Case Number: 5068608
Case Title:  MAHER, DENNIS V. SOLAR TRANSPORT CO
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Maher Dennis-5068608d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DENNIS MAHER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                     File No. 5068608 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
SOLAR TRANSPORT, L.L.C., 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ZURICH AMERICAN INSURANCE 
  :    Head Note Nos.:  1108.50, 1402.40, 1803, 
COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
   1801.01, 2602 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Dennis Maher, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Sole Transport, L.L.C., employer and Zurich American 
Insurance Company, insurance carrier as defendants.  Hearing was held on July 28, 
2020.  This case was scheduled to be an in-person hearing occurring in Des Moines.  
However, due to the outbreak of a pandemic in Iowa, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner ordered all hearings to occur via video means, using CourtCall.  
Accordingly, this case proceeded to a live video hearing via CourtCall with all parties 
appearing remotely.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Dennis Maher and Eric Osterhaus were the only witnesses to testify live at trial.  
The evidentiary record also includes joint exhibits JE1-JE5, claimant’s exhibits 1-3, and 
defendant’s exhibits A-K.  All exhibits were received without objection.  The evidentiary 
record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.       
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on August 24, 2020, at which time the 
case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Oct-27  10:23:38     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MAHER V. SOLAR TRANSPORT CO. 
Page 2 
 
 
1. Whether the stipulated July 11, 2018 work injury caused permanent disability.  
If so, the extent of industrial disability claimant is entitled to.   
2. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary total/healing period benefits from 
November 8, 2018 to February 1, 2019.     
3. The appropriate commencement date for any permanency benefits.   
4. Whether defendants are responsible for past medical expenses. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant, Dennis Maher, was 69 years old at the time of the hearing.  He alleges 
injury to his neck and low back as the result of a July 11, 2018 work injury with Solar 
Transport, L.L.C.  Mr. Maher began working for Solar Transport in February of 1999.  
(Testimony)  Defendants admit a temporary neck injury, but deny any injury to his low-
back.     
 
Mr. Maher worked for Solar Transport has a truck driver, hauling gasoline to Kum 
& Go convenience stores.  On July 11, 2018, Mr. Maher was parked in his fuel truck on 
the shoulder of an exit ramp off of Interstate 90 in Minnesota.  His fuel truck was struck 
by a motorist who fell asleep.  The collision totaled the other vehicle and ruptured the 
fuel tank on Mr. Maher’s truck.  Mr. Maher was transported via ambulance to the 
hospital to be examined.  (Testimony) 
 
Mr. Maher was receiving treatment shortly before the work injury.  On July 5, 
2018, Mr. Maher was seen by Jason A. Huisenga, D.O., at UnityPoint Health in Storm 
Lake.  Mr. Maher complained of pain in his left quadriceps muscle and hip pain.  He was 
able to ambulate with a limp.  He was assessed with left quadriceps muscle strain.  Mr. 
Maher was instructed to ice, use non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, stretch, and he was 
scheduled for physical therapy.  (JE2, pp. 17-19) 
On July 6, 2018, Mr. Maher attended physical therapy.  The primary diagnosis 
was left quadriceps strain and the treatment diagnosis was left hip, back, and leg pain.  
Mr. Maher reported that he developed pain about three weeks ago in his left SI region, 
left hip, and lateral leg.  Rising from a chair is very difficult and painful for Mr. Maher.  
His pain limited his ability to mow his lawn.  He was to attend therapy 1-2 times per 
week for up to 6 weeks.  (JE3, p. 47-48) 
Mr. Maher attended therapy again on July 9, 2018.  He reported he was a little 
sore.  He stopped carrying his wallet in his back pocket.  The therapist noted that Mr. 
Maher had an antalgic gait which was more significant with initial steps after sitting.  The 
treatment diagnosis was left hip, back, and leg pain.  Mr. Maher was to continue with 
home exercise program, manual therapy, and iontophoresis.  (JE3, p. 49) 
Just a few days later, Mr. Maher was involved in the work accident which is the 
subject of this lawsuit.  Mr. Maher was taken to the Sanford Jackson Hospital 
emergency room.  The notes indicate that he was at a full stop in his fuel truck when a 
Buick T-boned his truck on the driver’s side and hit the front wheel of his truck.  Mr. 

MAHER V. SOLAR TRANSPORT CO. 
Page 3 
 
 
Maher reported neck tenderness, but denied back pain.  Upon examination he had 
normal range of motion.  Mr. Maher reported left hip pain and that he had chronic left 
hip pain and was presently undergoing physical therapy for his left hip pain.  At the 
emergency room he was diagnosed with a cervical sprain and was discharged.  (JE1, 
pp. 1-16)   
 
Mr. Maher saw Timothy K. Daniels, M.D., at Unity Point on July 12, 2018.  He 
reported that he was sitting in his parked semi when he was hit behind the cab on the 
driver’s side by a car.  Since the accident, he has experienced neck pain, right side 
pain, and left hip pain.  CT scan of the cervical spine revealed mild disc space 
narrowing at C5-6 and C6-7.  CT scan of the head without contrast was normal.  The 
assessment was strain of neck muscle.  He was prescribed physical therapy for his 
neck pain.  He was also given Flexeril 5 mg three times per day as needed.  Mr. Maher 
was scheduled to see Dr. Huisenga on Tuesday, July 17.  He was to remain off work 
until the 18th of July.  (JE2, pp. 20-22) 
 
Mr. Maher began physical therapy for his neck on July 16, 2018.  He reported 
that he had a prior medical history of left hip and low back pain that he was currently 
receiving physical therapy for through Medicare.  He reported his neck pain began on 
July 11, 2018, when he was in the accident.  He also had right lower rib pain.  He was to 
attend physical therapy 2-3 times per week for up to 4 weeks.  (JE3, pp. 50-53) 
 
On July 17, 2018, Mr. Maher reported to Dr. Huisenga that he had some 
improvement with physical therapy.  He had full range of motion in his upper and lower 
extremities as well as the lumbar and cervical spine.  Dr. Huisenga’s assessment was 
strain of neck muscle.  He recommended continued physical therapy because he had 
made significant progress.  The doctor released Mr. Maher to return to work on July 23, 
without restrictions.  (JE2, pp. 23-25) 
 
By July 24, Mr. Maher had attended 3 sessions of physical therapy for neck pain.  
He had met his long-term goal to eliminate neck pain so that he could move his neck 
freely and return to work.  He was educated on a home exercise program (HEP).  Mr. 
Maher was discharged from physical therapy for his neck on August 1, 2018.  He had 
attended all three sessions and met his goals, including eliminating his neck pain.  (JE2, 
pp. 26-28)  
 
 
On October 2, 2018, Dr. Huisenga opined that Mr. Maher had reached maximum 
medical improvement (MMI) without any permanent impairment.  Mr. Maher was 
released to return to work without restriction.  (JE2, p. 28)  
 
Mr. Maher saw Dr. Huisenga at UnityPoint Health on October 26, 2018 for a well-
adult Medicare annual exam.  He denied any myalgias, muscle weakness, joint pain, 
arthritis, or muscular pain.  The physical exam did not reveal any problems or 
complaints related to his spine.  The assessment included, hyperlipidemia, essential 
hypertension, and abnormal glucose.  (JE2, pp. 29-34) 
Mr. Maher returned to his previous job at Solar Transport on July 23, 2018.  He 
continued to perform his pre-injury job until around November 8, 2018.  During this time, 
Mr. Maher did not miss time from work.  Mr. Maher testified that his neck injury healed 

MAHER V. SOLAR TRANSPORT CO. 
Page 4 
 
 
and he returned to truck driving.  However, his back and leg pain continued and 
worsened over time.  (Testimony) 
 
On November 5, 2018, Mr. Maher went to physical therapy with Christopher 
Beck, P.TA.  At this appointment, Mr. Maher completed a questionnaire.  He was asked 
if this was a work related injury covered under Workers’ compensation benefits; he left 
the answer blank.  Mr. Maher reported onset of right-sided hip and thigh pain which 
began approximately 3 weeks ago.  He said he was having similar pain in July of this 
year.  His pain on the left side had fully resolved.  Mr. Maher was involved in a MVA at 
work and had therapy for neck pain.  Yesterday he noticed some discomfort in his neck, 
but nothing serious.  He does not recall any mechanism of injury for this new onset of 
right-sided pain.  He was instructed to attend therapy 2-3 times per week, for 4 weeks.  
(JE3, pp. 59-60) Mr. Maher did not indicate that his symptoms were work-related.  Mr. 
Maher did not indicate to the physical therapist that his symptoms were related to the 
MVA. 
 
On November 6, 2018, Eric Osterhaus, Regional Operations Manager, Solar 
Transport sent an email to Bridget Nixon and Aaron New regarding Mr. Maher.  The 
emails reads:   
Denny called off yesterday, today, and tomorrow.  He has a diagnosis 
from a Physical Therapist that he has a pinched nerve in his right leg 
when he walks.  He said it is not workers comp, and he does not have a 
doctor’s note stating he cannot work.  At this point and time I am allowing 
him to use “sick days”.   
(Def. Ex. J, p. 23) 
 
At the hearing, Mr. Osterhaus testified that during the phone call Mr. Maher was 
adamant that this was not a workers’ comp issue.  Mr. Osterhaus credibly testified that 
it would have been just as easy for him to send an email that said this was a worker’s 
comp issue because then his safety team takes it over at that point.  A workers’ comp 
injury is actually less work for Mr. Osterhaus.  (Testimony)  
 
On November 9, 2018, Dr. Huisenga stated Mr. Maher should remain out of work 
from November 6, 2018 through November 19, 2018.  The note does not state the 
reason that he should not work and there are no corresponding clinical notes.  (JE2, p. 
35) 
 
Mr. Maher returned to Dr. Huisenga on November 16, 2018.  The note states he 
reported continued moderate back pain.  He cannot fully extend or fully flex, cannot 
ambulate with comfort and cannot sit with comfort or function in his current job.  His pain 
is worse with bending, lifting, standing straight, and changing positions.  He has been 
attending physical therapy with some improvement, but he thought that he would be 
getting better faster.  Mr. Maher would like another week off of work to recuperate. The 
assessment was sciatica of right side.  He was instructed to ice the area, use Tylenol, 
and stretch.  He was also to do physical therapy.  Mr. Maher was referred to Dr. 
McGuire.  He was given a note to remain off work until November 26, 2018.  (JE2, pp. 
36-39)    

MAHER V. SOLAR TRANSPORT CO. 
Page 5 
 
 
 
On November 20, 2018, Mr. Maher was seen at Iowa Spine Care by Daniel J. 
McGuire, M.D.  Dr. McGuire reported that Mr. Maher was still employed.  Mr. Maher 
said driving his semi was the easy part of his job.  When he was out of his truck moving 
hoses, things could get quite heavy.  Mr. Maher felt that in retrospect, his problems with 
his back and left, then right leg pain have slowly increased over the past six months.  
He also had a motor vehicle accident on July 11, 2018.  Before the MVA, he was doing 
reasonably well, but he has gone downhill since that time.  Mr. Maher had been unable 
to work the past 3 or 4 weeks due to severe back and right leg pain.  His severe pain 
makes performing the heavy parts of his job basically impossible.  Dr. McGuire 
assumed Mr. Maher had lumbar spondylosis that was giving him back pain.  Dr. 
McGuire assumed he had some spinal stenosis that was causing the leg pain.  He 
noted that Mr. Maher has good care, but he continues to get worse.  He recommended 
x-rays and an MRI of the lumbar spine.  (JE4, p. 68)  According to Mr. Maher’s history, 
his problems with his back and left, then right leg pain had slowly increased since May 
of 2018 which is two months before the MVA.    
 
On November 23, 2018, Mr. Maher had a MRI of his lumbar spine without 
contrast.  The MRI released mild lumbar levoscoliosis with mild anterior subluxation of 
L4 over L5 and suggestion of bilateral L4 spondylolysis; small generalized disc bulges 
from L2 to S1 associated with ligamentous and facet joint hypertrophy causing 
appearing degree of central spinal stenosis; a varying degree of neural foraminal 
compromise most pronounced and moderate to severe in degree at L4-L5.  (JE3, pp. 
63-64) 
 
Dr. McGuire reviewed Mr. Maher’s x-rays and MRI on November 26, 2018.  He 
called Mr. Maher who reported he was doing a bit better.  Dr. McGuire noted that he 
was hesitant to take Mr. Maher off of work for 2 or 3 months because he was concerned 
he may never get back to work again.  Dr. McGuire got the impression that Mr. Maher 
wanted to try to work a few more years. (JE4, p. 69) 
 
Mr. Maher saw Dr. McGuire on November 30, 2018.  Mr. Maher reported he was 
doing better.  He had been off of work for 3 weeks.  Dr. McGuire’s impression was, 
hopefully resolving episode of back and sciatica and lumbar spondylosis.  Dr. McGuire 
suggested that perhaps Mr. Maher retire or get a different job, but that was not an 
option.  Mr. Maher wanted to continue to work.  Dr. McGuire advised Mr. Maher that he 
would not do any damage to himself by working, but he would probably be quite 
uncomfortable.  He was kept off work for another 10 days.  (JE4, p. 70)    
 
On December 10, 2018, Mr. Maher returned to Dr. McGuire.  He reported he 
uses a cane part-time and was still quite restricted with right leg symptoms.  He could 
be up for maybe 20 minutes or so, but then he had significant right posterior right aches 
and pains.  Dr. McGuire noted that Mr. Maher wanted to have a little bit more time 
before he made an ultimate decision.  Dr. McGuire again explained to him that at the 
age of 69 the surgery had an excellent chance to help, but it might not get him back to 
10-12 hour shifts of driving a semi-truck and moving heavy equipment items.  Dr. 
McGuire said off work until his follow-up appointment.  (JE4, pp. 71-72) 
 
 
 
 

MAHER V. SOLAR TRANSPORT CO. 
Page 6 
 
 
Mr. Maher returned to Dr. McGuire on December 19, 2018.  He remained 
symptomatic with back and right leg symptoms.  His symptoms are quite tolerable if he 
does very little.  He had been off work for 8 weeks.  Mr. Maher decided to stay off work.  
Dr. McGuire explained to Mr. Maher that if he was off work and his symptoms kept him 
from doing normal things then he would readily do surgery because there is an excellent 
chance that surgery would allow him to enjoy retirement.  Even, if Mr. Maher is not 
retired, Dr. McGuire could do surgery but it is doubtful that he could return to working 12 
or 14 hour days.  Mr.  Maher noted that he was on short-term disability through 
February 7, 2018 and Dr. McGuire completed those forms for him.  He scheduled him 
for an epidural in Spencer after the 1st of the year.  Dr. McGuire kept him off work due to 
persistent back and right sciatica pain.  (JE4, pp. 73-74) 
 
On January 2, 2019, Mr. Maher was discharged from physical therapy.  He 
reported minimal to no pain and met all of his therapy goals.  (JE3, p. 67)    
 
Mr. Maher underwent a right L5-S1 epidural steroid injection on January 4, 2019.  
(JE4, p. 75) 
 
On January 21, 2019, Mr. Maher returned to Dr. McGuire.  He was feeling better 
and wanted to try to return to work.  His right hamstring was still a little tight.  Dr. McGuire’s 
impression was hopefully resolving sciatica.  He felt he probably had a surgical lesion at 
L4-L5 on the right.  Mr. Maher was going to try to return to work on February 4, 2019.  He 
was instructed to be careful moving heavy hoses.  Dr. McGuire noted that if Mr. Maher 
was unable to tolerate work, then he might want to consider a laminectomy, go through 
rehabilitation, and see if he can do the job or look for a different job.  (JE4, pp. 78-79) 
 
Mr. Maher returned to UnityPoint on February 11, 2019 with pain in his left knee.  
He could not fully extend or fully flex his left knee and was barely able to put weight on 
it.  Dr. Huisenga assessed a sprain of the lateral collateral ligament of the left knee.  He 
was prescribed Naprosyn for a week and if symptoms persisted then physical therapy.    
(JE2, pp. 41-42)  
On March 14, 2019, Mr. Osterhous sent an email to the “STTermination” email 
group regarding Mr. Maher.  The email indicated that after 20 years with Solar 
Transport, Denny will retire on April 1, 2019.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 4)    
On April 26, 2019, Mr. Maher presented to Dr. Huisenga for follow-up of 
hypertension.  (JE2, pp. 43-46)   
At the request of his attorney, Mr. Maher underwent an IME with Robin L. 
Sassman, M.D., on January 28, 2020.  On February 24, 2020, Dr. Sassman issued a 
report setting forth her opinions in this case.  She noted Mr. Maher was involved in a 
MVA on July 11, 2018.  Since that time, he has noted low back pain with radicular 
symptoms.  Initially, he also noted cervical symptoms; however, the cervical symptoms 
have since resolved.  Mr. Maher reported that he is doing well since retirement.  He 
avoids lifting because that seems to aggravate his symptoms.  When he was working he 
had a lot of back pain and right leg pain.  His lumbar symptoms have improved since he 
is no longer working at a physically demanding job; however, his symptoms are easily 
aggravated by activity.  Mr. Maher denied any neck or right shoulder pain.  In her 

MAHER V. SOLAR TRANSPORT CO. 
Page 7 
 
 
examination she noted no tenderness in his lumbar spine, normal lower-extremity 
strength, negative SLR test, and normal sensation in his right lower extremity.  She did 
note decreased sensation in his left leg; however, Mr. Maher is not attributing his left-leg 
complaints to the work injury.  Dr. Sassman’s diagnoses were cervical strain, resolved; 
lumbar pain with radiculopathy with MRI evidence of spinal stenosis at multiple levels.  
She opined that given that he did not have these symptoms before the collision and that 
the mechanism is consistent with the injury, it was her opinion that the July 11, 2018 
injury was a substantial aggravating factor of the low back spinal stenosis and directly 
and causally related to the now-resolved cervical symptoms.  Dr. Sassman placed Mr. 
Maher at MMI one year after the date of the July 11, 2018 injury.  She did not have any 
other treatment recommendations.  Dr. Sassman assigned 17 percent whole person 
impairment for the lumbar spine.  (Cl. Ex. 2; testimony)         
On June 11, 2020, Dr. McGuire authored a missive to the attorney for the 
defendants.  Dr. McGuire stated that he had a conference with the defendants’ attorney 
this past Monday morning.  In the letter Dr. McGuire noted a physical therapy record 
from July 6, 2018 which predated the MVA.  In that note, Mr. Maher reported that he 
had changed how he carried a wallet in his back pocket.  Dr. McGuire stated that this 
was a common maneuver for people with back and leg symptoms.  The physical 
therapy note also stated that Mr. Maher continued with some back and left hip 
complaints and he had returned to work.  Additionally, Dr. McGuire referenced a 
November 20, 2018 physical therapy note.  This physical therapy note stated that Mr. 
Maher presented with a 3-week history of right-sided hip and thigh pain and that the left 
side had fully resolved.  Dr. McGuire noted that he first saw Mr. Maher on November 20, 
2018.  At that visit, Mr. Maher reported a 6-month gradual onset of increasing problems 
with back and left, then right leg pain.  At that time, Dr. McGuire admitted that he was 
not focused on the exact dates of symptoms.  Mr. Maher provided a rather generic 
common history of some off and on problems.  Apparently, the attorney for the 
defendants provided a more exact chronology of events during the conference he had 
with Dr. McGuire.  In his missive to defendants, Dr. McGuire wrote:     
Mr. Maher did tell me that he had had some prior back complaints, but 
I did not really interrogate him to the amount of treatment.  You are correct 
on the 11/05/2018 office visit.  He did not attribute his back complaints to 
the work injury.  Even with me, he really did not focus on the incident.  He 
had told me that he had about 6 months of symptoms, and in fact the 
motor vehicle incident had been only about 5 months ago. 
I do not believe the work incident materially aggravated his spine, 
precipitating right leg symptoms. 
It is difficult to causally relate the treatment of his back and right leg 
symptoms, which I did over the winter, back to the incident of early July. 
I would not impose any permanent lifelong work restrictions as it 
pertains to the incident of 07/11/2018.  Given the history, I cannot give an 
overt reason to assign any impairment as it pertains to the 07/11/2018 
incident. 

MAHER V. SOLAR TRANSPORT CO. 
Page 8 
 
 
(Def. Ex. I, pp. 21-22) 
 
Mr. Maher has not treated for his low back since January of 2019.  (Ex. K, p. 30) 
Also in January of 2019, he passed a DOT physical with normal gait and a normal 
back/spine examination.  (JE5, p. 82; testimony)   
 
After the July 11, 2018 work injury, Mr. Maher was off of work for approximately 
10 days.  Then Mr. Maher returned to his pre-injury job until Dr. Huisinga took him off of 
work on November 9, 2018, due to low back pain.  He remained off of work until early 
February 2019.  During this time Mr. Maher received short-term disability benefits.  
(JE2, p. 35, Ex. A, p. 1, Ex. K, pp. 32-36, testimony) 
 
Mr. Maher returned to his pre-injury job at Solar Transport on February 4, 2019.  
He continued working until March 14, 2019 when he advised Eric Osterhaus that he 
was retiring.  His retirement date is listed as April 1, 2019.  (Ex. A, p. 1, Ex. C, p. 4, Ex. 
K, p. 36, testimony) 
 
On June 3, 2019, Mr. Maher began working at Arnold Motor Supply and was still 
employed there at the time of hearing.  He works approximately 20 hours per week 
delivering auto parts in the Storm Lake area.  His job includes lifting auto parts that vary 
in sizes and weights, including car batteries in excess of 50 pounds.  Mr. Maher has not 
provided Arnold Motor Supply with the recommended work restrictions from his IME 
doctor.  Mr. Maher has not looked for other work.  (Testimony, Def. Ex. E, p. 6; Ex. F, p. 
13; Ex. K, p. 37-41) 
 
At hearing Mr. Maher testified that he has not sought or received any medical 
treatment since January 2019.  He is only able to drive 30-45 minutes before he has to 
get out and walk around a bit.  If he lifts too much he still experiences back pain.  
Overall, he tries to be careful with his back because he does not want to undergo an 
operation.  (Testimony) 
 
The first issue to be determined is whether the July 11, 2018 work injury was the 
cause of any permanent partial disability.  Claimant relies on the opinions of Dr. 
Sassman who performed an IME at the claimant’s request.   
 
Dr. Sassman conducted an IME in this case.  Her diagnoses included cervical 
strain, resolved; lumbar pain with radiculopathy with MRI evidence of spinal stenosis at 
multiple levels.  Mr. Maher told Dr. Sassman that he did not have any low back 
symptoms prior to the injury in question.  He did not have low back symptoms until the 
July 11, 2018 MVA.  He also told her that since the MVA he has had low back pain with 
radicular symptoms.  Based on this information, Dr. Sassman opined that given that Mr. 
Maher did not have these symptoms before the collision and that the mechanism is 
consistent with the injury, the July 11, 2018 work event was a substantial aggravating 
factor of the low back spinal stenosis and directly and causally related to the now-
resolved cervical symptoms.  She is the only physician in this case to assign any 
permanent impairment to Mr. Maher for his back.  Dr. Sassman stated that there was no 
ratable impairment for his cervical spine.  (Cl. Ex. 2) 

MAHER V. SOLAR TRANSPORT CO. 
Page 9 
 
 
 
Unfortunately, the information that Dr. Sassman relied upon to form her opinions 
is not accurate.  The treatment records in this case demonstrate that Mr. Maher did 
have back pain prior to July 11, 2018.  At hearing, he conceded that his low back and/or 
left-leg side problems were active and ongoing at the time of the injury.  (Transcript p. 
67) Additionally, the medical documentation does not support Mr. Maher’s contention 
that he had low back pain with radicular symptoms since the July 11, 2018 MVA.  I find 
that the history and information that Dr. Sassman relies on in forming her opinion is not 
accurate and/or complete.  Because Dr. Sassman relies on an incorrect history, I find 
her opinions carry very little weight.   
 
Defendants rely on the opinions of Dr. Huisinga and Dr. McGuire.  Dr. Huisinga is 
Mr. Maher’s primary care physician.  Dr. Huisinga released him to return to work, full 
duty with no restrictions on July 23, 2018.  At that time, he also placed Mr. Maher at 
maximum medical improvement (MMI).  Dr. Huisinga opined that the work injury did not 
result in any permanent impairment.  (JE2, p. 28) 
Dr. McGuire has also offered his opinions in this case.  The defendants did not 
select Dr. McGuire; rather, Mr. Maher was referred to Dr. McGuire by his own doctor.  
Dr. McGuire provided treatment to Mr. Maher.  Once Dr. McGuire was provided with the 
chronology in this case, he stated, “I do not believe the work incident materially 
aggravated his spine, precipitating right leg symptoms.  It is difficult to causally relate 
the treatment of his back and right leg symptoms, which I did over the winter, back to 
the incident of early July.”  (Def. Ex. I, pp. 21-22) Dr. McGuire did not assign any 
impairment or any permanent restrictions as the result of the July 11, 2018 work 
incident.  (Id.)  
Just days before the July 11, 2018 work injury, Mr. Maher was treating for back 
pain.  Following the accident, he denied back pain.  It was not until late October or early 
November of 2018, that he again mentioned back pain.  It was not until around this 
same time that sciatica was mentioned.  At that time, he told his employer that the back 
pain was not work-related.  (Ex. J, p. 23) Around that same time he also did not indicate 
to his physical therapist that he thought his symptoms were related to a work injury.  He 
was unable to recall any mechanism of injury for his new onset of right sided pain.  
(JE3, p. 58)   
I find the opinions of Dr. Huisinga and Dr. McGuire are more consistent with the 
record as a whole and carry greater weight than the opinion of Dr. Sassman.  
Additionally, neither Dr. Huisinga nor Dr. McGuire was selected by the defendants and 
therefore it can hardly be argued that they are biased in favor of the defendants.  I find 
that Mr. Maher reached maximum medical improvement from the July 11, 2018 work 
injury on July 23, 2018.  Additionally, I find that claimant did not sustain any permanent 
partial disability as the result of the July 11, 2018 work injury.   
Next, claimant is seeking temporary total disability benefits from November 8, 
2018 to February 1, 2019 for his low back.  Mr. Maher missed approximately 10 days of 
work after the MVA due to neck pain.  Then he returned to his pre-injury job and did not 
miss work or seek medical treatment for several months.  His personal physician, Dr. 
Huisinga placed him at MMI as of July 23, 2018.  With regard to causation, I found the 
opinions of Dr. Huisinga and Dr. McGuire carried greater weight than those of Dr. 

MAHER V. SOLAR TRANSPORT CO. 
Page 10 
 
 
Sassman.  Based on the evidence on a whole, I find that Mr. Maher has failed to 
demonstrate that his symptoms after July 23, 2018 were related to the July 11, 2018 
work injury.  Furthermore, there is no medical documentation to demonstrate that Mr. 
Maher missed any additional time from work because he had restrictions as the result of 
the July 11, 2018 injury.  While he may have been restricted from work during this time 
period, I find that the record does not support the contention that Mr. Maher missed 
work due to the work injury.  Thus, I find claimant is not entitled to temporary total 
disability benefits from November 8, 2018 to February 1, 2019. 
Claimant is seeking payment of past medical expenses as set forth in claimant’s 
exhibit 3.  The medical charges all appear to have been incurred in November of 2018.  
Based on the opinions of Dr. Huisinga and Dr. McGuire and based on the evidence as a 
whole, I find that the claimant has failed to demonstrate that these charges were 
incurred as the result of the July 11, 2018 MVA.  Thus, I find that defendants are not 
responsible for these expenses.           
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.14(6)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Based on the above findings of fat, I conclude that Mr. Maher has failed to carry 
his burden of proof to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that he 
sustained any permanent partial disability as the result of the July 11, 2018 work injury.  
Just days before the July 11, 2018 work injury, he was treating for back pain.  Following 
the accident, he denied back pain.  His personal physician placed him at MMI on July 

MAHER V. SOLAR TRANSPORT CO. 
Page 11 
 
 
23, 2018.  At that time, Dr. Huisinga stated that Mr. Maher had no permanent 
impairment, nor did he require any permanent restrictions as the result of the work 
injury.  It was not until late October or early November of 2018, that Mr. Maher again 
mentioned back pain.  At that time, he told his employer that the back pain was not 
work-related.  (Ex. J, p. 23) Around that same time he also did not indicate to his 
physical therapist that he thought his symptoms were related to a work injury.  Mr. 
Maher reported that he was unable to recall any mechanism of injury for his new onset 
of right sided pain.  (JE3, p. 58)   
I conclude that the opinions of Dr. Huisinga and Dr. McGuire are more consistent 
with the record as a whole and carry greater weight than the opinion of Dr. Sassman.  I 
conclude that Mr. Maher reached maximum medical improvement from the July 11, 
2018 work injury on July 23, 2018.  Additionally, I conclude that Mr. Maher did not 
sustain any permanent partial disability, nor does he have any permanent restrictions, 
as the result of the July 11, 2018 work injury.  As such, Mr. Maher has failed to 
demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that he is entitled to any permanent 
partial disability benefits as the result of the July 11, 2018 motor vehicle accident.  
Because claimant has failed to prove entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits, 
the issue of the appropriate commencement date is moot. 
Next, claimant is seeking temporary total disability benefits from November 8, 
2018 to February 1, 2019 for his low back.  When an injured worker has been unable to 
work during a period of recuperation from an injury that did not produce permanent 
disability, the worker is entitled to temporary total disability benefits during the time the 
worker is disabled by the injury.  Those benefits are payable until the employee has 
returned to work, or is medically capable of returning to work substantially similar to the 
work performed at the time of injury.  Section 85.33(1).    
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude Mr. Maher has failed to prove by 
a preponderance of the evidence that he is entitled to temporary total disability benefits 
from November 8, 2018 to February 1, 2019.  His personal physician, Dr. Huisinga 
placed him at MMI as of July 23, 2018.  With regard to causation, I found the opinions of 
Dr. Huisinga and Dr. McGuire carried greater weight than those of Dr. Sassman.  Based 
on the evidence on a whole, I find that Mr. Maher has failed to demonstrate that his 
symptoms after July 23, 2018 were related to the July 11, 2018 work injury.  
Furthermore, there is no medical documentation to demonstrate that Mr. Maher missed 
any additional time from work because he had restrictions as the result of the July 11, 
2018 injury.  Thus, I conclude claimant has not demonstrated entitlement to temporary 
total disability benefits from November 8, 2018 to February 1, 2019. 
Mr. Maher is also asking that defendants be responsible for past medical 
expenses.  The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, 
osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and 
hospital services and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' 
compensation law.  The employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary 
transportation expenses incurred for those services.  The employer has the right to 
choose the provider of care, except where the employer has denied liability for the 

MAHER V. SOLAR TRANSPORT CO. 
Page 12 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial 
Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Specifically, claimant is seeking payment of past medical expenses as set forth in 
claimant’s exhibit 3.  These medical charges were all incurred in November of 2018.  
Based on the opinions of Dr. Huisinga and Dr. McGuire and based on the evidence as a 
whole, I find that the claimant has failed to demonstrate that these charges were 
incurred as the result of the July 11, 2018 MVA.  Thus, I find that defendants are not 
responsible for these expenses.           
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant shall take nothing further from these proceedings. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this _27th __ day of October, 2020. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Willis Hamilton (via WCES) 
Aaron Oliver (via WCES) 
       ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
