Case Number: 5041132
Case Title:  VARGAS, MIGUELINA V. TYSON FOODS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Vargas Miguelina-5041132d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MIGUELINA VARGAS, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         File No. 5041132 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  :            REVIEW-REOPENING DECISION 
 
 
  :  
TYSON FOODS, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  :                Head Note No.:  2905 
 
Self-Insured, 
  :  
 
Defendant. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Miguelina Vargas filed a petition for review-reopening seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from, the employer, Tyson Foods, a self-insured employer. 
The matter came on for hearing on August 28, 2018, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joseph L. Walsh in Davenport, Iowa.  The record in the 
case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 14; Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 11; Defense 
Exhibits A through H; as well the sworn testimony of claimant.  Tammy Guenther served 
as the court reporter.  Maria Orozco was approved to serve as the Spanish-language 
interpreter.  This was her first legal hearing. 
This matter was briefed and the matter was fully submitted on October 15, 2018. 
ISSUES AND STIPULATIONS 
 
The primary issue in this case is whether the claimant has proven the 
prerequisites to demonstrate she is entitled to review-reopening benefits under Iowa 
Code section 86.14. 
The parties have stipulated, and it has been legally established, that the claimant 
suffered an injury, which arose out of and in the course of her employment on January 
20, 2011.  There is an Agreement for Settlement in the record (and the case file) 
demonstrating that claimant suffered an injury on that date.  The defendant stipulated 
that this injury caused a temporary disability during a period of recovery, as well as a 20 
percent permanent industrial disability.  The claimant is not seeking any further 
temporary disability benefits at this time. 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Jan-30  15:29:24     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

VARGAS V. TYSON FOODS 
Page 2 
 
 
The claimant alleges she is entitled to additional industrial disability under 
Section 86.14.  The defendant concedes that claimant’s disability is industrial, however, 
they allege that no further benefits are owed.  The parties have agreed upon the 
appropriate commencement date for benefits as being the date the review-reopening 
petition was filed, September 30, 2016. 
 
The parties have stipulated to all of the elements which comprise the claimant’s 
rate of compensation.  Again, these are established in the Agreement for Settlement.  
They believe the appropriate rate of compensation is $489.69 per week.  Affirmative 
defenses have been waived.  The claimant is seeking medical expenses as set forth in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 8, page 81.  The parties agree that some medical bills have been 
paid under claimant’s group health plan through her employer.  The claimant is merely 
seeking to have the expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 8, page 81 paid through 
workers’ compensation.  The claimant is also seeking payment for an independent 
medical evaluation.  Defendants deny claimant is entitled to an IME.  Claimant 
alternatively seeks payment of this evaluation as a cost.  Finally, the claimant seeks 
alternate medical care in the form of an order for continued medical care for her 
conditions she alleges are work related. 
 
The parties have stipulated that the claimant has been paid 100 weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits at the rate of $489.69 per week. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Miguelina Vargas was 46 years old as of the date of hearing.  She is a mother 
and grandmother.  She was born in the Dominican Republic and primarily 
communicates in Spanish.  She does not read or write in English.  She is married to 
Julio Vargas and lives in Conesville, Iowa.  Her husband does not work and Miguelina 
supports him and helps their children.  Her English language skills are quite limited. 
Ms. Vargas testified live and under oath at hearing through a Spanish language 
translator.  Her hearing testimony was generally credible and consistent.  She did not 
appear to be exaggerating.  Her testimony was largely consistent with the balance of 
the record, including her previous testimony under oath.  There was nothing about her 
demeanor in particular which caused the undersigned any concern about her 
truthfulness. 
Ms. Vargas suffered an injury which arose out of and in the course of her 
employment for Tyson Foods on January 20, 2011.  In June 2012, she filed a petition 
seeking industrial disability benefits for a right shoulder disability.  In July 2014, Ms. 
Vargas and Tyson settled her claim on an Agreement for Settlement (AFS).  (Claimant’s 
Exhibit 1)  The AFS included an agreement that the injury occurred in Iowa, the 
elements comprising her rate of compensation and the payments to which she was 
entitled.  “Permanent partial disability for 20% loss of BAW resulting in 100 weeks of 
compensation under Iowa Code Section 85.34 (2)(V) payable commencing July 26, 
2011.”  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1)  It is noted that both parties had different attorneys at this time. 

VARGAS V. TYSON FOODS 
Page 3 
 
 
The AFS attached medical reports from respective physicians which indicated 
that the permanent disability involved her right shoulder.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 5-10)  In 
January 2012, Robert Gordon, M.D., had provided a 1 percent body as a whole 
impairment rating the loss of range of motion in her shoulder.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 5)   Dr. 
Gordon released her from care for her right shoulder in March 2012 without any medical 
restriction.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 6-7)  Robert Milas, M.D., evaluated her in October 2012, and 
diagnosed “derangement of the right shoulder.”  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 9)  He also noted that she 
had developed symptoms in her left shoulder as well.  “She has developed symptoms 
now in the left shoulder and has been taken off of her light duty status at work.”  (Cl. Ex. 
1, p. 8)  He assigned an 18 percent whole person rating based upon strength loss and 
recommended severe functional restrictions placing her in the light duty category.  (Cl. 
Ex. 1, p. 9)  In January 2013, Tuvi Mendel, M.D., placed her at maximum medical 
improvement for her left shoulder and returned her to work without any restrictions.  He 
opined the following. 
With regard to the left shoulder, I did not see significant findings to 
suggest any need for surgical management.  We obtained an EMG which 
did not reveal any significant findings as it relates to her neck or shoulder.  
However, she does have evidence of moderate to severe bilateral carpal 
tunnel symptoms.  She is still complaining of moderate discomfort and 
pain in her left shoulder.  At this point, as it relates to her right shoulder, as 
previously mentioned, we placed her at MMI back to normal activities. 
PLAN:  With regard to the left side, I am not exactly sure what is going on.  
From a shoulder standpoint I would not recommend any surgical 
management.  I think there are other issues going on there and she could 
potentially seek additional evaluation as it relates to her neck and possibly 
carpal tunnel type symptoms.  However, from the shoulder standpoint, I 
would not recommend any surgical management.  I am going to go ahead 
and put her at MMI as it relates to the left shoulder.  I will refer her back to 
Dr. Clem in occupational medicine for continued management of her 
symptoms.  We will see her back in the future if she has any problems.  
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10)  There are no other records attached to the AFS and nothing further is 
explained regarding the basis for the AFS.  Nevertheless, it is clear that her medical 
situation during this period of time was more involved.  Throughout 2012 and 2013, Ms. 
Vargas underwent significant treatment on her left shoulder, as well as her neck or 
upper back.  (Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 1-4; Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 4-5; Jt. Ex. 9, pp. 1-2; Jt. Ex. 13, pp. 1-4; 
Jt. Ex. 14, pp. 1-4)  I find at the time of the AFS on July 10, 2014, her left shoulder and 
upper back/neck were still symptomatic, but stable. 
Claimant subsequently filed ten petitions seeking benefits from Tyson in 2015.  
Two of the petitions involved either the upper back/neck or her shoulders.  File No. 
5049103, alleged an injury to claimant’s left shoulder from overuse.  In an April 12, 2016 
decision, the Deputy made the following relevant findings and conclusions. 

VARGAS V. TYSON FOODS 
Page 4 
 
 
File No. 5049103 (Date of injury October 2, 2012).  Affected body 
parts: Upper body, neck, and left shoulder. 
Claimant asserts she sustained repetitive use injuries to her upper 
body, neck, and left shoulder as a result of an “accident” date of October 
2, 2012.  Claimant signed a “Statement of Injury/Illness” on this date which 
reported pain in the left upper extremity from using her left hand to move 
and cut the fat off loins.  (Ex. Y, p. 1)  Claimant was then seen by Dr. Clem 
on October 25, 2012, with complaints of left shoulder symptoms.  Dr. Clem 
diagnosed claimant’s left shoulder problems as secondary to the right 
shoulder due to compensation.  She began physical therapy on the left 
shoulder on October 26, 2012.  (Ex. 3, p.12-14)  
She reiterated her belief that her left shoulder pain was not due to a 
new injury to Dr. Mendel.  Dr. Mendel recorded in his notes on November 
30, 2012, “[s]he feels that she is overcompensating for the right and that 
gradually increased her symptoms on the left. She denies any specific 
injury to her left shoulder.”  (Ex. B, p. 12)   
The objective tests did not show any signs of injury.  Dr. Gordon did 
not assign any additional restrictions above and beyond the left shoulder 
restrictions that were already in place when she saw him in January 2013.  
Ultimately she was returned to duty without restrictions on February 12, 
2013.  She consulted with Dr. Hall on April 11, 2013, for bilateral shoulder 
pain.  Dr. Hall concluded she suffered from myosfascial [sic] pain and 
tendon overuse likely related to repetitive work activities.  She did not 
receive treatment for the left shoulder again until April 2014.  
Dr. Milas, an independent medical examiner, did not give any rating 
for the shoulder on November 3, 2015, because of the normal range and 
function.  She did receive an injection to her right shoulder on November 
20, 2015.  
While Dr. Bedell did treat the claimant for shoulder complaints, he 
did not provide a causal opinion.  The causal opinion as it relates to the 
left shoulder include Dr. Clem who found the left shoulder pain to be 
sequelae to the right shoulder injury that was part of an accepted and 
settled claim.  The claimant argues that Dr. Milas provided an expert 
opinion on the causation between claimant’s left shoulder pain and work, 
but Dr. Milas’ reports only provide causation on the right shoulder, cervical 
and thoracic spine issues, and bilateral carpal tunnel.  He does state that 
the impairment to the left shoulder would be difficult to rate, but does not 
provide an opinion statement about causation as to the left shoulder.  (Ex. 
I, p. 8-9)  

VARGAS V. TYSON FOODS 
Page 5 
 
 
Thus, the claimant’s left shoulder pain was not a condition of 
overcompensation and does not arise out of a November 2, 2012, injury, 
but rather is sequalae of the right shoulder injury.  However, there is no 
opinion as to any impairment to the left shoulder.  Dr. Milas did not provide 
a rating.  During her October 16, 2015, examination, all four extremities 
were within normal limits.  Her strength and deep tendon reflexes were 
symmetrical.  
Therefore there is no finding of permanency as it relates to the left 
shoulder injury. 
The claimant also claims upper body and neck injuries.  She was 
seen by Dr. Bedell beginning on March 30, 2012, for a four-month history 
of left neck pain radiating into her shoulder.  The November 30, 2012, 
EMG did not result in an abnormal finding related to the neck.  She did not 
have further complaints of neck pain until May 7, 2014.  
Dr. Milas concluded in his multiple reports that the ligamentous 
injury to claimant’s neck and thoracic region was the result of repetitive 
injury.  Dr. Phillips concluded that the claimant’s neck muscle spasms 
were compensatory for her chronic shoulder pain.  (Ex. M, p. 3)  By 
February 2015, she reported a decline in neck symptoms and Dr. Clem 
noted that her neck pain was largely resolved.  However, she continued to 
treat for neck pain throughout 2015.  
Dr. Milas’ October 16, 2015 note states that claimant described her 
neck and thoracic pain as progressively worsening after her right shoulder 
surgery.  She denied any specific traumatic injury.  The radiographs 
showed nothing more than mild, degenerative disc changes.  
Claimant’s report and Dr. Milas’ historical account more accurately 
match that of Dr. Phillips’ conclusion that claimant’s neck and muscle 
spasms relate to her chronic shoulder pain and not a new, traumatic 
injury.  
It is found as to File No. 5049103 that claimant’s left shoulder, 
upper body, and neck injuries are sequalae or symptomatology arising out 
of claimant’s right shoulder injury of 2011.  
Claimant has not met her burden of proof that the left shoulder, 
upper body, and neck injuries were related to an October 2, 2012, work 
injury.  The remaining issues as to medical bills are rendered moot by the 
finding of no causation.  These would be more appropriately addressed in 
a review-reopening. 
 
 

VARGAS V. TYSON FOODS 
Page 6 
 
 
(Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 33-34)  This determination was appealed to the Commissioner who 
affirmed the Deputy on November 8, 2017.  (Cl. Ex. 3) 
Following her July 2014 AFS, Ms. Vargas was seen by Gregory Clem, M.D.  He 
examined her noting a “little bit of tenderness over the left trapezius.”  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 8)  
He opined her left shoulder function is normal and diagnosed “neck pain with some 
occasional left radicular symptoms, resolved.”  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 8)  In March 2015, she 
returned to her primary physician, David Bedell, M.D.  Dr. Bedell documented ongoing 
left shoulder and neck symptoms.  He diagnosed left-sided neck pain and fibromyalgia.  
(Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 8-9)  He started her on some medications and gave her exercises to deal 
with the fibromyalgia symptoms.  There were no acute abnormalities.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 9)  In 
August 2015, she had an MRI of her cervical and thoracic spine.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 4)  Dr. 
Bedell also reviewed the MRI in September 2015.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 12)  He recommended 
following up with the authorized orthopedist.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 13) 
Ms. Vargas returned to Dr. Milas on October 16, 2015.  He diagnosed a 
ligamentous injury of the cervical and thoracic spine, and assigned a 15 percent 
impairment rating for these conditions and opined her work for Tyson was the direct 
cause of the condition.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 2)  He recommended that Ms. Vargas not engage 
in repetitive twisting.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 2) 
Joseph Chen, M.D., evaluated Ms. Vargas on January 8, 2016.  She was 
referred there in relation to an alleged July 23, 2014, work injury “when she was using a 
vibrating whiz knife.”  (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 1)  He reviewed her MRI and accurately recounted 
her medical history, including on claims unrelated to those herein.  (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 1)  He 
diagnosed chronic myofascial pain and fibromyalgia, which he stated were not related to 
any specific work injury.  He opined there were no permanent restrictions or impairment 
associated with a July 2014, work incident.  (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 3) 
After following up with Dr. Clem and Dr. Bedell, Ms. Vargas underwent MRI’s of 
each of her shoulders in January and February 2016.  (Jt. Ex. 11, pp. 1-3)  She was 
then seen by James Nepola, M.D., in February 2016, for her shoulder symptoms.  (Jt. 
Ex. 1, p. 1)  He diagnosed an acute temporary exacerbation of her chronic shoulder 
pain and provided a series of injections in February, March and September 2016.  (Jt. 
Ex. 1, pp. 1-9)  Ms. Vargas reported significant temporary improvement from the 
injections.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 7) 
In December 2016, Dr. Bedell wrote an opinion letter stating a number of his 
medical opinions.  His diagnosis was fibromyalgia.  “I do agree with the physiatry is that 
she has fibromyalgia which is unrelated to her work although may often be exacerbated 
by it.”  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 21)  After discussing her various work-related conditions, he 
recommended various work accommodations (limit standing, bending, and repetitive 
movements).  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 21) 
 
 

VARGAS V. TYSON FOODS 
Page 7 
 
 
Steve Rippentrop, M.D., evaluated Ms. Vargas on December 12, 2016.  He 
performed an examination and a review of the relevant records.  He diagnosed right 
shoulder pain, status post subacromial decompression, acromioplasty, and 
debridement, left shoulder pain and fibromyalgia.  (Def. Ex. F, p. 7)  He opined that her 
ongoing pain complaints were most likely related to chronic myofascial pain and 
fibromyalgia.  “Given her repeated injections by Dr. Nepola with minimal subjective 
improvement, it is unlikely to be related to either the bursitis or tendinopathy, 
demonstrated on MRI.”  (Def. Ex. F, p. 7)  He opined that there is no causal connection 
between her work injury and her shoulder condition.  (Def. Ex. F, p. 8)  He did opine that 
work activities may temporarily aggravate her fibromyalgia, which is a personal 
condition.  (Def. Ex. F, p. 8)  He concurred with Dr. Gordon’s 2012 impairment rating on 
the right shoulder and found no ratable impairment on the left.  (Def. Ex. F, pp. 9-10) 
Ms. Vargas returned to Dr. Hartely in December 2016, reporting increased 
bilateral shoulder and upper back symptoms.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 5)  Dr. Hartley noted 
inconsistencies in her range of motion.  He released her with no restrictions and 
recommended she follow up for treatment of fibromyalgia.  (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 5-6) 
On July 29, 2017, Dr. Bedell wrote a letter to claimant’s former counsel outlining 
the causation of her medical problems.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 22)  The letter does not shed much 
light on this case regarding her bilateral shoulders or neck.  He did make a poignant 
observation when discussing the level of her disability. 
The question then becomes what level of pain or discomfort is reasonable 
for a person to endure in order to continue working.  I have recommend 
[sic] for several years that she seek work that is less physical and doesn’t 
have the degree of repetitive motion that food processing jobs have.  
Unfortunately her lack of English fluency and level of education make it 
very difficult for her to find employment that will provider [sic] her close the 
financial compensation she receives at Tyson. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 23) 
In April 2018, Ms. Vargas requested additional treatment and was again 
evaluated by Dr. Hartley in June 2018.  He evaluated her, reviewed her medical history 
and opined that she had not experienced a substantial change in her chronic diffuse 
musculoskeletal symptoms since her last evaluation.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 9) 
In June 2018, Ms. Vargas was evaluated by Sunil Bansal, M.D., for an IME at the 
direction of her new attorney.  Dr. Bansal reviewed her history accurately and performed 
a thorough evaluation.  He documented the following regarding her current condition. 
Ms. Vargas continues to have pain in the back of her shoulders, more into 
her shoulder blades, as well as into the center of her chest.  After her right 
shoulder surgery, she relied heavily on her left upper extremity.  This is 
when her pain transferred to her left shoulder as well as her neck.  She 

VARGAS V. TYSON FOODS 
Page 8 
 
 
has numbness of both hands, involving the second through forth fingers 
bilaterally.  At work she wears a support brace on her shoulders that 
enables her to be able to lift.  From the floor to table height she is able to 
lift 5 pounds, but she does not use her left arm as much.  She can lift very 
little overhead because of her pain, and she frequently drops objects. 
She takes Tylenol and a prescription pain medicine when her he pain [sic] 
is particularly severe.  She has had a recent injection into her shoulder, 
which has helped a little bit. 
(Cl. Ex. 6, p 66)  Dr. Bansal diagnosed cervical myofascial pain syndrome with 
characteristic of discogenic pathology, right shoulder impingement syndrome and left 
shoulder subacromial bursitis and tendinitis.  (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 68-69)  He opined that her 
left shoulder and cervical conditions were worsened by favoring her right shoulder 
during her recovery.  (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 69)  He recommended a cervical MRI for the neck 
and upper back, as well as intermittent steroid injections for both shoulders.  (Cl. Ex. 6, 
p. 72)  Dr. Bansal further assigned a 5 percent whole body rating related to the cervical 
spine, a 6 percent whole body rating for the right shoulder and a 5 percent whole body 
rating for the left shoulder.  (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 74)  He recommended restrictions of no lifting 
more than 10 pounds and no lifting over the shoulder level with either arm, and only 
occasional reaching with either arm.  (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 73) 
An MRI was performed on August 2, 2018 on claimant’s bilateral shoulders and 
cervical spine.  (Jt. Ex. 11)  It was deemed unremarkable. 
For her part, Ms. Vargas has continued to work at Tyson, removing the fat from 
meat.  Her job has not changed although she has worked on light-duty at various times.  
She uses an electric knife. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first and primary question is whether the legal elements for review-reopening 
have been met in light of the findings of facts set forth above.  The claimant alleges she 
has proven that her left shoulder and upper back/cervical area became permanent 
following her July 2014 AFS, necessitating an increase in industrial disability.  The 
defendants argue that her condition has not changed and she has now been diagnosed 
with fibromyalgia, a non-work related condition, which better explains her constellation 
of ongoing symptoms. 
In a proceeding to reopen an award for payments or agreement for settlement as 
provided by section 86.14, inquiry shall be into whether or not the condition of the 
employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, or increase of compensation so 
awarded or agreed upon.  Iowa Code section 86.14(2) (2017).  In order to demonstrate 
eligibility for an increase of compensation under section 86.14(2), the claimant must 
demonstrate what her physical or economic condition was at the time of the original 
award or settlement.  At a subsequent review-reopening hearing, claimant has the 

VARGAS V. TYSON FOODS 
Page 9 
 
 
burden to prove that there is a substantial difference in such condition which warrants 
an increase in compensation.  Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387 (Iowa 2009).  
The difference can be economic or physical.  Blacksmith v. All-American Inc., 290 
N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Henderson v. Iles, 250 Iowa 787, 96 N.W.2d 321 (1959).  
Essentially, two snapshots of the claimant’s condition are taken; one in each hearing or 
settlement.  The claimant must prove that there is something substantially different 
between the two snapshots such that it warrants an increase in benefits.  Gosek v. 
Garmer & Stiles Co., 158 N.W.2d 731, 735 (Iowa 1968).   
The principles of res judicata apply and the agency should not reevaluate facts 
and circumstances that were known or knowable at the time of the original action.  
Kohlhaas at, 392.  Review-reopening is not intended to provide either party with an 
opportunity to relitigate issues already decided or to give a party a “second bite at the 
apple.”  The agency, however, is forbidden from speculating as to what was 
contemplated at the time of the original snapshot.  Id.   
The burden remains upon the injured worker to prove by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the current condition is proximately caused by the original injury.  
Kohlhaas, 777 N.W.2d at 392.  When a work-related injury causes another injury to the 
worker, this new injury (sequela) may also be considered as a work-related injury under 
Iowa’s workers’ compensation laws. 
Where an employee suffers from a compensable injury and another condition or 
injury arises that is the consequence or result of the previous injury, the sequelae rule 
applies.  If the employee suffers a compensable injury and later suffers further disability, 
which is the proximate result of the original injury, such further disability is 
compensable.  If the employee suffers a compensable injury and thereafter returns to 
work and, as a result, the first injury is aggravated and accelerated so that the employee 
is more greatly disabled than they were before returning to work, the entire disability 
may be compensable.  The employer is liable for all consequences that naturally and 
proximately flow from the accident.  Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 767-68, 
266 N.W. 480 (1936).  
In order to apply the facts to the law, the two snapshots must be contrasted and 
compared.  The first snapshot was claimant’s condition in July 2014.  The snapshot of 
claimant’s condition as of that date is murky.  There was an AFS for a 20 percent 
industrial disability.  The medical records attached to the AFS demonstrated an 
accepted right shoulder claim with vastly disparate medical opinions concerning the 
extent of claimant’s functional disability.  Tyson’s physician found a 1 percent body 
impairment and no restrictions, while claimant’s physician opined a 18 percent whole 
body impairment with massive restrictions.  Dr. Milas recommended a 10-pound lifting 
restriction and no working with her arms above shoulder level. 
 
 

VARGAS V. TYSON FOODS 
Page 10 
 
 
There is also reference to her left shoulder and her upper back/cervical area, 
although the record at that time is quite unclear regarding the precise status of those 
conditions at that time.  Dr. Milas documented her difficulty in 2012, “performing 
repetitive activity with her upper extremities because she is favoring her right shoulder.”  
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 8)   
It is particularly challenging in this case to ascertain a clear understanding of the 
precise nature of the first snapshot.  One might say the snapshot is blurry.  There was 
certainly no clear determination which delineated what her condition was at the time of 
the July 2014 AFS, as there may have been had the matter been determined through a 
hearing and arbitration decision.  Instead the parties simply attached dramatically 
differing medical opinions and agreed that her industrial disability was 20 percent.  I find 
that the only factor which is certain about the July 2014 AFS is that the parties agreed 
her industrial disability was 20 percent.  It is speculative, however, to determine what 
the parties understood her condition was at that time in order to reach that number.  The 
burden in this action, however, is on the claimant to show that her condition is worse in 
the second snapshot.  Any ambiguity caused by uncertainty of the meaning of the first 
snapshot weighs against the claimant.   
The second snapshot taken was the date of hearing, August 28, 2018.  The 
claimant did undergo some additional treatment between the two snapshots, however, 
she did not have surgery.  She was prescribed medications and light-duty at various 
times and she had a few injections.  She never had a clear diagnosis from her 
authorized physicians.  None of the objective testing found anything conclusive in her 
left shoulder or upper back/cervical area.  The most consistent and credible diagnosis 
was fibromyalgia, which none of the physicians in this record have convincingly causally 
connected to her 2011 work injury.1 
 
Dr. Bansal did provide a clear diagnosis.  He opined her diagnosis is cervical 
myofascial pain syndrome with characteristic of discogenic pathology and left shoulder 
subacromial bursitis and tendinitis.  (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 68-69)  He opined these conditions 
resulted in permanent impairment.  By virtue of Dr. Bansal’s IME report, the claimant 
does have evidence of permanent impairment which did not exist at the time of the 
original hearing.  Dr. Bansal’s opinion regarding diagnosis, causation, and impairment, 
however, stand in opposition to the opinions of Dr. Hartley, Dr. Rippentrop, Dr. Nepola 
and Dr. Chen.  While I could find flaws in each of their opinions, I find that cumulatively 
their opinions are difficult to dismiss.  Perhaps most importantly, Dr. Bansal’s report 
does not address the diagnosis of fibromyalgia by Dr. Bedell (and others), or its 
relationship to her ongoing symptoms.  Based upon the record before the agency, I find 
it likely that she does have fibromyalgia.  While this does not preclude the possibility 
that she has real diagnoses in her neck and shoulder, I find it very difficult to make such 
                                            
1 In January 2016, Dr. Chen noted that work activities may aggravate the symptoms associated 
with her fibromyalgia, but did not provide a convincing causation opinion which allows claimant to meet 
her burden of proof. 

VARGAS V. TYSON FOODS 
Page 11 
 
 
a finding based upon an opinion which does not even address the fibromyalgia 
diagnosis.  Moreover, the restrictions he recommended (which were never followed) in 
2018 are very similar to the restrictions Dr. Milas recommended (which were never 
followed) in 2012. 
 
The burden of proof is on the claimant to show that there is an increase in her 
industrial disability from the first snapshot.  While this is a close case, I find that the 
claimant has failed to meet this burden of proof. 
 
The claimant also seeks medical expenses and alternate medical care under 
Section 85.27. 
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has 
the right to choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly 
and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience 
to the employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the 
care offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
 
All of claimant’s care set forth in Joint Exhibit 8 was unauthorized:  Dr. Bedell and 
Dr. Nepola.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 1)  The claimant has failed to prove beneficial care for this 
unauthorized care and these claims are denied.  The claimant’s request for alternate 
medical care is denied, however, defendants shall continue to authorize a physician to 
evaluate and treat her right shoulder condition if necessary. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant shall take nothing further from this action. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Defendant shall pay the IME expense of Dr. Bansal in the amount of three 
thousand three hundred seventy-two and no/100 dollars ($3,372.00). 
 
 

VARGAS V. TYSON FOODS 
Page 12 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
Costs are taxed to defendant. 
Signed and filed this __30th __ day of January, 2020. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Andrew W. Bribriesco (via WCES) 
Jason Wiltfang (via WCES) 
 
