Case Number: 5039943.02
Case Title:  THORNTON, TOBY V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Thornton Toby-5039943.02m.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
TOBY THORNTON, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
          File No. 5039943.02 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING, 
  : 
 
 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
  ALTERNATE MEDICAL CARE  
 
 
  :                        DECISION               
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
AMERICAN INTERSTATE INSURANCE  : 
COMPANY, 
  : 
            Head Note: 2701 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 This is a contested case proceeding under Iowa Code chapters 85 and 17A. The 
expedited procedure of rule 876 IAC 4.48 is invoked by claimant, Toby Thornton.   
The alternate medical care claim came on for hearing on May 28, 2025. Claimant 
appeared personally and through his attorney Tiernan Siems.  Defendants appeared 
through their attorney Caitlyn Kilburg.  The proceedings were digitally recorded. That 
recording constitutes the official record of this proceeding.  
Pursuant to the Commissioner’s July 21, 2023, Order, the undersigned has been 
delegated authority to issue a final agency decision in this alternate medical care 
proceeding. Therefore, this ruling is designated final agency action and any appeal of 
the decision would be to the Iowa District Court pursuant to Iowa Code section 17A. 
Prior to the hearing, claimant submitted exhibits 1-6, consisting of 8 pages.  
Claimant’s exhibits 1-4 were submitted with the filing of claimant’s petition on May 15, 
2025.  Claimant’s exhibits 5 and 6 were filed just prior to the hearing on May 28, 2025.  
The night before the hearing, defendants submitted proposed exhibits consisting of 25 
pages, as well as a motion to exceed the permissible number of hearing exhibits.  The 
undersigned denied defendants’ motion to exceed the permissible number of hearing 
exhibits prior to the start of the hearing.  Iowa Administrative Rule 876-4.48(9) states, 
“Written evidence shall be limited to ten pages per party.” (emphasis added). The use of 
the word shall indicates the limit is mandatory.  The rule is being imposed because this 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-May-30  15:09:36     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 2 
 
is an abbreviated proceeding; the language also indicates the undersigned lacks 
authority to grant defendants’ request.  Defendants were instructed to refile 10 pages of 
proposed exhibits.  Defendants emailed the undersigned 10 pages of amended exhibits 
at the start of the hearing.  A copy of those exhibits, as well as defendants’ hearing 
brief, were filed immediately after the conclusion of the hearing. At the start of the 
hearing, it was discovered that claimant’s exhibit 5 had been rejected by the agency.  
Claimant also refiled exhibit 5 after the conclusion of the hearing.   
The parties had several evidence objections.  Defendants objected to claimant’s 
proposed exhibit 6.  (Hearing Testimony).  Claimant’s exhibit 6 contains several 
excerpts from the deposition of Matthew Strabala in another legal matter.  (Cl Ex. 6).  
According to claimant’s counsel, that matter is a bad faith action filed by the claimant 
against insurer, American Interstate Insurance Company, in the United States District 
Court for the Southern District of Iowa.  (Id. at 1).  Mr. Strabala’s deposition was taken 
on May 15, 2025. (Id.).  The proposed exhibit contains 9 short excerpts from that 
testimony. (Id.).  Defendants objected to the exhibit due to unfair surprise and hearsay. 
(Hearing Testimony).  Defendants’ counsel argued she had not been present at the 
deposition on May 15, 2025, and was not aware of the deposition transcripts’ existence 
until claimant filed the proposed exhibit on the morning of May 28, 2025. (Id.).  
Additionally, defense counsel argued the transcript was inadmissible hearsay as Mr. 
Strabala was not present at the hearing to cross examine. (Id.).   
In response, claimant’s counsel argued admission of the deposition excerpts was 
not unfair surprise because American Interstate Insurance Company, a mutual 
defendant in both claims, had legal counsel present at the deposition on May 15, 2025, 
even if it was not the same legal counsel present for today’s alternate care hearing. 
(Id.).  Claimant’s counsel also alleged that defendants’ counsel had previously 
requested not to be included on communications for claimant’s bad faith claim. (Id.). 
Claimant’s counsel indicated that an email from Mr. Strabala was included in claimant’s 
original proposed exhibits, which were filed on May 15, 2025. (Id.).  Given this, 
claimant’s counsel argued defendants were not unfairly surprised or prejudiced by the 
inclusion of Mr. Strabala’s deposition testimony. (Id.).  Finally, claimant’s counsel stated 
that Mr. Strabala’s testimony does not meet the definition of hearsay, and even if it did, 
hearsay is admissible in administrative proceedings. (Id.).  The undersigned reserved 
ruling on the objection until issuance of the decision.   
After reviewing the arguments made by the parties, I overrule defendants’ 
objection to claimant’s exhibit 6.  As claimant indicated, Mr. Strabala was previously 
identified as a person with relevant information when claimant filed his petition on May 
15, 2025.  (See Claimant’s Exhibit 6).  Even though the deposition excerpts are from a 
separate legal matter, defendants were aware of Mr. Strabala’s existence and could 
have investigated his opinions prior to hearing.  (Id.).  Additionally, the deposition 
transcripts are not markedly different than a previous report provided by Mr. Strabala.  
Defendants are not unduly prejudice by admittance of this exhibit.  
 

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 3 
 
Claimant’s counsel objected to a text message included on page 3 of defendants’ 
exhibit A.  (Hearing Testimony). The text message is purported to be from Sautter’s 
Auto. Claimant’s counsel objected to the exhibit on the grounds that the text message is 
irrelevant to the issues in this proceeding and unfairly prejudicial to the claimant 
because it was later discovered that the text message did not actually come from 
Sautter’s Auto.  (Id.). Counsel claimed the text is irrelevant because claimant is no 
longer relying on the text as evidence of his need for a new van. (Id.).  In response, 
defendants’ counsel argued that the text message is both relevant and admissible. (Id.).  
She argued that the text is relevant and important to understanding the history of 
claimant’s request for a new van. (Id.).  She also stated that the text message was 
originally served as an attachment in an email from claimant’s counsel’s office and 
therefore its inclusion in the record is necessary in order for the agency to have a true 
understanding of the veracity of the evidence presented. (Id.).  Claimant’s objection to 
the text message contained on page 3 of defendants’ exhibit A was overruled. (Id.).   
Claimant’s counsel also objected to defendants’ exhibit B. (Hearing Testimony).  
Exhibit B is a series of text messages exchanged between the claimant and his brother 
concerning pocketing money using b/s invoices. (See Ex. B). Claimant’s counsel 
alleged that claimant’s brother is his power of attorney for the 2009 injury date and 
therefore communications between the brothers are protected by attorney-client 
privilege and the work-product doctrine and are inadmissible in this proceeding. 
(Hearing Testimony).  Defendants’ counsel argued that neither the claimant nor his 
brother are attorneys, and therefore attorney-client privilege does not apply to their text 
messages. (Id.).  The undersigned reserved ruling on the objection until issuance of the 
decision.  (Id.).   
After reviewing the arguments made by the parties, I overrule claimant’s 
objections to defendants’ exhibit B.  The attorney-client privilege applies to “confidential 
communication[s] between an attorney and the attorney’s client.” Shook v. City of 
Davenport, 497 N.W.2d 883, 886 (Iowa 1993) (overruled on other grounds by Wells 
Dairy v. American Indus. Refrigeration, Inc., 690 N.W.2d 38 (Iowa 2004)). This privilege 
is codified at Iowa Code § 622.10, which explains that the privilege applies to “[a] 
practicing attorney…or the stenographer or confidential clerk of any such person…who 
obtains information by reason of the person’s employment . . .” The attorney-client 
privilege prohibits a “practicing attorney” from disclosing “confidential communication[s] 
properly entrusted to the person in the person’s professional capacity, and necessary 
and proper to enable the person to discharge the functions of the person’s office 
according to the usual course of practice or discipline.” Id.  The language of Iowa Code 
section 622.10 explicitly includes “practicing attorneys;” it does not, however, include 
those with a power of attorney. Iowa Code § 622.10.  The language of the statute does 
not include individuals with power of attorney, and claimant’s counsel has not provided 
any legal authority indicating the courts would extend that protection to claimant’s 
brother in this specific instance.  See St. Paul Reinsurance Company, Ltd. v. 
Commercial Financial Corp., 197 F.R.D 620, 641 (N.D. Iowa 2000) (holding the privilege 
only applies to communications between an attorney and a client in the context of a 
professional relationship involving the attorney as an attorney).   

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 4 
 
Additionally, to qualify as privileged, a communication must be “necessary and 
proper to enable” the attorney to serve as the client’s legal counsel. Iowa Code § 
622.10. Therefore, communications regarding matters unrelated to the attorney’s 
representation are not privileged. “The attorney-client privilege is not a strategic tool 
designed to enable a litigant to gain an advantage by keeping evidence to himself or 
herself rather than sharing it with others.” Young v. Gibson, 423 N.W.2d 208, 209-10 
(Iowa Ct. App. 1998). “The privilege is established so clients can communicate concerns 
about their legal problems without fear the communication might subsequently be used 
as evidence against them.” Id. “The burden is upon one claiming the attorney-client 
privilege to establish it.” State v. Tensley, 249 N.W.2d 659, 661 (Iowa 1977).   
It is unclear how exactly the text messages discussing b/s repair invoices and 
pocketing money constitute advice for a legal proceeding.  Claimant bears the burden of 
proving the veracity of his objection, and he has not proven that the text messages were 
confidential communications made to someone acting as his attorney in a legal matter. 
While claimant’s brother testified that he helps his brother with finances, there is not 
substantial evidence claimant’s brother was helping litigate and/or making the decisions 
in claimant’s bad faith and/or workers’ compensation claims and that the text messages 
were sent in connection with that specific representation.   
In his objection, claimant’s counsel also mentioned the work-product doctrine. 
(Hearing Testimony).  Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 1.503(3) creates a qualified privilege 
for trial preparation materials. Under the Rule, the pivotal question is whether the 
communication or documents were prepared in anticipation of litigation and therefore 
constitute protected work product.  In Wells Dairy, the Iowa Supreme Court articulated 
the test as follows,  
[W]e hold that the overarching inquiry in determining whether a document 
was prepared in anticipation of litigation is “whether, in light of the nature of 
the document and the factual situation in the particular case, the document 
can fairly be said to have been prepared or obtained because of the 
prospect of litigation.” 8 Wright & Miller § 2024, at 198–99. If documents 
“would have been created in essentially similar form irrespective of the 
litigation[,] ... it [cannot] fairly be said that they were created ‘because of’ 
actual or impending litigation.” (citation omitted). 
Wells Dairy, 690 N.W.2d at 48.  The text messages are discussing b/s invoices and 
pocketing money, not creating documentation for claimant’s bad faith and/or workers’ 
compensation claims.  There is no concrete evidence showing claimant’s brother 
suggested the b/s invoices because of pending or potential litigation.  The suggestion 
appears to have been financially motivated and made irrespective of any litigation.  
Claimant has not proven that the text messages contained in defendants’ exhibit B are 
privileged communications protected by the work-product doctrine.  Claimant’s objection 
is overruled.   
 

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 5 
 
The official hearing record consists of: 
 Claimant’s Exhibit 1-6, consisting of 8 pages 
 Defendants’ Exhibits A and B, consisting of 10 pages  
 Defendants’ Brief 
 
Claimant testified at the hearing.  Timothy Thornton and Andrew Meyer also 
testified at the hearing.  Counsel for both parties provided argument.   
ISSUES 
The issues presented for resolution are whether the claimant is entitled to 
alternate medical care in the form of: 
 A new conversion van 
 Repairs to claimant’s current conversion van performed by Meyer’s 
Automotive  
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned having considered all the evidence in the record finds: 
 
On June 25, 2009, the claimant, Toby Thornton, sustained a work-related injury 
while driving a truck for Clayton County Recycling. See Thornton v. Clayton County 
Recycling, File No. 5039943, 2013 WL 2450177 (Arb. Decision, May 23, 2013).  On that 
date, he was involved in a rollover motor vehicle accident and catastrophically injured, 
after the load he was carrying shifted causing the truck to jack-knife. (Hearing 
Testimony). Thornton was paralyzed in the accident. (Id.). He now has quadriplegia with 
limited use of his arms. (Id.).  At the alternate care hearing, Thornton testified that he is 
confined to a wheelchair. (Id.).  His left hand has no function and his right hand retains 
around 30% of its function. (Id.).   
Following the injury, Thornton filed a workers’ compensation claim against 
Clayton County Recycling and its insurance carrier.  That case went to hearing on 
March 23, 2013. See Thornton, 2013 WL 2450177.  A decision was issued on May 23, 
2013.  (Id.).  In that decision, Thornton was award permanent total disability benefits. 
(Id.).  On May 16, 2014, the agency granted Thornton’s request for a partial 
commutation of that award. Thornton v. Clayton County Recycling, File No. 5039943, 
2014 WL 2404252 (Comm. Decision, May 16, 2014).   
Defendants have accepted liability for the June 25, 2009 injury and provided 
Thornton with medical care.  Thornton, 2013 WL 2450177.  This care includes CNA 
assistance each morning to address his personal needs, such as bathing, bowel 
movements and dressing. (Id.).  Defendants have supplied Thornton with adaptive 
equipment including two wheelchairs, a manual chair and a power chair that  

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 6 
 
can go “off road.” (Hearing Testimony).1  Defendants have also provided Thornton with 
two conversion vans for transportation. (Id.).  The first van was purchased in January 
2010. (Ex. 1, p. 1).  It was a 2010 Grand Caravan with Braun XT Conversion and was 
traded in on August 22, 2017, with 124,000 miles on it and significant engine issues. 
(Id.).  Thornton is currently using the second van purchased by defendants. (Hearing 
Testimony).  This van is a 2017 Pacifica with Braun XT Conversion.  (Id.).  In 2024, the 
van had approximately 103,000 miles on it. (Id.).  At the time of the alternate care 
hearing in 2025, Thornton testified it had approximately 117,000 miles on it. (Hearing 
Testimony).  
According to the hearing evidence, on March 20, 2024, claimant’s counsel sent 
defendants’ counsel an email.2 (Ex. A, p. 1).  That email stated as follows: 
We have been informed by Mr. Thornton that his 2017 Chrysler 
Pacifica van has surpassed 100,000 miles and is going to have to be 
replaced. The useful life of his vehicle is substantially diminished compared 
to other vehicles because of the weight of his wheelchair and modifications 
that have been done to the vehicle.  Now that the vehicle has surpassed 
100,000 miles, the suspension and brake system components will begin to 
fail which could cause the vehicle to become non-operational.  Please 
advise if you are in favor of the van replacement and if the purchase is so 
authorized.  
(Id.).  On April 4, 2024, defendants’ counsel responded and instructed claimant’s 
counsel to contact Siebert Mobility to discuss the necessity of obtaining a new vehicle 
and get a quote for a new van. (Id.).  Six minutes later, claimant’s counsel sent a 
response which reads, 
There have been multiple delays regarding service work on the van and 
payment for those services up to this point.  Are you saying that you are 
approving the van replacement?  If not, we are filing a Petition for Alternate 
Medical Care today.  Please advise. 
(Id.).  Later that afternoon, defendants’ counsel wrote back, “I am not aware of any 
pending requests for service.  Please forward me a copy so that I can seek my client’s 
position on the same.”  (Id.).  Claimant’s counsel then wrote back admitting that van 
repairs were not needed at that time; claimant just wanted to know if his request for a 
new van was approved. (Ex. A, p. 2).  Two hours later, defendants’ counsel sent the 
following reply, 
                                                 
1 Thornton has filed two prior alternate care actions.  One requested a new wheelchair and the 
second involved payment for CNA services. See Thornton v. Clayton County Recycling, File No. 
5039943.01, 2021 WL 4955129 (Alt. Decision, October 18, 2021); Thornton v. Clayton County Recycling, 
File No. 5039943, 2014 WL 6480296 (Consent Order, Nov. 4, 2014).   
2 The heading of all of claimant’s counsel’s emails read “Thornton, Toby/adv. American Interstate 
Insurance Company (2021 Bad Faith Claim) (27780.067165).   

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 7 
 
I’m glad to hear that the van is not in need of any repairs at this time.  
As stated previously, please have your client reach out to Siebert Mobility   
. . . to address his current needs with regards to a replacement vehicle.  At 
this time, my client has no estimate, invoice, order, prescription, 
recommendation, or opinion (expert, medical, or otherwise) to approve or 
deny.  This is the same company that helped outfit Mr. Thornson’s [sic] 
current vehicle, and I believe a return to them is a prudent and necessary 
first step in getting your client something that will continue to fit his needs. 
If you would prefer, I can set up the appointment and let you know the details 
of the same.  
(Id.).  That is the end of the parties’ email exchanges on April 4, 2024.  
 
The next email in the hearing record is dated April 26, 2024. (Ex. 1, p. 1).  This 
email is from Matt Strabala at Siebert Mobility. (Id.).  Siebert Mobility made the 
modifications on Thornton’s prior vans. (Hearing Testimony).  The email was addressed 
to Thornton and his attorney.  (Ex.1, p. 1).  It reads,  
Attached is the estimate for a new van and adaptive equipment for Toby, 
including his trade in.  Also attached is a window sticker for a van that we 
currently have on hold, at Braun’s facility in Indiana.   
If/when we get the thumbs up to proceed, the van will need to be converted, 
which should take around 4-6 weeks to arrive at our location for the rest of 
the up-fitting (Lockdown, driving controls, etc.). 
Additional information that may be beneficial moving forward:  
Toby’s first van was purchased around 1/19/2010, 2010 Grand Caravan 
with Braun XT conversion.  It was traded in to us around 8/22/2017, with 
about 124,000 miles, with significant engine issues.  
His current van, 2017 Pacifica with Braun XT conversion, was purchased 
around 8/22/2017 and now has around 103,000 miles.  It is not an exact 
“lifespan” but similar. According to Toby, the current van does need a 
significant A/C repair, which is an extremely important component to any 
wheelchair accessible vehicle.  
Quote assumes that the trade in, is in good mechanical order (engine, 
transmission, etc.).  
Please let me know if you have any questions. Happy to assist in any way 
that I can.  
(Id.).   

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 8 
 
 
The next email in the record is dated May 6, 2024. (Ex. A, p. 2).  It is from 
claimant’s counsel. (Id.).  It states “It is our understanding that the insurance carrier has 
been in direct contact with Siebert Mobility.”  (Id.).  Claimant’s counsel then asks 
whether the new van has been ordered. (Id.).  Defendants’ counsel responded on May 
21, 2024. (Id.).  The email indicates that is not her understanding and claimant should 
reach out to Siebert Mobility directly to get his current car valued, etc.  (Id.).  
Defendants’ counsel again offers to make the appointment for the claimant. (Id.).  
Defendants’ counsel sent another follow-up email on May 29, 2024, asking if claimant 
needed her assistance. (Id. at 3).  Claimant’s counsel responded that day.  (Id.).  That 
email reads in pertinent part,  
It is our understanding that the claims adjuster and Siebert had a 
conversation about the van replacement. The gist of the conversation was 
that vehicle is at the same vintage and number of miles as the last vehicle 
when it was replaced.  Siebert acknowledges that with Toby’s large frame 
of the wheelchair, a conversion van is going to be a beating. Please see 
attached quote generated as a result of that conversation.  
Contrary to your belief that there is no recommendation for a new van, see 
additional attachments.  Siebert currently has a vehicle on hold, and if it is 
lost it is going to take some time to replace that. All that being said, please 
let me know if the van replacement is approved.  Otherwise, we will get our 
Alt Med Care Petition on file.   
(Id.).   
There are three attachments included in claimant’s counsel’s email on May 29, 
2024.  The first appears to be a quote generated by Matt Strabala at Siebert Mobility 
after a conversation with Thornton on April 26, 2024.3 4 (Id.).  The second attachment 
purports to be a text message from Sautter’s Auto, a different mechanic in Monona, 
Iowa, the town where Thornton resides. (Id.; Hearing Testimony). The language of the 
text indicates that Thornton’s wheelchair is causing excessive strain and damage to his 
van; it recommends Thornton get a new van at 100,000 miles because of this excessive 
wear and tear. (Id.).  The last attachment is a report written by Andrew Meyer, the 
owner of Meyer’s Auto Service. (Id.).  A copy of this report is also contained in 
claimant’s exhibit 2.  The report reads,  
                                                 
3The parties did not submit the quote itself into the hearing record.  A later email confirms that the 
quote was actually given to Thornton, not the insurance adjuster. (Ex. A, p. 4).  There is no evidence in the 
record that an adjuster was present when Thornton met with Strabala on April 26, 2024.  
 
4 Matthew Strabala’s deposition was taken in connection with Thornton’s bad faith action against 
American Interstate Insurance Company on May 15, 2025. (Ex. 6, p. 1).  Claimant submitted 9 small 
portions of Strabala’s testimony into the hearing record.  (Id.).  The fragments, however, are extremely 
disjointed and of limited value in this proceeding.  
 

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 9 
 
It is my recommendation that the van be replaced due to the age of 
the van and the mileage. With now over 100,000 miles, parts will begin to 
fail, such as wheel bearings, struts, suspension components, cooling 
system components as well as the interior electronic components. . . . The 
air conditioning system already has a leak causing him to be without air 
conditioning. This repair alone will cost over $1000.00 and with Toby’s 
condition his body doesn’t regulate temperature well making this a 
necessity.  Also some of the components listed above could cause the van 
to become non-operational therefore would need to be towed if any of those 
failed.  While towing the van isn’t a big deal getting Toby and his chair in 
and out of a vehicle, (that is not as equipped as his van is), is going to be 
extremely difficult and almost impossible in certain situations. . . . 
(Id.).  This report is not dated, but Thornton’s attorney indicates it was received by their 
office on March 20, 2024. (Ex. A, p. 5).  
 
Defendants’ counsel investigated the attachments claimant produced on May 29, 
2024. (See Ex. A, pp. 4-6).  The results of that investigation revealed that Sautter’s Auto 
had not authored that attached text message. (Id. at 5).  Sautter’s only had a landline 
and did not use a cell phone for business matters. Sautter’s suggested defendants 
check with Meyer’s Auto Repair to see if they had authored the text. (Id.).  Mr. Strabala 
also confirmed that he had spoken directly with Thornton, and not the insurance 
adjuster, prior to writing the April 26, 2024 email. (Id. at 6).   
 
The next communication in the record is an email from defendants’ counsel. (Ex. 
A, p. 6).  It is dated June 6, 2024. (Id.).  The email indicates that defendants were 
authorizing a 99 multi-point inspection of Thornton’s van with Fillback Chrysler Dodge 
Jeep Ram in Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin. (Id.).  Defendants’ counsel asks what date 
and time would work best for Thornton. (Id.).  On June 10, 2024, defendants’ counsel 
sent another email confirming the appointment time and clarified that the appointment 
was to look for “any anomalies in the functioning of the vehicle.” (Id.).  The email 
provides an extensive list of the items that would be checked during the inspection and 
asks claimant to tell the technician if there are any other items on the van he wants 
inspected at that time. (Id.).  
 
Fillback Automotive released its inspection report on June 12, 2024. (Ex. A, p. 7).  
That report indicated that the van had passed inspection; there were no noted issues 
with the steering components, engine/transmission mounts, suspension, drive shaft, 
exhaust system, or engine components. (Id.).  The report identified two areas on the 
van that needed repair, the CV boots and the engine oil cooler. (Id.).  The report states 
that there was a hole in the right-side CV boot and repairing it would require an axel 
replacement. (Id.).  The inspection also found a leak in the engine oil cooler. (Id.).  It 
recommends replacement.  (Id.).  The report includes repair estimates for both items. 
(Id.). 
 
On October 18, 2024, defendants’ counsel sent an email notifying Thornton that 
his request for a new van was denied.  (Ex. A, p. 7).  The email indicated that the text 

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 10 
 
message opinion indicating Thornton needed a new van had not actually come from 
Sautter’s Auto.  (Id.).  The source of the text message remained unclear. (Id.).  
Additionally, defendants’ counsel indicated she spoke with Andrew Meyer and he stated 
that Thornton had asked him to author the attached report. (Id.).  According to the email, 
Meyer told defendants he had not inspected or worked on Thornton’s van since April 
2023, and did not even know how many miles were on the van. (Id.).  Defendants’ email 
also addresses the repairs suggested by Fillback Automotive. (Id.).  It indicated that 
under Iowa law, vehicle repairs were the claimant’s responsibility. (Id.).  However, in a 
show of good faith, defendants agreed to cover the cost of the recommended repairs if 
they were performed at Fillback Automotive. (Id.).  The letter closed by offering to 
schedule an appointment for Thornton for the repairs. (Id.).  After this communication 
there is a gap in the record.  
 
On April 17, 2025, claimant’s counsel sent an email to defendants.  That email 
said “Please see the attached quote for work American Interstate has committed to 
covering.  Mr. Thornton would like this work done at Meyer’s Auto Service, who has 
performed other work on the van.” (Ex. A, p. 7).  The attachment itself is not included in 
the hearing record. (Id.). On April 22, 2025, defendants counsel responded indicating 
that they had authorized Fillback Automotive to do the repairs, not Meyer’s Auto 
Service. (Id.). Defendants asked if Thornton wanted to schedule an appointment at 
Fillback Automotive. (Id.).  
 
On May 7, 2025, claimant’s counsel sent an email stating that Thornton was 
taking his van to Meyer’s Auto Service the following Monday to get the boot axel and oil 
cooler repairs. (Ex. A, p. 8).  Thornton thought Meyer’s might also have time to fix the 
air conditioner as well. (Id.).  The email asserted that claimant felt the air conditioner 
repair was defendants’ responsibility under his workers’ compensation claim because 
he needed the air conditioner to properly regulate his body temperature, and after-
market modifications necessary because of his work injury made the air conditioner 
more susceptible to damage. (Id.).  Claimant’s counsel asked if defendants would 
approve the air conditioner repairs. (Id.).  Defendants’ counsel responded that day, 
stating that Fillback Automotive was the authorized provider for Thornton’s van, not 
Meyer’s Auto Service. (Id.).   
 
On May 10, 2025, claimant’s counsel sent an email to defendants stating that 
Fillback was “not a reasonable selection,” and that Meyer’s could provide more 
reasonable services under the circumstances. (Ex. A, p. 8).  The email closes with 
“Please treat this email and notice of dissatisfaction with the services provided. We 
anticipate filing a Petition for Alternate Services under the circumstances.” (Id.).  
 
Thornton filed this alternate care petition on May 15, 2025. (See Petition).  In his 
petition, Thornton requested a new conversion van and completion of the repairs 
necessary on his current van. (Id.).  Thornton requested an order from the agency 
mandating that the repairs be completed by Meyer’s Auto Service. (Id.).   
 
Defendants’ exhibits contain a series of text messages between Thornton and his 
brother Timothy Thornton. (Ex. B, p. 10).  The messages appear to be dated May 15, 

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 11 
 
2023. (Id.).  In them, Thornton sends his brother pictures of several different invoices.  
(Id.). He confirms that one of the invoices is from Siebert’s in Iowa City, Iowa. (Id.).   
Thornton then states, “I think I sent u the wrong paperwork for the A/C. I’m heading to 
see what my mechanic can do.” Timothy Thornton provides the following response,  
Ok. That estimate u sent me that you would like paid to u directly to pocket 
the $, do u think your local guy would write up the same total but as an 
invoice and give u the extra $$$.  
…. 
Spoke to Tiernan today.  He thinks it will be hard to get w/c to pay u directly 
so we spoke about u getting your mechanic to write up a b/s invoice.  
(Id.).   
 
There are two more emails in the hearing record.  The first of these is from 
claimant’s counsel.  (Ex. A, p. 9). It is dated May 24, 2025. (Id.).  It indicates that 
Andrew Meyer would be a witness at the alternate care hearing and informs defendants 
that Mr. Meyer will be opining that Thornton’s current van is not safe to drive because 
the rear suspension is rusted through and the sub-frame had dropped 3 inches. (Id.).  
Attached to the email are photographs that Mr. Meyer purportedly took. (Id.).  Those 
pictures are contained in claimant’s exhibit 5. (See Claimant’s Exhibit 5).  The final 
email is from defendants’ counsel. (Ex. A, p. 9).  It is dated May 27, 2025.  (Id.).  It 
states that the repairs Meyer identified appear to be the same repairs identified by the 
99-point inspection in 2024. (Id.).  Defendants’ counsel reiterated their offer to have the 
repairs completed at Fillback. (Id.).  The email closes with “Defendants are willing to 
provide the necessary repairs for Claimant’s vehicle so long as everything is conducted 
above board.” (Id.).   
 
Timothy Thornton was the first witness to testify at the alternate care hearing. 
(Hearing Testimony).  Timothy is Toby Thornton’s brother. (Id.). He lives in Omaha, 
Nebraska, which is 6 hours away from Toby’s residence. (Id.).  Timothy testified that he 
is Toby’s power of attorney. (Id.).  He became Toby’s power of attorney after the work 
accident in 2009. (Id.).  Timothy stated he helps his brother with finances, budgeting, 
investing, and paying bills. (Id.).  He also stated that he helps Toby with van repairs and 
has been assisting his brother “since the beginning.” (Id.).  Timothy testified that the 
conversion van is Toby’s only mode of transportation. (Hearing Testimony).  He stated 
that Toby has been frustrated by delays in getting his van repaired.  (Id.).  He indicated 
that some of the delays were caused by certain documents being characterized as 
estimates rather than invoices. (Id.).  Timothy testified he used the phrase “B/S invoice” 
as a slang word and only in an effort to “get the ball rolling” on the repairs. (Id.).  
Timothy stated that Toby’s van has been significantly modified to accommodate his 
wheelchair and the modifications are causing it to breakdown more quickly. (Id.).  He 
stated that because of Toby’s mobility issues, he would like to have the van repaired 
closer to his home in Monona, Iowa. (Id.).  Timothy testified there are three mechanics 

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 12 
 
in the Monona area capable of working on Toby’s van. (Id.).  He opined that Toby’s 
current van is not safe to drive because of rust issues. (Id.).   
 
Andrew Meyer was the second witness to testify at the alternate care hearing. 
(Hearing Testimony).  Defendants objected to Meyer’s testimony.  (Id.).  That objection 
was overruled. (Id.).  Meyer is the owner of Meyer’s Auto Service in Monona, Iowa. (Id.).  
He has a two-year degree in automotive technology. (Id.).  After school, he worked as a 
mechanic at a Chevrolet dealership for 8 years. (Id.).  He opened Meyer’s Auto Service 
in 2012. (Id.).  He is ISE certified and an advanced level specialist. (Id.).  Meyer knows 
Toby Thornton as a customer through the Chevrolet dealership and Meyer’s Auto 
Service, as well as personally. (Id.). Meyer testified he is qualified to work on Thornton’s 
conversion van and has in fact done prior maintenance work and repairs on the van 
approximately 15 times. (Id.). Meyer’s shop is located approximately 8-10 blocks from 
Thronton’s residence in Monona, Iowa. (Id.).  He indicated Thornton sometimes wheels 
home after dropping off his van for repairs. (Id.).  Meyer testified he checks the van for 
obvious safety issues whenever he works on it, but prior to May 23, 2025, he had not 
performed a formal 99-point inspection of the vehicle. (Id.). Meyer stated that the last 
time he serviced Thornton’s van was in July 2024. (Id.).  At that time, he did not notice 
any safety issues. (Id.).  Meyer admitted that he and his wife authored the report 
included in claimant’s exhibit 2 after Thornton sent him a text requesting the report. (Id.).   
 
Meyer testified that he was recently asked to do an in-depth inspection of 
Thornton’s conversion van. (Hearing Testimony).  That inspection took place on Friday, 
May 23, 2025. (Id.).  At the beginning of that inspection, he determined that part of the 
unibody-frame had rusted causing a portion of the suspension subframe to hang down 
unattached. (Id.).  He did not know whether the rust issue he observed was visible or 
present when the van was last inspected in 2024. (Id.).  Meyer testified that the unibody 
frame issue was separate from the two problems identified by Fillback Automotive.  
(Id.).  He stated fixing the CV boots and the engine oil cooler would not fix his concerns 
about the van’s frame. (Id.).  Meyer took 8 photographs of the frame of Thornton’s van. 
(Id.).  Meyer provided those photographs to claimant’s counsel.  (Id.).  They are 
contained in claimant’s exhibit 5. (Id.).  Meyer thought repairing the unibody-frame 
would be a difficult process and would need to be done by Braun. (Id.). He did not know 
how much time it would take to repair the frame.  (Id.).  He did not know if it would be 
less than the 4-6 weeks needed to retrofit a new van. (Id.).  Meyer testified that in his 
opinion Thornton’s van is not safe to operate for long distances. (Id.).  Meyer indicated 
he did not complete the full inspection. (Id.).   
 
Toby Thornton also testified at the alternate care hearing. (Hearing Testimony).  
He testified that he uses his right hand to operate both his wheelchair and the 
conversion van utilizing a rotter. (Id.). Thornton stated that his wheelchair locks into a 
mechanism in the floor of the van to keep it in place. (Id.).  The van does not have a 
driver’s seat. (Id.).  If someone else drives the vehicle they have to use a folding chair. 
(Id.).  Thornton does not think that is safe. (Id.).  He enters and exits the van via a ramp 
that comes out of the passenger side. (Id.).   Thornton indicated he has had some 
problems with the ramp of his van; it has jammed, and he has had to call for help. (Id.).  

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 13 
 
 
Thornton testified that the van is his only mode of transportation. (Hearing 
Transcript). He indicated that he lives in a rural area and there is no other handicapped 
accessible transportation nearby. (Id.).  He can get to the grocery store using his 
wheelchair, but it is difficult. (Id.).  In addition to daily errands, Thornton uses the van to 
visit relatives in other towns. (Id.).  Thornton stated that he no longer feels safe driving 
the van long distances after Meyer’s recent inspection on May 23, 2025.  (Id.).  He 
testified that he recently cancelled a urology appointment in La Crosse, Wisconsin 
because he did not feel safe driving there.  Thornton indicated that Fillback Automotive 
is located 15-18 miles from his home. (Id.).  He cannot wheel home from Fillback 
Automotive. (Id.).   He does not let Fillback work on his van because “he has heard 
horror stories” and doesn’t feel safe letting them work on his vehicle. (Id.).   
 
Thornton stated that he and his brother discussed creating a b/s invoice in order 
to get the ball rolling on the van repairs and get his air conditioning fixed faster. (Hearing 
Testimony). Thornton is the title holder of the conversion van.  (Id.).  He testified that the 
last time he received a new vehicle, he signed over the title of the old vehicle and its 
trade-in value was applied to the purchase price of his new van. (Id.).  He has had his 
current van for approximately seven years. (Id.).  Thornton testified that he is 
dissatisfied with the condition of his van and wants a new one. (Id.).   
Thornton testified that he was first notified that defendants had volunteered to 
pay for repairs on his vehicle in the spring of 2025.  (Hearing Testimony).  He indicated 
this notification took place at his deposition.5  Thornton stated he chose not to have the 
vehicle repaired at that time because he does not like Fillback and does not want to wait 
there all day. (Id.).  He would rather have Meyer’s Auto Service do the work. (Id.).  At 
the time of the hearing, the issues identified by Fillback were still not repaired. (Id.).  
Neither was his air conditioning. Thornton testified he did not believe his current van 
could be repaired, nor would he consider it “roadworthy” after the repairs were 
completed. (Id.).  He does not see the point in repairing his current vehicle, even if the 
work is done at Meyer’s Auto Service. (Id.).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Under Iowa law, an employer who has accepted compensability for a workplace 
injury has a right to control the care provided to the injured employee.  Ramirez-Trujillo 
v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016).  The relevant statute provides 
as follows: 
(1) The employer, for all injuries compensable under this chapter, or 
chapter 85A, shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, 
osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, 
ambulance, and hospital services and supplies therefor and shall 
allow reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for 
such services. The employer shall also furnish reasonable and 
                                                 
5 This deposition appears to be related to Thornton’s bad faith claim, as no workers’ 
compensation actions were on file with this agency at that time.  

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 14 
 
necessary crutches, artificial members and appliances but shall not 
be required to furnish more than one set of permanent prosthetic 
devices.  
…. 
 
(4)  For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and 
has the right to choose the care. . . . The treatment must be offered 
promptly and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue 
inconvenience to the employee. If the employee has reason to be 
dissatisfied with 
the 
care offered, 
the 
employee 
should 
communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction to the employer, in 
writing if requested, following which the employer and the employee 
may agree to alternate care reasonably suited to treat the injury. If 
the employer and employee cannot agree on such alternate care, 
the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of 
the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
Iowa Code § 85.27(1),(4).   
Defendants’ “obligation under the statute is confined to reasonable care for the 
diagnosis and treatment of work-related injuries.” Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 
N.W.2d 122, 124 (Iowa 1995) (emphasis in original). In other words, the “obligation 
under the statute turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability.”  Id. An 
application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because claimant is 
dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving. Mere dissatisfaction with the medical 
care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical care. Rather, 
the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not reasonably 
suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the claimant. See 
Iowa Code § 85.27(4). By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment and seeking 
alternate care, claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is 
unreasonable. See Iowa R. App. P 6.904(3)(e); Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124.  Ultimately, 
determining whether care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact. Long, 
528 N.W.2d at 123. 
Thornton’s petition seeks a replacement conversion van, as well as repairs to 
claimant’s current conversion van performed by Meyer’s Automotive. (See Petition).  In 
Manpower Temporary Services v. Sioson, 529 N.W.2d 259, 264 (Iowa 1995), the Iowa 
Supreme Court determined that a modified van constituted a qualifying medical 
appliance under Iowa Code section 85.27(1) because it was a “means to an end,” and a 
necessary part of the claimant’s care.  Thus, it is apparent that the item Thornton seeks 
is a covered cost under Iowa Code section 85.27.  The real question, however, in this 
proceeding is whether defendants have already met their burden under the statute.  
Thornton currently has a modified conversion van.  This van was provided by 
defendants.  It is the second conversion van provided by defendants.  Thornton alleges 
that it is in poor condition and needs to be replaced. Defendants assert there is no 
credible evidence that a replacement vehicle is reasonable and necessary at this time.   

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 15 
 
In his Addendum, claimant points to Andrew Meyer’s 2024 report, as well as the 
email from Matt Strabala, as evidence that the van needs to be replaced immediately.6 
(See Addendum).  The undersigned does not find claimant’s arguments convincing.  
The email from Matt Strabala is a response to a client requesting a quote.  While it 
provides facts about Thornton’s past vehicle and trade-in dates, it does not opine that 
Thornton’s van needs to be replaced immediately.  The only comment Strabala makes 
about the state of the vehicle concerns its air conditioning, and it is clear that Strabala is 
getting his information from Thornton, not from his own inspection of the vehicle.  The 
undersigned also questions the reliability of Meyer’s 2024 report.  At the hearing, Meyer 
admitted that he and his wife wrote that report at Thornton’s request. He also wrote the 
report before performing a formal inspection of the vehicle.  In reality, the report only 
mentions one necessary repair to the van’s air conditioning system that costs around 
$1,000. That is not sufficient evidence that a whole van needs to be replaced.  Further, 
a later inspection performed by Fillback Automotive only identified two items for repair. 
Thornton testified that he did not trust Fillback to work on his vehicles, but there is no 
evidence in the hearing record demonstrating Fillback lacks competence.  
During the hearing, Meyer also testified that he discovered a major issue with the 
van’s unibody frame when he inspected it on May 23, 2025.  However, under Iowa Code 
section 85.27, claimant bears the burden of providing “reasonable proofs of the 
necessity” to order alternate care.  This includes submitting evidence for all of the 
statutory requirements outlined in Iowa Code section 85.27.  Code section 85.27(4) 
requires an employee notify defendants of his or her dissatisfaction with care (or 
appliances) before applying to the agency for alternate medical care.  According to the 
statute, this requirement is intended to give the parties an opportunity to reach an 
understanding, before asking the agency to intervene.  There is no evidence in the 
hearing record that Thornton notified defendants of the unibody frame issue or asked 
them to fix that issue prior to filing his alternate care petition on May 15, 2025.  In fact, 
given the date of Meyer’s discovery, such notification was impossible. Advance 
notification is a requirement under the statute.  Thornton did not meet that requirement.   
Finally, under existing case law, defendants are allowed to take cost into 
consideration when choosing between two providers or two different courses of action. 
See Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124.  That consideration does not make what they are offering 
unreasonable under the statute.  An employee’s desire for a different “reasonable” 
alternative does not make the employer-authorized care unreasonable. Id.  In an 
alternate care action, the claimant must prove that the item being offered by the 
employer is unreasonable, not that another option is reasonable. Id.; See also Lynch 
Livestock, Inc. v. Bursell, 870 N.W.2d 274 (Table) (Iowa Ct. App. 2015).  Thornton has 
not met his burden to prove his current van is unreasonable, not roadworthy and needs 
to be replaced even after repairs.  His request for a replacement van is denied at this 
time.  
                                                 
6 The Addendum does not mention the text message purported to be from Sautter’s Auto, so it is 
not addressed.  

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 16 
 
Thornton’s petition also asked for repair work on his current van.7 (See Petition). 
According to the petition, he wants that work done by Meyer’s Auto Service. (Id.).  First, 
the undersigned notes that this request falls into a legal gray area.  In Sioson, the Iowa 
Supreme Court determined that the cost of repairing a modified vehicle, as well as fuel, 
title, license and insurance for the van, should be the claimant’s responsibility because 
the vehicle is in his or her control.  Sioson, 529 at 264.  Thornton is requesting repairs in 
this action. Sioson is controlling legal precedent.  It does not appear, however, that the 
undersigned needs to make a legal finding on this issue because defendants have 
already volunteered to make the repairs. They did so in prior emails to claimant’s 
counsel, as well as during the alternate care hearing and in their hearing brief.  Given 
this, the undersigned finds that any argument about the legal compensability of these 
repairs has been waived.  
As defendants have already agreed to make the repairs, the only remaining 
disagreement is who will perform the work.  Defendants have authorized Fillback 
Automotive in Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin.  Thornton is requesting Meyer’s Auto 
Service in Monona, Iowa.  Under Iowa law, an employer who has accepted liability for a 
workplace injury has the right to control the claimant’s care. See Ramirez-Trujillo, 878 
N.W.2d at 769.  That right generally includes choosing which providers will furnish the 
care, as long as it is not unduly inconvenient for the claimant. Id.  Thornton testified that 
he does not like Fillback Automotive and does not trust them to work on his vehicles.  
Without supporting evidence, Thornton’s statement is not sufficient to show defendants’ 
offer of repair work at Fillback is unreasonable.   
At the hearing, however, Thornton also testified that he prefers utilizing Meyer’s 
Auto Service because it is located in his hometown, which allows him to drop off his 
vehicle for repairs and wheel home.  Past decisions from the Iowa Supreme Court and 
this agency have generally found care located within a 50-mile radius of the claimant’s 
residence to be reasonable.  See Bitner v. Cedar Falls Construction Co., File No. 
5013852 (Alt. Care. September 24, 2004); see also, Trade Professionals. Inc, v. Shriver, 
661 N.W.2d 119, 124 (Iowa 2003) (more than 100 miles is an undue inconvenience); 
Schrock v. Corkery Waste Disposal, Inc., File No. 1133725 (Alt. Care June 26, 1996) 
(120-mile round trip excessive); Schulte v. Vocational Services of Area Residential Care, 
File No. 1134342 (Alt. Care September 6, 1996) (care more than 70 miles away 
unreasonable).   
Thornton testified that Fillback Automotive is located 15-18 miles from his home. 
That is not a great distance, but Thornton also has extenuating circumstances.  He is 
wheelchair bound, and living in a rural area with no other handicapped accessible 
transportation.  Thornton indicated that Fillback is too far away for him to drop off his 
vehicle and wheel home.  There is no evidence in the record contradicting this 
statement.  But, a finding that Fillback is too far away to be reasonable does not 
necessitate an order requiring defendants to utilize Meyer’s Auto Service for the van 
                                                 
7 At the end of Thornton’s hearing testimony, he appeared to withdraw this request. (Hearing 
Testimony).  Given these conflicting demands, and in an abundance of caution, the undersigned will still 
address the request.  

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 17 
 
repairs.  Both Thornton and his brother testified that there are at least three automotive 
mechanics in Monona, Iowa.  Nothing in this hearing record indicates defendants should 
lose their right to direct claimant’s care under Iowa Code section 85.27.  Accordingly, 
Thornton’s request for van repairs is granted in part and denied in part.  Defendants are 
ordered to authorize the requested repairs with a mechanic located in Monona, Iowa, 
within the next 14 days.  Defendants do not have to approve Meyer’s Auto Service as 
the provider of the repairs.  
Thornton filed this action as an expedited proceeding under Iowa Code section 
85.27.  That statute provides that the workers’ compensation commissioner shall issue 
a decision within ten working days of receipt of an application for alternate care made 
pursuant to a telephone hearing. See Iowa Code § 85.27(4).  The ten-day statutory 
deadline results in the need for summary proceedings. It also limits the parties’ ability to 
submit evidence. See 876 IAC 4.48(9) (limiting each party to 10 pages of evidence).  
Summary proceedings are not well suited to adjudicate complex legal and/or medical 
matters.  The sheer amount of evidence submitted by the parties speaks to the 
complexity and longevity of the legal disputes between these parties.  Complex disputes 
are better addressed by filing a petition for medical benefits under rule 876-4.1, which 
permits full discovery, additional written evidence, and more time for hearing.  Under 
this limited record, Thornton has not proven that he needs a new conversion van.  That, 
however, does not preclude him from submitting additional evidence supporting that 
request at a later date in a full arbitration proceeding.  
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Claimant’s petition for alternate medical care is granted in part and denied in 
part.  Claimant’s request for a new conversion van is denied at this time.  Claimant’s 
request for vehicle repairs is granted in part.  Within 14 days defendants shall authorize 
a mechanic located in Monona, Iowa, to perform the necessary repairs. Defendants, 
however, do not have to have the work performed by Meyer’s Auto Service, as claimant 
requested.  
Signed and filed this __30th ___ day of May, 2025. 
 
   
__________________________ 
         AMANDA R. RUTHERFORD 
              DEPUTY WORKERS’  
    COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 

THORNTON V. CLAYTON COUNTY RECYCLING 
Page 18 
 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Tiernan Siems (via WCES) 
Caitlin Kilburg (via WCES) 
