Case Number: 5066865
Case Title:  GARCIA RUBALCAVA, MIGUEL V. SIOUXPREME EGG PRODUCTS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      GarciaRubalcava Miguel-5066865d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MIGUEL GARCIA RUBALCAVA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                     File No. 5066865 
 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
SIOUXPREME EGG PRODUCTS, INC.,   : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY 
  :        Head Note Nos.:  1402.40, 1803, 
HOMESTATE INSURANCE COMPANY,  : 
 
 
       1803.01, 2907 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Miguel Garcia Rubalcava, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against 
Siouxpreme Egg Products (hereinafter referred to as “Siouxpreme Egg”), as the 
employer and Berkshire Hathaway Homestate Insurance Company as the insurance 
carrier.  This case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on May 4, 
2020.  This case was scheduled to be an in-person hearing occurring in Des Moines.  
However, due to the outbreak of a pandemic in Iowa, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner ordered all hearings to occur via video means, using CourtCall. 
Accordingly, this case proceeded to a live video hearing via Court Call with claimant’s 
counsel appearing remotely from two locations, claimant appearing remotely from one 
of his attorney’s office, defense counsel appearing remotely, and the court reporter also 
appearing remotely.  The hearing proceeded without significant difficulties. 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing.  On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 11 and Defendants’ 
Exhibits A through E.  All exhibits were received without objection.   
Claimant testified on his own behalf.  Defendants called Brett Kleve to testify.  
The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on May 4, 
2020.   
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Jun-23  10:15:35     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

GARCIA RUBALCAVA V. SIOUXPREME EGG PRODUCTS 
Page 2 
 
 
However, counsel for the parties requested an opportunity to file post-hearing 
briefs.  This request was granted and both parties filed briefs simultaneously on May 29, 
2020.  The case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on that date. 
ISSUES 
The parties completed a hearing report prior to the commencement of hearing 
and submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. 
Whether the claimant’s stipulated November 29, 2017 work injury should 
be compensated with permanent disability benefits as a scheduled 
member injury to the right shoulder, or as an unscheduled injury. 
2. 
Whether claimant’s permanent disability claim is ripe for determination or 
whether he remains in a running healing period. 
3. 
If compensable as an unscheduled injury, whether claimant’s permanent 
disability benefits should be compensated using a functional method due 
to his return to work or using an industrial disability analysis. 
4. 
The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability, if any. 
5. 
The proper commencement date for permanent disability benefits, if any. 
6. 
Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement to some or all of his 
independent medical evaluation fee pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
7. 
Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
At the commencement of hearing, the parties informed the undersigned they had 
reached an agreement regarding reimbursement of claimant’s independent medical 
evaluation.  Defendants were verbally ordered to reimburse those fees.  Defendants 
should honor that agreement and reimburse claimant for his independent medical 
evaluation fees, if they have not done so already.  However, the parties’ agreement and 
the verbal order at hearing resolve this as a disputed issue.  No further discussion, 
findings, conclusions, or award will be made relative to the issue of claimant’s 
independent medical evaluation. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Miguel Garcia Rubalcava is a 57-year-old gentleman, who lives in Sioux Center, 
Iowa.  He was born in Mexico and came to the United States at the age of 17 or 18.  He 
attended six years of schooling in Mexico and has no additional education. 

GARCIA RUBALCAVA V. SIOUXPREME EGG PRODUCTS 
Page 3 
 
 
Mr. Garcia Rubalcava’s native language is Spanish.  However, he has learned 
how to speak English since being in the United States.  He is not able to read or write in 
the English language, however. 
Claimant began working for the employer, Siouxpreme Egg, in 1992 and 
continued his employment with the employer at the time of the arbitration hearing.  On 
November 29, 2017, Mr. Garcia Rubalcava sustained an injury when he was lifting 
boxes overhead.  The employer admitted the injury and sent claimant for medical care. 
Following unsuccessful attempts at conservative care, claimant was referred to 
an orthopaedic surgeon, Steven J. Stokesbary, M.D.  Dr. Stokesbary diagnosed 
claimant with a “Right shoulder partial thickness rotator cuff tear with impingement and 
SLAP lesion.”  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 43)  Dr. Stokesbary attempted conservative measures, 
including injections into the right shoulder area.  Ultimately, however, Dr. Stokesbary 
recommended and took claimant to surgery on June 22, 2018.  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 46) 
The operative note indicates that Dr. Stokesbary performed a “Right shoulder 
arthroscopy with limited debridement, biceps tenotomy, and [sic] mini open rotator cuff 
repair, and subacromial decompression.”  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 46)  Unfortunately, the surgical 
intervention did not alleviate all of Mr. Garcia Rubalcava’s symptoms.  In his October 1, 
2018 office note, Dr. Stokesbary noted that claimant was making minimal progress and 
that “he wants to be made completely disabled, and he wants to collect a check, retire, 
and move to Mexico.”  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 50)  Claimant denies he ever said this to Dr. 
Stokesbary.  However, this is a statement I would expect a physician to remember and 
document when made by a patient.  I find that Mr. Garcia Rubalcava likely did make a 
comment similar to the recorded statement in Dr. Stokesbary’s medical record, though I 
recognize that such a statement may have been made in frustration given the lack of 
improvement in claimant’s symptoms and condition. 
Dr. Stokesbary opined in the October 1, 2018 office note that claimant was 
capable of returning to one-handed work.  He imposed work restrictions that included no 
use of claimant’s right arm and released Mr. Garcia Rubalcava from his care on that 
date.  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 50) 
Nevertheless, claimant returned for further evaluation by a nurse practitioner at 
Dr. Stokesbary’s office on November 19, 2018.  The nurse practitioner noted that 
claimant continued to stretch his shoulder but was not performing his home exercise 
program.  She also noted that claimant complained of pain with any overhead motion.  
(Joint Ex. 4, p. 51)  The nurse ordered another MRI of claimant’s right arm. 
The MRI demonstrated a traumatic incomplete tear of the right rotator cuff.  
(Joint Ex. 4, pp. 55-56)  Dr. Stokesbary re-evaluated Mr. Garcia Rubalcava on 
December 27, 2018 and performed another injection into claimant’s right shoulder. 
On January 8, 2019, claimant again presented for evaluation by Dr. Stokesbary.  
Dr. Stokesbary confirmed that the MRI demonstrated findings consistent with a possible 

GARCIA RUBALCAVA V. SIOUXPREME EGG PRODUCTS 
Page 4 
 
 
partial thickness tear of a rotator cuff tendon.  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 58)  Dr. Stokesbary 
performed an injection of the long head of claimant’s biceps tendon at this evaluation.  
(Joint Ex. 4, p. 58) 
On February 14, 2019, Dr. Stokesbary again evaluated claimant.  At this 
appointment, claimant’s most significant complaint was his right elbow and Dr. 
Stokesbary ordered an MRI of the right elbow.  Dr. Stokesbary diagnosed claimant with 
a possible partial right distal biceps tear.  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 60) 
On February 28, 2019, claimant presented to a partner of Dr. Stokesbary for an 
injection of his right distal biceps tendon.   The injection provided significant pain relief 
immediately.  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 64)  At a March 28, 2019 follow-up, Dr. Stokesbary 
documented that claimant had good relief from the biceps injection.  He noted that 
claimant had full range of motion in the right shoulder and elbow.  However, he also 
noted decreased strength with forward flexion and abduction and pain with right 
shoulder adduction.  Given the ongoing symptoms in claimant’s right shoulder, Dr. 
Stokesbary referred claimant for evaluation by one of his surgical partners, Brian D. 
Johnson, M.D. (Joint Ex. 4, p. 69) 
Dr. Johnson evaluated Mr. Garcia Rubalcava on April 1, 2019 and assessed 
claimant with “likely an upper rolled margin subscapularis tear,” as well as “bicipital 
cramping with clear Popeye deformity from tenotomy.”  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 72)  Dr. Johnson 
recommended surgical intervention when claimant felt the symptoms required surgical 
intervention.  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 72)  Shortly thereafter, claimant did request a second 
surgical procedure. 
Dr. Johnson performed a second surgery on claimant on May 22, 2019.  
Specifically, Dr. Johnson performed an arthroscopic procedure that included anterior 
and superior labral debridement, a revision of the prior distal clavicle excision, a revision 
of the prior subacromial decompression, as well as an arthroscopic repair of the 
subscapularis rotator cuff tendon, and a repair of the subscapularis rotator cuff tendon.  
(Joint Ex. 4, p. 85)  Following surgery, Dr. Johnson recommended in his February 10, 
2020 office note that claimant continue physical therapy until he felt those therapy 
sessions were no longer helpful.  Dr. Johnson also opined that claimant could continue 
improving for up to a year after his surgery in May 2019.  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 84)  Mr. Garcia 
Rubalcava did not return for evaluation by Dr. Johnson between February 10, 2020 and 
the hearing date.  However, he was scheduled to return to be evaluated by Dr. Johnson 
in June 2020.  (Claimant’s testimony)  
Defendants scheduled an independent medical evaluation, performed by 
Michael J. Morrison, M.D., on February 6, 2020.  Dr. Morrison noted current symptom 
complaints from claimant that included neck pain that radiated to his chest wall and 
down his right arm.  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 89; Defendants’ Ex. A)  Claimant testified at the time 
of trial that he believes and asserts that his back and neck conditions are causally 
related to his November 2017 work injury.   

GARCIA RUBALCAVA V. SIOUXPREME EGG PRODUCTS 
Page 5 
 
 
However, Dr. Morrison opined that these symptoms are not related to the work 
injury in November 2017.  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 89; Defendants’ Ex. A)  I find that opinion to 
be unrebutted in this record.  Dr. Morrison’s opinion is bolstered by a physical therapy 
record in February 2018, which indicates that claimant denied neck pain at that time.  
(Joint Ex. 9, p. 124)  Therefore, I accept Dr. Morrison’s medical causation opinion 
pertaining to the alleged neck injury and find that claimant failed to prove he sustained a 
neck injury as a result of the November 29, 2017 work injury. 
Dr. Morrison noted that Mr. Garcia Rubalcava was eight months post-surgery at 
the time of his evaluation.  Dr. Morrison opined that no further physical therapy would 
likely be helpful and that claimant had reached maximum medical improvement by at 
least the date of his evaluation on February 6, 2020.  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 90; Defendants’ 
Ex. A)  Utilizing the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition, Dr. Morrison further opined that no additional treatment was necessary and that 
claimant sustained a 15 percent permanent functional impairment of his right upper 
extremity as a result of the November 2017 work injury.  Dr. Morrison recommended a 
functional capacity evaluation (FCE) be performed to determine permanent work 
abilities and restrictions.  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 90; Defendants’ Ex. A) 
Claimant attended an FCE on March 13, 2020.  The evaluating therapist opined 
that claimant provided a valid FCE and recommended work limitations that included 40 
pounds occasional lifting with lower amounts (20 pounds occasionally) over shoulder 
and no prolonged or repetitious work over head.   The therapist also recommended no 
frequent forward reaching with the right arm.  (Joint Ex. 6, p. 92) 
Claimant then sought an independent medical evaluation, performed by David 
R. Archer, M.D., on March 25, 2020.  Dr. Archer opined that claimant’s injury in 
November 2017 resulted in chronic pain and a loss of active range of motion.  He 
opined that Mr. Garcia Rubalcava sustained a 21 percent permanent functional 
impairment of the right upper extremity, which is equivalent to 13 percent of the whole 
person.  (Joint Ex. 7, p. 103)  Dr. Archer concurred that claimant was at maximum 
medical improvement.  He opined that claimant should lift up to 20 pounds maximum 
with his right arm and avoid overhead reaching and lifting with the right arm.  (Joint Ex. 
7, pp. 103-104) 
Dr. Archer is the only physician in this record that provides any in-depth 
explanation or analysis of the anatomy of claimant’s injury.  He reviewed the surgical 
procedures performed by Dr. Stokesbary and Dr. Johnson and explained that “The 
glenoid labrum comprises part of the proximal articulation of the scapula w/ [sic] the 
humerus, acromion process is part of the scapula which is the proximal part of the 
shoulder joint, and the distal end of the clavicle which was excised is proximal to the 
shoulder joint.”  (Joint Ex. 7, p. 101)  Dr. Archer’s explanation of the anatomy 
comprising and surrounding claimant’s right shoulder is accepted as accurate and 
unrebutted. 

GARCIA RUBALCAVA V. SIOUXPREME EGG PRODUCTS 
Page 6 
 
 
Given Dr. Archer’s medical and anatomic explanation, I find that the glenoid 
labrum is joined with the scapula and connects the arm (humerus) to the scapula.  
Arguably, this is part of the shoulder joint because it is necessary to connect the arm 
and shoulder.  However, I provide no specific finding whether the labrum is specifically 
part of the shoulder joint or not. 
I find that the acromion process is part of the scapula and is the proximal part of 
the shoulder joint.  I find that the acromion process and the decompression performed in 
this area was done on the shoulder joint. 
However, the distal clavicle is proximal to the shoulder joint according to Dr. 
Archer.  (Joint Ex. 7, p. 101) Again, this medical opinion is not rebutted or refuted by 
other evidence in this record.  I find that the distal clavicle is proximal to the shoulder 
joint and that the distal clavicle excision performed by Dr. Stokesbary and the revision of 
the distal clavicle excision by Dr. Johnson extended beyond and proximal to the 
shoulder joint. 
I also note that claimant sustained tears to three rotator cuff tendons.  None of 
the physicians in this record explains the origination point, termination point, purpose, or 
location of these rotator cuff tendons.   
Having considered all of the medical evidence and physician’s opinions, I find the 
opinions of Dr. Morrison and Dr. Archer to be convincing on the issue of maximum 
medical improvement.  Although Dr. Johnson recommended some additional therapy 
and suggested that claimant may improve through May 2020, both Dr. Morrison and Dr. 
Archer opined that claimant achieved maximum medical improvement.  Claimant had no 
ongoing medical care and his symptoms do not appear to have significantly improved 
before the date of hearing.  I find the opinions of Dr. Morrison and Dr. Archer to be most 
convincing and accurate on the issue of maximum medical improvement.  Specifically, I 
find that claimant achieved maximum medical improvement by the date of Dr. 
Morrison’s evaluation, or February 6, 2020. 
Dr. Morrison and Dr. Archer both offered opinions about permanent functional 
impairment.  In comparing those two opinions, I note that Dr. Morrison specifically 
references and opined that his impairment is pursuant to the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  Dr. Archer provides his impairment 
rating without explanation or confirmation that it is issued pursuant to the AMA Guides 
to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  I find the opinion of Dr. 
Morrison more credible given his specific reference and use of the AMA Guides.   
Therefore, I find claimant has proven a 15 percent permanent functional 
impairment of the right upper extremity as a result of the November 2017 work injury.  
This converts, or is equivalent, to 9 percent of the whole person according to Table 16-3 
of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, page 439. 

GARCIA RUBALCAVA V. SIOUXPREME EGG PRODUCTS 
Page 7 
 
 
As noted previously, claimant has returned to work for the employer.  He 
currently earns a higher hourly wage and higher weekly earnings than he did on the 
date of injury in November 2017.  (Claimant’s testimony)  The employer’s representative 
testified that claimant is actually working overtime hours in 2020.  (Testimony of Brett 
Kleve) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The initial disputed issue submitted by the parties is whether claimant’s stipulated 
November 29, 2017 work injury should be compensated as a scheduled member 
disability or as an unscheduled injury.  Claimant alleged and asserted at trial that he 
sustained a neck injury as a result of the November 29, 2017 work injury.  However, 
claimant asserts that the neck claim is not yet ripe for determination. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
In this instance, I conclude that there is definitive medical evidence in the record 
about causation.  I conclude the issue is ripe for determination.  I accepted the 
unrebutted medical causation opinion offered by Dr. Morrison and found that claimant 
failed to prove his neck injury is causally related to the November 2017 work injury.  
Therefore, I conclude that claimant cannot recover benefits for the alleged neck injury 
and the alleged neck injury does not convert this claim into an unscheduled injury. 
Claimant also asserts that his work injury extends beyond the right shoulder into 
the body as a whole.  Specifically, claimant argues that at least some of the injured 
areas are proximal to the glenohumeral joint and, as such, the injury should be 
determined to be an unscheduled injury compensated with industrial disability pursuant 
to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) (2017).   
Defendants contend that the injury is limited to the right shoulder and should be 
compensated as a scheduled member injury pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) 
(2017).  In the alternative, defendants contend that even if the injury is determined to be 
an unscheduled injury, it should be compensated with a functional impairment analysis 
and award pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
Prior to July 1, 2017, injuries to the shoulder were considered proximal to the 
arm, extending beyond the arm, and compensated with industrial disability as an 
unscheduled injury pursuant to prior Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(u) (2016).  See Alm v. 
Morris Barick Cattle Co., 240 Iowa 1174, 38 N.W.2d 161 (1949). The Iowa legislature 
enacted significant amendments to the Iowa workers’ compensation laws, which took 

GARCIA RUBALCAVA V. SIOUXPREME EGG PRODUCTS 
Page 8 
 
 
effect in July 2017.  As part of those amendments, the legislature specified that injuries 
to the shoulder should be compensated as scheduled member injuries on a 400-week 
schedule.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) (2017).  It has long been understood that an 
injury must be compensated as a scheduled injury if the legislature saw fit to list the 
injured body part in Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(a)-(u).  Williams v. Larsen Construction 
Co., 255 Iowa 1149, 125 N.W.2d 248 (1963).  
Claimant contends that the legislature did not define what constitutes the 
“shoulder” or provide guidance as to the anatomic parts that are to be considered a 
“shoulder.”  Claimant contends that the “shoulder” delineated in Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(u) (2017) refers to the glenohumeral joint.  Therefore, Mr. Garcia Rubalcava 
asserts that the injuries he sustained involve anatomical body parts that are proximal to 
the glenohumeral joint and necessarily extend beyond the glenohumeral joint, or 
“shoulder.”  Defendants contend, “No doctor has provided any opinion that Claimant 
injured any part of his body beyond his shoulder.”  (Defendants’ Post-Hearing Brief, p. 
5)  Defendants assert that claimant’s injuries are limited to the right shoulder and should 
be compensated as scheduled member injuries of the shoulder pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(n) (2017). 
The Iowa Supreme Court made it clear in Alm v. Morris Barick Cattle Co., 240 
Iowa 1174, 1177, 38 N.W.2d 161, 163 (1949) that when the injury “extended beyond the 
scheduled area, the schedule of course does not apply.”  The Court noted, “where there 
is injury to some scheduled member and also to parts of the body not included in the 
schedule,” the injury is not compensated under a scheduled member analysis.  Id. 
It appears undisputed that claimant’s injury resulted in a distal biceps injury, 
anterior and superior labral debridement, a repair of three rotator cuff tendons, including 
the subscapularis, supraspinatus and infraspinatus tendons.  It also resulted in a 
subacromial decompression and revision of that decompression, as well as a distal 
clavicle excision and revision of that excision.  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 85)  Therefore, the first 
question to be determined in this case is whether the injuries to claimant’s rotator cuff, 
and specifically the subscapularis, supraspinatus and infraspinatus tendons, constitute 
“shoulder” injuries or should be considered injuries to anatomic body parts proximal to 
the shoulder and compensated as unscheduled injuries.  Alternatively, or perhaps in 
conjunction, it must be determined whether repair of a labral tear, a subacromial 
decompression and/or a distal clavicle excision results in injury to an anatomic body 
part proximal to the shoulder.  These issues are relatively untested before the agency 
with no known decisions from the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, the 
district courts, or the Iowa appellate courts interpreting what anatomic body parts 
constitute the “shoulder” pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n). 
This agency has issued at least six deputy-level decisions considering post-July 
1, 2017 “shoulder” injury claims.  In three of those decisions, it appears that no 
argument was made, or no supporting medical evidence was introduced, to establish 
that the injury extended beyond the “shoulder” to become an unscheduled injury.  See 
Arroyo v. Smithfield Foods, Inc., File No. 5066288 (Arbitration Decision, February 6, 

GARCIA RUBALCAVA V. SIOUXPREME EGG PRODUCTS 
Page 9 
 
 
2020); Agee v. EFCO Corp., Inc., File No. 5065304, 5064099 (Arbitration Decision, 
October 22, 2019); Hospardsky v. Quaker Oats Co., File No. 5061912 (Arbitration 
Decision, October 30, 2019).  In two recent decisions, a deputy commissioner 
specifically considered whether torn rotator cuff tendons were “shoulder” injuries or 
unscheduled injuries to the body as a whole.   
In Chavez v. Technology, L.L.C., File No. 5066270 (Arbitration Decision, 
February 5, 2020) and Deng v. Farmland Foods, Inc., File No. 5061883 (Arbitration 
Decision, February 25, 2020), the deputy commissioner concluded that rotator cuff 
tendons attach proximal to the glenohumeral joint and are unscheduled injuries, not 
shoulder injuries.  The injuries in Chavez and Deng were both rotator cuff injuries.  In 
Chavez, the injured worker tore the infraspinatus and supraspinatus tendons, similar to 
this case.  In Deng, the injured worker suffered a torn infraspinatus tendon.  Both those 
cases also appear to have had relevant medical opinions that documented and 
explained the relative anatomy of the shoulder joint and surrounding structures. 
The issue also came before the undersigned recently in Smidt v. JKB 
Restaurants, File No. 5067766 (Arbitration Decision, May 6, 2020).  In Smidt, I found 
that injuries to the infraspinatus and supraspinatus tendons and corresponding muscles 
were injuries proximal to the glenohumeral joint.  After performing a statutory 
construction analysis, the undersigned concluded the claimant in Smidt proved factually 
that his injury extended proximal to the glenohumeral joint and concluded that the injury 
should be compensated as an unscheduled injury, rather than being limited to a 
“shoulder” injury. 
This agency and the courts have had to consider similar issues with respect to 
different body parts in the past.  For instance, carpal tunnel injuries involve the wrist.  
Disputes arose before this agency whether carpal tunnel injuries were “hand” injuries or 
“arm” injuries pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2).  Ultimately, carpal tunnel and 
wrist injuries were determined to be proximal to the hand and compensated as “arm” 
injuries.  Miranda v. IBP, File No. 5008521 (Appeal Decision, August 2, 2005).  Injuries 
to the hip were determined to be proximal to the leg and determined to be unscheduled 
injuries.  Lauhoff Grain Co. v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834 (Iowa 1986); Dailey v. Pooley 
Lbr Co., 233 Iowa 758, 10 N.W.2d 569 (1943).  Injuries involving the joint between the 
finger and the hand were determined to be hand injuries.  Miranda v. IBP, File No. 
5008521 (Appeal Decision, August 2, 2005).   
As noted, injuries to the shoulder area, including rotator cuff tears, were 
previously considered and determined to be proximal to the arm and considered 
unscheduled injuries prior to the 2017 statutory changes.  Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. 
Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258 (Iowa 1995).  The courts and this agency have held that 
injuries proximal to the scheduled member are awarded based upon the more proximal 
body part, or as an unscheduled injury if the injury extends beyond all scheduled 
members. Id.; Miranda v. IBP, File No. 5008521 (Appeal Decision, August 2, 2005).  
Therefore, the legal question to be answered in this case is whether tears of three 
rotator cuff tendons (the subscapularis, the infraspinatus, and the supraspinatus 

GARCIA RUBALCAVA V. SIOUXPREME EGG PRODUCTS 
Page 10 
 
 
tendons) constitute a “shoulder” injury or an unscheduled injury.  In conjunction, or 
alternatively, it must be determined whether injuries resulting in labral tears, 
subacromial decompression, and/or distal clavicle excisions constitute injuries proximal 
to the shoulder joint such that they should be compensated as unscheduled injuries. 
When conducting statutory interpretation, the goal is to determine the intent of 
the legislature.  When the plain language of the statute is clear as to its meaning, courts 
apply the plain language and do not search for legislative intent beyond the express 
terms of the statute.  Denison Municipal Utilities v. Iowa Workers’ Compensation Com’r, 
857 N.W.2d 230 (Iowa 2014).  A statute is only ambiguous if reasonable minds could 
differ or be uncertain as to the meaning of the statute.  Iowa Ins. Institute v. Core Group 
of Iowa Ass’n for Justice, 867 N.W.2d 58 (Iowa 2015). 
Statutes should be read as a whole, rather than looking at specific words or 
phrases in isolation.  Id.  Moreover, when making statutory changes, the legislature is 
deemed to have known and understood the status of the law, including any 
interpretations made by this agency and the Iowa Supreme Court as to existing 
statutes.  Roberts Dairy v. Billick, 861 N.W.2d 814, 821 (Iowa 2015) (as amended); 
State v. Fluhr, 287 N.W.2d 857, 862 (Iowa 1980).  When enacting the 2017 
amendment, the legislature presumably understood that shoulder injuries were 
previously compensated as unscheduled injuries and that limiting a shoulder injury to a 
scheduled injury would result in significantly less compensation to an injured worker.  
Therefore, the legislature made a conscious decision to add the “shoulder” as a 
scheduled member injury, rather than compensate it as an unscheduled injury.   
Presumably, the legislature was also aware that rotator cuff injuries were 
previously awarded as unscheduled injuries because they were proximal to the arm.  
Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258, 262 (Iowa 1995).  In Nelson, 
the Iowa Supreme Court did not discuss the anatomy but referred to the rotator cuff 
injury as a “shoulder” injury. Therefore, it is possible that the legislature intended that 
rotator cuff injuries should be compensated as “shoulder” injuries.  However, in 2017, 
the legislature also should have been aware that anatomic parts proximal to the 
specified scheduled member have been determined to be compensable to the more 
proximal body part or body as a whole.  Id. 
With this in mind, the legislature likely understood that the rotator cuff tendons 
and corresponding muscles attach proximal to the glenohumeral joint.  With this 
understanding, it is also possible that the legislature decided to allow prior legal analysis 
to govern torn rotator cuff injuries as proximal to the glenohumeral, or “shoulder,” joint.   
As noted, this agency and the courts have interpreted legislative intent and 
determined the specific meanings of various portions of Iowa Code section 85.34(2).  
For instance, this agency has had to clarify when injuries are considered finger versus 
hand injuries, hand versus arm injuries, and leg versus whole body injuries.  The 
generic language used in other subsections of Iowa Code section 85.34(2) have 
required context, definition, and judicial interpretation.  Yet, in spite of this history, the 

GARCIA RUBALCAVA V. SIOUXPREME EGG PRODUCTS 
Page 11 
 
 
legislature elected to use relatively generic language to include the “shoulder” as a 
scheduled member when amending Iowa Code section 85.34(2).   
The legislature certainly did not delineate the anatomic parts of the body that 
constitute the “shoulder” within the terms of the statute.  As the Iowa Court of Appeals 
noted, “Medical terminology used to describe an area of the body is not always 
compatible with the statutory terminology used to described [sic] an area of the body to 
classify a scheduled injury.  This can present a problem when distinguishing scheduled 
losses from unscheduled losses.”  Prewitt v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 564 N.W.2d 
852, 854 (Iowa App. 1997).  Yet, the legislature also must have known that, in prior 
case law, this agency and the courts have determined that when in doubt, the law is 
interpreted to the benefit of the worker.  Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. 
Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015).  If this analysis is followed to its logical 
conclusion, the legislature in 2017 knew that any body parts proximal to the “shoulder” 
joint would result in an injury being compensated to the whole person yet chose not to 
incorporate or specifically include rotator cuff injuries or distal clavicle excisions as 
“shoulder” injuries.   
As noted in the findings of fact, Dr. Archer provided an undisputed medical 
explanation and opinion stating that the distal clavicle excision performed by Dr. 
Stokesbary and revised by Dr. Johnson is anatomically located proximally to the 
glenohumeral, or shoulder, joint.  Given the undisputed anatomic explanation provided 
by Dr. Archer, the 2017 statutory amendment, at best, leaves doubt and ambiguity as to 
what constitutes a “shoulder” pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) (2017). 
On the other hand, an injured worker is likely to report “shoulder” pain when 
experiencing a torn rotator cuff injury or surgical repairs of the labrum, a distal clavicle 
excision, or a subacromial decompression.  Physicians order an MRI of the “shoulder” 
to diagnose torn rotator cuff tendons and assess the shape and type of the acromion.  
“Shoulder” surgeons repair torn rotator cuff injuries, perform labral repairs, subacromial 
decompressions, and distal clavicle excisions.  Dr. Johnson and Dr. Stokesbary refer to 
claimant’s injury and symptoms as located within the right shoulder.  They obtained and 
relied upon right shoulder MRI’s to diagnose and repair claimant’s injuries.  Tears of the 
infraspinatus and supraspinatus (two tendons of the rotator cuff involved in this case as 
well) are often referred to as shoulder injuries in medical records, by physicians, by 
patients, and by this agency.  See May v. Menard, Inc., File No. 5041559 (Arbitration 
Decision, June 2, 2015) (affirmed by agency in December 2016). 
In Farmer v. Second Injury Fund of Iowa, File No. 5021559 (Appeal, November 
20, 2008), the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner noted, “the deltoid muscle is 
part of the muscle complex which operates the shoulder joint.”  While the Commissioner 
was, obviously, not addressing the specific anatomic structure or delineating the 
specifics of the “shoulder” in 2008, the Commissioner nonetheless recognized a 
difference between the “shoulder joint” and the “muscle complex” which operates the 
shoulder joint.  Again, carrying this to the logical conclusion, the legislature was aware 

GARCIA RUBALCAVA V. SIOUXPREME EGG PRODUCTS 
Page 12 
 
 
of this pre-existing definition by the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner and 
elected not to modify this definition or clearly define what constitutes a “shoulder.”  
The AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, offers 
permanent impairment for loss of range of motion, loss of strength, and joint 
replacement of the shoulder.  Range of motion and strength ratings necessarily would 
be affected by tendons and muscles (such as the rotator cuff) that make the shoulder 
joint operational.  However, the Guides do not define what constitutes a shoulder and, in 
fact, evaluate the shoulder impairment as an upper extremity, or arm.  The Guides are 
not terribly insightful or helpful in determining whether a torn rotator cuff is a shoulder 
injury or an injury proximal to the shoulder joint.  Ultimately, I conclude that the 
language selected by the Iowa legislature and enacted as Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(n) is ambiguous as to whether a “shoulder” includes the rotator cuff tendons, 
labral tears, subacromial decompression, and/or a distal clavicle excision. 
When a statute leaves ambiguity as to its meaning or intent, it has long been the 
law of Iowa that a statutory provision in the Iowa Workers' Compensation Acts should 
be interpreted liberally in favor of the injured worker.  Bluml v. Dee Jay’s, Inc., 920 
N.W.2d 82 (Iowa 2018); Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 
N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015); Iowa Ins. Institute v. Core Group of Iowa Ass’n for Justice, 
867 N.W.2d 58 (Iowa 2015); Denison Municipal Utilities v. Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Com’r, 857 N.W.2d 230 (Iowa 2014); Ewing v. Allied Const. Services, 592 N.W.2d 689 
(Iowa 1999); Myers v. F.C.A. Services, Inc., 592 N.W.2d 354 (Iowa 1999); Danker v. 
Wilimek, 577 N.W.2d 634 (Iowa 1998); Haverly v. Union Const. Co., 18 N.W.2d 629, 
236 Iowa 278 (1945); Conrad v. Midwest Coal Co., 3 N.W.2d 511, 231 Iowa 53 (1942); 
Miranda v. IBP, Inc., File No. 5008521 (Appeal, August 2, 2005).  As the Iowa Supreme 
Court stated, “[t]he primary purpose of the workers’ compensation statute is to benefit 
the worker and his or her dependents, insofar as statutory requirements permit.”  
McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 188 (Iowa 1980). 
Ultimately, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner and likely the Iowa 
Supreme Court are going to have to give the statutory language some context and 
define the parameters of what constitutes a “shoulder” pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(n) (2017).  Given the uncertainty and ambiguity left by the generic term 
“shoulder” used in the statutory amendment, I apply the overriding principle of workers’ 
compensation statutory interpretation.  Specifically, I conclude that it is appropriate and 
required that I interpret Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) (2017) liberally for the benefit of 
the injured worker.  Bluml v. Dee Jay’s, Inc., 920 N.W.2d 82 (Iowa 2018). 
In this instance, applying such an interpretation, I found that the distal clavicle 
excision performed by Dr. Stokesbary and the revision of that distal clavicle excision by 
Dr. Johnson were surgical interventions proximal to the glenohumeral joint.  Relying 
upon my prior decision in Smidt, I further conclude that the supraspinatus and 
infraspinatus rotator cuff tendons and corresponding muscles attach and originate 
proximal to the glenohumeral joint.  Therefore, I conclude that claimant has produced 

GARCIA RUBALCAVA V. SIOUXPREME EGG PRODUCTS 
Page 13 
 
 
unrebutted medical evidence in this case and established through prior agency 
precedent that his injuries extend proximal to the shoulder joint. 
Unscheduled injuries are compensated on a 500-week schedule and the 
industrial disability award can exceed the permanent functional impairment.  “Shoulder” 
injuries are compensated on a 400-week schedule and are limited to the functional 
impairment rating.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n), (v), (x).  Claimant can recover 
additional benefits by asserting and proving an unscheduled injury as opposed to being 
limited to a shoulder injury.  Therefore, recalling that the statute should be interpreted 
for the benefit of the injured worker when ambiguity exists, I conclude that it is beneficial 
for claimant if his injury is compensated as an unscheduled injury. 
Given that the injured anatomic structures (rotator cuff tendons and distal clavicle 
excision) originate or are located proximal to the glenohumeral joint, I conclude that the 
injuries to claimant’s supraspinatus and infraspinatus tendons, as well as the distal 
clavicle excision, result in an injury proximal to the shoulder joint.  I found, pursuant to 
unrebutted medical evidence, that the labral tears are part of the shoulder joint and that 
the subacromial decompression is also a surgical procedure to part of the shoulder joint.  
I provide no findings relative to the subscapularis tendon tear, as there is not sufficient 
medical evidence in this case to support a finding that condition is distal to, proximal to, 
or part of the glenohumeral “shoulder” joint.  Therefore, having found claimant proved 
injuries proximal to the shoulder, I conclude that claimant has proven his injury results in 
an injury to the body as a whole, or an unscheduled injury.   
Unscheduled injuries are compensated pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v) (2017).  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) provides that unscheduled injuries 
should be compensated based upon a 500-week schedule.  However, amendments in 
2017 changed the traditional industrial disability analysis in at least a couple of ways.  
First, industrial disability is not awarded if the claimant “returns to work or is offered 
work for which the employee receives or would receive the same or greater salary, 
wages, or earnings than the employee received at the time of the injury.”  Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(v) (2017).   
The Iowa Supreme Court has also made it clear that a determination of and 
award of permanent disability is not ripe unless and until the injured worker has 
achieved maximum medical improvement and substantial improvement is no longer 
expected.  Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193 (Iowa 
2010).  In this case, claimant asserts that he remains in a running healing period and 
that he has not yet achieved maximum medical improvement because he has additional 
medical treatment scheduled into the future. 
Having accepted the medical opinions of Dr. Morrison and Dr. Archer on the 
issue of maximum medical improvement, I found that Mr. Garcia Rubalcava achieved 
maximum medical improvement by the date of Dr. Morrison’s evaluation, or February 6, 
2020.  I acknowledge claimant’s arguments that he has a return appointment with Dr. 
Johnson.  However, his condition has not required significant, ongoing medical 

GARCIA RUBALCAVA V. SIOUXPREME EGG PRODUCTS 
Page 14 
 
 
treatment and two physicians evaluating claimant Dr. Johnson have concluded that he 
has achieved maximum medical improvement.  I found those opinions convincing.   
If additional treatment options are identified and commenced, claimant may 
qualify for an intermittent healing period.  Evenson v. Winnebago Industries, Inc., 881 
N.W.2d 360 (Iowa 2016).  However, I conclude that claimant is at maximum medical 
improvement and that his claim for permanent disability benefits is ripe at this time. 
Mr. Garcia Rubalcava asserts a claim for industrial disability benefits.  In this 
case, defendants contend that claimant returned to work and that any permanent partial 
disability benefits are limited to an award under the functional impairment methodology 
of Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) (2017). 
The pertinent portion of Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) (2017) provides: 
If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or 
would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the 
employee received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment 
resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the employee’s earning 
capacity. 
In this case, I found that Mr. Garcia Rubalcava did return to work for the 
employer and continued to work for the employer at the time of trial.  He earned more 
per hour and more per week at the time of trial than he did on the date of injury.  
Therefore, I conclude that the above provision of Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) (2017) 
is applicable.  Claimant’s recovery is statutorily limited, at this time, to the functional 
impairment resulting from his injury. 
In this case, I considered the impairment ratings offered by Dr. Morrison and Dr. 
Archer.  I recognized that Dr. Morrison rendered his impairment in accordance with and 
referenced the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  
Dr. Archer did not clarify whether his impairment was rendered pursuant to the Fifth 
Edition of the AMA Guides. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) (2017) specifically provides: 
[W]hen determining functional disability and not loss of earning capacity, 
the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be 
determined solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent 
impairment, published by the American Medical Association, as adopted 
by the workers’ compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 
17A. 
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has enacted an administrative 
rule, which adopts the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 

GARCIA RUBALCAVA V. SIOUXPREME EGG PRODUCTS 
Page 15 
 
 
Impairment for determining the extent of loss of percentage of impairment for 
permanent partial disabilities not involving analysis of a loss of earning capacity.  876 
IAC 2.4  Therefore, I conclude that the Iowa legislature, in conjunction with the 
commissioner’s administrative rule have adopted the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides as 
the appropriate method to determine permanent functional impairment in this case. 
I found Dr. Morrison’s opinion to be more credible and accurate with respect to 
the issue of permanent impairment.  It also specifically complies with Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(x) (2017) and 876 IAC 2.4.  Therefore, I found that claimant proved a 15 
percent permanent functional impairment of the right upper extremity.  I converted that 
impairment to 9 percent of the whole person pursuant to the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  Therefore, I conclude that claimant 
has proven a 9 percent permanent functional loss of the whole person as a result of his 
November 29, 2017 work injury. 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) (2017), an unscheduled injury is 
compensated on a 500-week schedule.  Nine percent of 500 weeks is equivalent to 45 
weeks.  I conclude that Mr. Garcia Rubalcava is entitled to an award of 45 weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
The parties also dispute when permanent disability benefits should commence.  
Claimant contends that he remains in a running healing period.  Having rejected that 
argument, I must determine the applicable commencement date for permanent disability 
benefits. 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2) (2017): 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is 
medically indicated that maximum medical improvement form the injury 
has been reached and that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment can be determined by use of the guides to the evaluation of 
permanent impairment, published by the American Medical Association, 
as adopted by the workers’ compensation commissioner pursuant to 
chapter 17A. 
Having found that maximum medical improvement occurred by February 6, 2020, 
I conclude that permanent partial disability benefits commence on February 7, 2020.  
Iowa Code section 85.34(2) (2017). 
Finally, claimant seeks assessment of costs.  Assessment of costs is a 
discretionary function of the agency.  Iowa Code section 86.40.  The parties reached an 
agreement for reimbursement of claimant’s independent medical evaluation.  Therefore, 
that expense does not need to be addressed as a cost even though it is listed on 
claimant’s statement of costs at Joint Exhibit 11.   

GARCIA RUBALCAVA V. SIOUXPREME EGG PRODUCTS 
Page 16 
 
 
The other costs sought by claimant include his filing fee, service costs, and 
transcription fees for his deposition.  Claimant has prevailed and assessment of his 
filing fee ($100.00) and service costs ($6.70) are reasonable and permitted pursuant to 
876 IAC 4.33(3) and (7).  Defendants elected to introduce claimant’s deposition 
transcript as an exhibit.  Therefore, it is reasonable to also tax claimant’s cost ($70.00) 
for a copy of that transcript pursuant to Rule 876 IAC 4.33(2). 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay claimant forty-five (45) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits commencing on February 7, 2020. 
All weekly benefits shall be payable at the stipulated weekly rate of five hundred 
twenty-eight and 45/100 dollars ($528.45) per week. 
Interest shall be payable on all past-due weekly benefits at an annual rate equal 
to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most 
recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent. See Gamble v. AG 
Leader Technology File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018). 
Defendants are entitled to the credit the parties stipulated to in the hearing report 
against any benefits awarded in this decision. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs totaling one hundred seventy-six 
and 70/100 dollars ($176.70). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this _23rd __ day of June, 2020. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 

GARCIA RUBALCAVA V. SIOUXPREME EGG PRODUCTS 
Page 17 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Judy L. Freking, (via WCES) 
Janece Valentine (via WCES) 
Robert Gainer (via WCES) 
 
