Case Number: 23700026.01
Case Title:  MORGAN, HUNTER V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Morgan Hunter-23700026.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
HUNTER MORGAN, 
  : 
             FILE NO. 23700026.01 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
    A R B I T R A T I O N 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
          D E C I S I O N                         
ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT 
  : 
INC.,  
  : 
 
 
  :                               
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                                 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
IMT INSURANCE CO.,  
  : 
HEADNOTES:  1100, 1400, 1600, 1800, 
 
 
  : 
 
 
    1801, 1803 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
The claimant, Hunter Morgan, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Advanced Crop Management, Inc. (“Advanced”) and its 
insurer, IMT Insurance Company.  Mark Hedberg appeared on behalf of the claimant.  
Julia Adams appeared on behalf of the defendants.   
 
The matter came on for hearing on January 3, 2024, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips.  Pursuant to an order of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, the hearing occurred electronically via Zoom.  
The hearing proceeded without significant difficulty.  
 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-3, and 
Defendant’s Exhibits A-D.  All of the exhibits were received into evidence without 
objection.   
The claimant testified on his own behalf.  Brandon Metzger testified on behalf of 
the defendants.  Jami Johnson was appointed the official reporter and custodian of the 
notes of the proceeding.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the hearing, 
and the matter was considered fully submitted following briefing by the parties on 
February 14, 2024.    
 
  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-May-08  16:07:26     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 2 
STIPULATIONS 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged 
injury.   
 
2. That, at the time of the work injury, the claimant was single, and entitled to 
one exemption.  The resulting stipulated weekly compensation rate was four 
hundred sixty-one and 18/100 dollars ($461.18).   
 
3. That, with regard to disputed medical expenses:  
 
a. That the fees or prices charged by the providers were fair and 
reasonable. 
b. That the treatment was reasonable and necessary. 
c. That, although disputed, the medical providers would testify as to 
the reasonableness of their fees and/or treatment set forth in the 
listed expenses and the defendants were not offering contrary 
evidence. 
d. That the listed expenses were causally connected to the work injury. 
e. That although the causal connection of the expenses to a work 
injury cannot be stipulated, the listed expenses are at least causally 
connected to the medical conditions upon which the claim of injury is 
based.   
The defendants waived some of their affirmative defenses, but asserted one as listed 
below.  Credits against any award were no longer in dispute.     
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in in the 
course of his employment on September 26, 2022.  
  
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery. 
  
3. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
 
4. Whether the claimant is entitled to temporary disability and/or healing period 
benefits from September 26, 2022, to November 28, 2022, and from March 1, 
2023, to April 11, 2023, and/or from June 6, 2022, to the time of the hearing.   

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 3 
 
5. Whether the claimant was off work from September 26, 2022, to November 
28, 2022, and from March 1, 2023, to April 11, 2023, and/or from June 6, 
2022, to the time of the hearing. 
 
6. The extent of permanent partial disability benefits, should any be awarded. 
 
7. Whether the alleged permanent partial disability is an industrial disability. 
 
8. The proper commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, 
should any be awarded.   
 
9. Whether the claimant is entitled to payment of certain medical expenses.   
 
10. With regard to the disputed medical expenses: 
 
a. Whether the requested expenses were authorized by the defendants.   
 
11. Whether the claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
evaluation (“IME”) pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.   
  
12. Whether the claimant is entitled to a specific taxation of costs, the amount of 
those costs, and whether the costs were paid.   
 
13. Whether the defendants proved an affirmative defense of horseplay and/or 
willfulness or recklessness pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.16.   
It should be noted that the parties indicated a dispute as to the claimant’s gross 
earnings.  However, the parties noted after questioning at the hearing that the rate of 
compensation was agreed to, thus the amount of the claimant’s gross earnings was 
moot.   
The defendants also listed their position under Section 10 of the hearing report, as 
follows: 
It is Defendants’ position that Claimant is not entitled to any temporary 
benefits.  Defendants assert as follows: Claimant voluntarily quit his 
employment with Advanced Crop Management.  For the period of 
September 26, 2022[,] through November 28, 2022, Claimant had no 
medical restrictions.  Claimant began new employment on November 28, 
2022.  On March 1, 2023, Claimant sustained an unrelated injury to his low 
back at his new employer, John Deere.  On July 23, 2023, Claimant injured 
his back while working on his car.  These incidents are unrelated to the 
alleged work-related injury.  Any subsequent restrictions that prevented 
Claimant from working or performing substantially similar work are 
unrelated to the September 26, 2022[,] alleged DOI.   

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 4 
See Hearing Report, pg. 3. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Hunter Morgan, the claimant, was 21 years old at the time of the hearing.  
(Testimony).  He graduated from Indianola High School in 2020.  (Testimony).  
Subsequent to his graduation from high school, Mr. Morgan attended Des Moines Area 
Community College (“DMACC”), where he earned a welding certificate.  (Testimony).   
He then went to work “at a few different fab shops, welding shops…that sort of 
work, doing grinding and welding.”  (Testimony).  These jobs required him to lift 
between 5 and 20 pounds on a regular basis.  (Testimony).  He did not have to do much 
pushing.  (Testimony).  He sometimes had to be mobile while welding.  (Testimony).  He 
felt that he could not perform these positions at the time of the hearing due to pain that 
he attributed to the alleged work injury.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Morgan started working for Advanced on September 1, 2022.  (Testimony).  
He earned eighteen and 00/100 dollars ($18.00) per hour.  (Testimony).  He was 
responsible for collecting soil samples from various farms and sending them to a 
laboratory to determine the fertility results of the soil.  (Testimony).     
On September 26, 2022, Mr. Morgan sampled soil in a farm field with his 
coworker “Brandon.”  (Testimony).  He was on-site for about one hour.  (Testimony).  
He was generally unfamiliar with the farm field.  (Testimony).  He rode a four-wheeler 
around the field collecting various soil samples based upon a map on his laptop.  
(Testimony).  The map for this particular field was not a topographical map.  
(Testimony).  However, the co-owner of Advanced, Brandon Metzger, testified that 
employees were provided with maps showing field borders, waterways, and terraces.  
(Testimony).  According to Mr. Metzger, it is an expectation that employees review the 
appropriate maps before collecting soil samples.  (Testimony).   
On the date in question, Mr. Morgan drove towards his next soil sample location 
at about 25 miles per hour while looking at a GPS map on his laptop to determine its 
location in the field.  (Testimony).  In spite of this, he testified that he felt he was not 
driving recklessly, though he acknowledged it was “probably not” safe to be driving at 25 
miles per hour over unfamiliar terrain while looking at his laptop.  (Testimony).   
While looking for his next sampling location, he did not notice a terrace in the 
field until he was six to seven feet from the edge.  (Testimony; Defendants’ Exhibit A:4).  
He was traveling too fast in order to “…have any sort of reaction.”  (DE A:4).   He then 
rode off the side and dropped 13 feet.  (Testimony).  His four-wheeler landed flat on all 
four wheels and bounced.  (Testimony).  When the four-wheeler bounced, Mr. Morgan 
recounted a recoil in his back, at which time he flipped off the four-wheeler and struck 
his leg.  (Testimony).  He then called “Brandon” over to assist.  (Testimony).   

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 5 
He described experiencing back pain that was stinging, and sharp and was the 
worst pain he had ever experienced.  (Testimony).  He also experienced bruising and 
pain in his leg.  (Testimony).  His coworker then came over and they called Brandon 
Metzger.  (Testimony).  They asked for instructions on what to do next.  (Testimony).  
Mr. Morgan testified that Mr. Metzger instructed him to load the four-wheelers onto a 
truck and then return to their offices, at which time, Mr. Morgan would be transported to 
the emergency room.  (Testimony).  Mr. Morgan then testified that he was instructed to 
say that it was not a work-related incident, as Mr. Metzger was concerned about an 
insurance claim.  (Testimony).  Instead, Mr. Morgan testified, Mr. Metzger offered to pay 
in cash for his medical bills.  (Testimony).  Mr. Morgan expressed concern over this, and 
that it “made [him] feel unsafe to work there anymore, and I felt like I was being part of 
a, like, [sic] fraud or something.”  (Testimony).   
Mr. Metzger contradicted this and testified that he advised Mr. Morgan to “…go 
get checked out…” at the hospital.  (Testimony).  Further, he testified that he never told 
Mr. Morgan to report the incident as non-work related, nor did he offer to pay for Mr. 
Morgan’s medical bills in cash.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Morgan visited one emergency room.  (Testimony).  He was told that his 
injuries were too severe, and that he needed to report to the MercyOne trauma center 
for further treatment.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Morgan reported to the emergency room at MercyOne on September 26-27, 
2022.  (Testimony; Joint Exhibit 1:1-20).  Mr. Morgan told the provider that he was riding 
on an ATV when he approached a cliff that he thought was 3 feet in depth, but that 
unbeknownst to him it was actually 13 feet high.  (JE 1:3).  He landed and felt a jolt in 
his lower back, fell off the four-wheeler and struck his left leg.  (JE 1:3).  He recounted 
pain in his lower back and left lower extremity.  (JE 1:3).  He was given acetaminophen 
for his pain.  (JE 1:3).  An x-ray was taken of his back, which showed fracture 
deformities at L1 and L2.  (Testimony; JE 1:2).  A CT scan was then done, which 
showed mild fracture deformities at the upper L1 and L2 endplates, a 10 percent 
compression fracture of L2, and no spondylolisthesis.  (JE 1:1-2, 6).  The emergency 
room provided him with an injection of Toradol to treat his pain.  (JE 1:6).  He was 
discharged with prescriptions for oxycodone and cyclobenzaprine, along with a 
recommendation to follow-up with neurosurgery in one month.  (JE 1:18).   
Mr. Morgan never followed-up with outpatient neurosurgery, as recommended by 
MercyOne.  (Testimony). 
Following his release from MercyOne, Mr. Morgan went to bed.  (Testimony).  He 
then spent the next several weeks resting and recovering.  (Testimony).  He testified 
that he was in a lot of pain during this time, despite his prescribed medications.  
(Testimony).  It was difficult for him to get out of or into bed, walk around, or stand up.  
(Testimony).  He acknowledged that no doctor ever provided him with a restriction or 
kept him off work during this time.  (DE A:4).   

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 6 
On October 20, 2022, Mr. Morgan reported to a DoctorsNow Walk-In clinic where 
Anna Holzer, M.D., examined him.  (JE 2:21-26).  He recounted his compression 
fracture.  (JE 2:21).  His pain improved, though he still experienced pain at night.  (JE 
2:21).  Mr. Morgan expressed a desire to return to work.  (JE 2:21).  Dr. Holzer 
observed Mr. Morgan to have some lumbar tenderness and point tenderness over L1, 
L2, and L3.  (JE 2:21).  He also displayed an abnormal posture with his torso hunched 
forward.  (JE 2:21).  X-rays were done showing no displaced fracture, and no soft tissue 
issues.  (JE 2:22).  She diagnosed Mr. Morgan with collapsed vertebra and 
vertebrogenic low back pain.  (JE 2:22).  She declared Mr. Morgan fit for duty without 
restrictions and educated him on proper lifting techniques and posture.  (JE 2:22).  He 
was also told to discontinue a task if a particular job task caused him pain.  (JE 2:22).  
Finally, Dr. Holzer referred the claimant to physical therapy.  (JE 2:22).   
Mr. Morgan started therapy at ATI Physical Therapy on October 27, 2022, based 
upon Dr. Holzer’s referral.  (JE 3:27, 30-42).  Mr. Morgan presented with decreased 
range of motion, joint mobility issues, soft tissue mobility issues, increased pain, and 
issues with his posture.  (JE 3:27).  He did not check a box indicating that his injuries 
were work related.  (JE 3:35).  He indicated difficulty lifting heavy items, and with 
sleeping.  (JE 3:39-40).  Therapy was performed.  (JE 3:27, 30-42).   
On November 2, 2022, Mr. Morgan returned for his second physical therapy visit.  
(JE 3:43).  His exercises were progressed, which he tolerated well.  (JE 3:43).  He 
experienced pain while lying on his back and/or his stomach.  (JE 3:42).   
His therapy at ATI Physical Therapy continued on November 3, 2022.  (JE 3:44).  
He reported no changes and only minor soreness to his lower back.  (JE 3:44).  He 
tolerated therapy well along with certain additional modalities.  (JE 3:44).   
On November 7, 2022, Mr. Morgan had his fourth therapy visit.  (JE 3:45).  He 
told the therapist that his low back felt good, and that he was pain free throughout the 
prior weekend.  (JE 3:45).  He tolerated therapy without complaints, though he 
displayed fatigue during certain exercises.  (JE 3:45).   
Therapy continued on November 10, 2022, with Mr. Morgan reporting that his low 
back felt “great.”  (JE 3:46).  He also recounted improvements to his sleep and ability to 
sit since beginning therapy.  (JE 3:46).  His therapy was progressed with no issue.  (JE 
3:46).   
On November 14, 2022, Mr. Morgan told his therapist at ATI that he moved a bed 
frame over the weekend when he experienced a sharp pain in his back.  (JE 3:47).  
After that, he struggled to sleep due to pain in his lower back.  (JE 3:47).  Nevertheless, 
he tolerated therapy well.  (JE 3:47).   
Mr. Morgan failed to show for a therapy appointment on November 17, 2022.  (JE 
3:55).   
Mr. Morgan had a pre-employment medical examination with John Deere on 
November 18, 2022.  (DE D:39-56).  The examination of his back was normal.  (DE 

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 7 
D:39).  He indicated that he currently experienced back pain, but that he had a release 
to work.  (DE D:43, 53).  After examining him, John Deere indicated that he was 
medically cleared for employment without restrictions.  (DE D:50).   
On November 21, 2022, Mr. Morgan was discharged from therapy following his 
seventh visit.  (JE 3:28-29, 52-54).  The therapist opined that Mr. Morgan responded 
well to therapy “with few complaints reported with exercises.”  (JE 3:53).  He showed 
good technique with his exercises and demonstrated independence with his home 
exercise plan.  (JE 3:53).  He was discharged with instructions to continue with his 
home exercise plan.  (JE 3:53).   
Following six weeks of physical therapy, he felt “…a little better.”  (Testimony).  
Mr. Morgan testified that, during the interim, no one from Advanced or their insurer ever 
contacted him to discuss his return to employment.  (Testimony).  Mr. Morgan reiterated 
during his testimony that he was not comfortable with contacting Advanced due to the 
alleged conduct of Mr. Metzger.  (Testimony).  Therefore, he simply stopped showing up 
for work at Advanced.  (Testimony).  Mr. Metzger confirmed that Mr. Morgan never 
returned to work with Advanced, nor did he ever inform them that he would not be 
returning to work with Advanced.  (Testimony).   
Yet, Mr. Morgan expressed a desire to return to work.  (Testimony).  Therefore, 
he applied for work for John Deere.  (Testimony).  Mr. Morgan described John Deere as 
“…about the best job I can get without having to be in the union for multiple years…” 
and “…someplace I wanted to be for a long time.”  (Testimony).   
Mr. Morgan continued to experience pain when he applied with John Deere.  
(Testimony).  However, he testified that he disclosed his history and condition to them 
upon applying.  (Testimony).  He also underwent a pre-employment physical.  
(Testimony).  John Deere hired him on November 28, 2022, and he worked for them for 
about one year before he began to experience what he termed a flare-up of his back 
pain.  (Testimony).  He testified in his deposition that when he was not in overt pain, he 
was in discomfort, as he had to bend down a lot and bend around and twist his body 
while welding.  (Defendants’ Exhibit A:3).   
He described an incident on March 1, 2023, wherein he moved a large jack 
underneath a part that he was welding.  (Testimony).  When he moved the jack, it 
began to fall, and his back “jerked” as he caught it.  (Testimony).  He opined that this 
caused another flare-up of his back pain.  (Testimony).  He opined that this was not a 
separate injury.  (Testimony).  However, John Deere did not consider this to be a flare-
up and paid him workers’ compensation benefits for this incident.  (Testimony).  In a 
John Deere internal document, it was noted that Mr. Morgan’s back pain stated when he 
moved to a new department, and that he located his pain to “same spot as old injury 
[sic].”  (DE D:33).   
Following his incident, Mr. Morgan was seen for his back pain at John Deere 
Occupational Health.  (DE D:19).  He told the provider that he experienced low back 
pain related to his prior fractures.  (DE D:20).  He rated his pain 4 to 8 out of 10.  (DE  

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 8 
D:20).  He was sent home from work that evening.  (DE D:21).  He was allowed to work 
modified duty with restrictions.  (DE D:19).  The restrictions include no lifting, no pushing 
or pulling, no work above shoulder height, sit down duties only with standing as 
tolerated, and avoidance of repetitive bending, twisting, kneeling, or squatting.  (DE 
D:19).  He was also told to take Ibuprofen.  (DE D:19).   
Kirby Singleton, P.A., of John Deere Occupational Health saw the claimant on 
March 6, 2023, following his March work incident.  (DE D:18).  He experienced mid-
thoracic and lumbar back pain.  (DE D:27).  Mr. Singleton noted that Dr. Berg examined 
Mr. Morgan and diagnosed him with a thoracic and lumbar strain.  (DE D:27).  He 
displayed tenderness to palpation along his paraspinous muscles.  (DE D:27).  His 
spinal range of motion was limited due to his claimed pain.  (DE D:27).  He was fit for 
modified duty with restrictions.  (DE D:18).  The restrictions included no lifting over 20 
pounds, no pushing or pulling over 20 pounds, and avoidance of repetitive bending or 
twisting.  (DE D:18).   
Mr. Morgan visited with Mr. Singleton again on March 10, 2023.  (DE D:24).  He 
rated his pain 4 to 6 out of 10 and noted that he felt slight improvement.  (DE D:24).  He 
located the pain in his right lower back.  (DE D:24). Prolonged standing or walking did 
not worsen his pain.  (DE D:24).  Mr. Morgan told Mr. Singleton that he completed 
physical therapy for his prior fractures and received a full discharge.  (DE D:24).  He 
was diagnosed with lower back pain.  (DE D:24).  Mr. Morgan was allowed to work 
modified duty on March 10, 2023.  (DE D:17).  His restrictions were no lifting over 20 
pounds, and no pushing or pulling more than 20 pounds.  (DE D:17).  He also 
recommended that the claimant take Ibuprofen and Tylenol.  (DE D:17).     
On March 13, 2023, John Deere provided a document indicating that Mr. Morgan 
was fit for full duty.  (Testimony; DE D:16).  This followed a visit with Mr. Singleton, at 
John Deere Occupational Health.  (DE D:22).  Mr. Morgan felt that his back pain 
improved over the weekend, which led him to stop taking over the counter medications.  
(DE D:22).  He felt that his position change to a robot welder limited his pain. (DE D:22).  
He was diagnosed with lower back pain.  (DE D:22).  Mr. Singleton allowed the claimant 
to return to work full duty.  (DE D:22).    
Mr. Morgan described an incident from July of 2023, wherein he was changing a 
tire on his Honda Civic.  (Testimony).  He lifted the tire, and placed the new tire on the 
wheel when he felt a jolt of pain hit his back.  (Testimony).  He attributed this to a flare-
up related to the alleged initial injury.  (Testimony).   
On July 25, 2023, Mr. Morgan visited with Marilyn Keane, PA-C reporting chronic 
bilateral low back pain without sciatica.  (JE 5:57-58).  He recounted his medical history 
and opined that he re-injured his back two days prior while working on his car.  (JE 
5:57).  He visited a chiropractor who referred him to neurosurgery.  (JE 5:57).  He was 
stretching, using Tylenol, and icing to relieve his pain.  (JE 5:57).  Ms. Keane signed 
paperwork “…for him to be off work until he sees neurosurgery.”  (JE 5:57).   

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 9 
Ms. Keane signed a weekly indemnity disability application form from John Deere 
July 25, 2023.  (JE 5:62).  This was due to an “underlying spinal traumatic injury.”  (JE 
5:62).  He was said to be totally unable to work due to his inability to bend, walk, or 
stand for long periods of time.  (JE 5:62).  There is a mention of September 26, 2022, in 
the form, but it is unclear as to what this means.  (JE 5:62).  It includes a plan of a 
referral to neurosurgery.  (JE 5:62).  This form was later modified to allow the claimant 
to return to work on October 9, 2023.  (JE 5:62).   
As of the date of the hearing, Mr. Morgan had yet to follow-up with neurosurgery 
as recommended, as he experienced an issue with his health information not being 
faxed to the offices.  (Testimony).  He also had not followed-up with a neurosurgeon 
regarding this issue.  (Testimony).   
Eventually, John Deere moved Mr. Morgan to a position requiring more mobility 
and bending.  (Testimony).  This placed stress on his body and caused additional flare-
ups of his low back pain.  (Testimony).   
John Deere provided the claimant with restrictions in July of 2023.  (Testimony).  
These included no pulling, no pushing, no lifting more than 20 pounds, no reaching, no 
bending, and no twisting.  (Testimony).  Due to these restrictions, Mr. Morgan was not 
working at John Deere as of the date of the hearing; however, he remained an 
employee on short term disability.  (Testimony).  He was paid about five hundred one 
and 00/100 dollars every week in short-term disability benefits pursuant to a collective 
bargaining agreement.  (Testimony).  He expressed a desire to return to John Deere.  
(Testimony).  At the time he stopped working at John Deere, he earned twenty-six and 
70/100 dollars ($26.70) per hour.  (Testimony).  He also earned quarterly bonuses and 
weekly efficiency bonuses.  (Testimony).  Depending on these bonuses, his hourly pay 
ranged from thirty-two and 00/100 dollars ($32.00) per hour and thirty-three and 00/100 
dollars ($33.00) per hour.  (Testimony).  This was more than he earned at Advanced.  
(Testimony).   
Since being placed on leave by John Deere, Mr. Morgan testified that he applied 
to work at Waldinger.  (Testimony).  This was a work-from-home position as a trucking 
dispatcher.  (Testimony).  However, after further questioning, it appears this was simply 
Mr. Morgan discussing a potential position at Waldinger with a friend who was “talking 
to people there trying to get my resume to them.”  (Testimony).  He also spoke with his 
brother about a position as a fiber splicer, but again, he had yet to formally apply.  
(Testimony).   
On October 4, 2023, Mr. Morgan saw Ms. Keane again.  (JE 5:59-60).  Ms. 
Keane documented Mr. Morgan’s complaint of back pain since his four-wheeler 
incident.  (JE 5:59).  He worked with physical therapy and did yoga to alleviate his 
symptoms.  (JE 5:59).  He expressed a desire to return to work on Monday with 
accommodations to reduce his pain.  (JE 5:59).  He displayed no tenderness upon 
examination of his lower back.  (JE 5:59).  He also displayed a normal range of motion 
in his lower back.  (JE 5:59).  Ms. Keane again documented a diagnosis of chronic 
bilateral low back pain without sciatica.  (JE 5:59).   

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 10 
Ms. Keane signed a work release form from John Deere Occupational Health on 
October 4, 2023.  (JE 5:61).  She allowed the claimant to return to work with restrictions 
effective October 9, 2023.  (JE 5:61).  He was restricted to occasional lifting between 15 
and 20 pounds.  (JE 5:61).  He also was restricted to occasional bending forward, 
reaching away from the body, squatting, kneeling, climbing, operating hazardous 
machinery, and using vibratory tools.  (JE 5:61).  He was not allowed to jolt his body, 
nor was he allowed to perform sit down or sedentary work.  (JE 5:61).  Finally, she 
wrote that he was to “try to avoid awkward positioning of [his] back.”  (JE 5:61).   
On November 14, 2023, Mr. Morgan visited Robert Rondinelli, M.D., Ph.D., 
C.I.M.E., F.A.A.P.M.&R., for an IME.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 1:1-12).  Dr. Rondinelli is 
board certified in physical medicine and rehabilitation.  (CE 1:1).  This IME was 
arranged by claimant’s counsel.  (CE 1:1-2).  Mr. Morgan recalled spending about 45 
minutes to one hour with Dr. Rondinelli.  (Testimony).  Dr. Rondinelli indicated that the 
entire examination took one hour and 45 minutes.  (CE 1:1).    
Dr. Rondinelli outlined his interview with Mr. Morgan.  (CE 1:2-4).  Mr. Morgan 
recounted how his injury occurred on September 26, 2022, when he was performing 
field work.  (CE 1:2).  They were “trying to be fast” so they operated their four-wheeler at 
about 25 miles per hour when he approached a sudden drop off on unfamiliar terrain.  
(CE 1:2).  He assumed it was going to only be three feet, but instead it was 13 feet.  
(CE 1:2).  He landed on all four wheels, but immediately felt pain in his lower back.  (CE 
1:2).  Mr. Morgan also reiterated his claim that Mr. Metzger wanted to keep “workers’ 
compensation” out of the claim.  (CE 1:2).   
Mr. Morgan complained of intermittent pain in his midline lumbar spine at about 
L1-2, which occasionally radiated into his shoulder.  (CE 1:3).  He rated his pain 5 out of 
10, and described it as sharp with some tingling.  (CE 1:3).  Moving about helped 
alleviate his pain, while sedentariness aggravated his pain.  (CE 1:3).  Mr. Morgan 
related to Dr. Rondinelli his opinion that “heavy labor such as welding” also increased 
his pain, and “that he is incapable of doing same at this time.”  (CE 1:3).  Furthermore, 
he described a “weird sensation” of tingling in his right leg, though Dr. Rondinelli noted 
that this was opposite of his “traumatized” left leg.  (CE 1:3).  Mr. Morgan avoided 
analgesics, opioids, Tylenol and NSAIDs, because he wanted “…to know the true level 
of his pain in order to determine if he [was] getting worse or better.”  (CE 1:3).   
Dr. Rondinelli found Mr. Morgan to be functional with his activities of daily living.  
(CE 1:4).  Mr. Morgan felt he could walk more than one mile, though he may need to 
slow down.  (CE 1:4).  He could drive a vehicle for up to one hour before discomfort set 
in.  (CE 1:4).  Mr. Morgan told Dr. Rondinelli that he did not believe he could perform his 
former job as a welder without accommodation, and “would like to find alternative work 
as a forklift operator if possible.”  (CE 1:4).   
He also noted his employment with John Deere, and the restrictions placed upon 
him of no bending or twisting his torso, no frequent lifting in excess of 20 pounds, and 
no reaching up or away from his body.  (CE 1:2).  Due to these restrictions, he could not 
work at John Deere, though he remained employed.  (CE 1:2).   

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 11 
Dr. Rondinelli then performed a “functional review of systems” by administering a 
“Lower Extremity Functional Scale” survey to determine what Mr. Morgan’s functional 
disability was based upon his current symptoms.  (CE 1:4).  Dr. Rondinelli noted that the 
“Lower Extremity Functional Scale” was “a 20-item self-report inventory of perceived 
levels of difficulty when performing tasks primarily associated with lower limb mobility as 
it impacts on activities of daily living (ADLs) and instrumental activities of daily living 
(IADLs) including work.”  (CE 1:4).  Mr. Morgan scored 57 on this, which Dr. Rondinelli 
indexed to 71 percent.  (CE 1:4).  According to Dr. Rondinelli, this means that Mr. 
Morgan perceived that he retained 71 percent of his maximum pre-injury functional 
ability and therefore perceived a 29 percent disability in relation to his lower extremity.  
(CE 1:4).   
Dr. Rondinelli continued by physically examining the claimant.  (CE 1:5).  He 
found him to have an appropriate affect, and to also have grossly intact cranial nerves.  
(CE 1:5).  He showed no signs of muscle atrophy.  (CE 1:5).  Dr. Rondinelli also tested 
the claimant’s spinal range of motion and found him to have 140 degrees of motion at 
T12 and 90 degrees of motion at S1, which yielded a “net arc of motion” of 50 degrees.  
(CE 1:6).  He also had maximum forward flexion to 40 degrees and extension to 10 
degrees.  (CE 1:6).   
The IME continued with the doctor opining that Mr. Morgan sustained a buckle 
fracture or superior endplate deformity of L1 vertebra with mild compression, a mild 
depressed superior endplate fracture at L2 with an approximate 10 percent loss of 
vertebral height, and “possible neuropathic pain syndrome, persisting cerebrogenic 
back pain, and mild issues potentially affecting his bowel control.”  (CE 1:6).  Dr. 
Rondinelli wanted the claimant to have another MRI to rule out a conus medullaris 
injury.  (CE 1:6).  Dr. Rondinelli opined that the fractures in Mr. Morgan’s lower back 
were related to his September 26, 2022, incident.  (CE 1:6).  These diagnoses were 
consistent with the mechanism of injury of vertical loading that occurred during the 
incident.  (CE 1:7).  Dr. Rondinelli continued by examining the “functional residuals of 
pain and perceived low back and lower limb functional disability…” which he noted 
“…may be radicular or neuropathic at this time.”  (CE 1:7).  Dr. Rondinelli did not make 
any causal opinion on these issues, as he recommended an MRI to make any final 
causal associations.  (CE 1:7).   
The doctor opined that the care provided to the claimant was appropriate.  (CE 
1:7).  However, he recommended an MRI of the lumbar spine to rule out evidence of 
spinal cord trauma.  (CE 1:7).  He also recommended an electromyogram of the 
thoracolumbar spine and right lower extremity.  (CE 1:7).  Dr. Rondinelli opined that Mr. 
Morgan had “significant residual disability due to pain, possibly neurogenic in nature…” 
and recommended a trial of certain medications.  (CE 1:7).  Dr. Rondinelli could not 
place Mr. Morgan at maximum medical improvement (“MMI”) at the time of the 
evaluation.  (CE 1:7-8).   
Dr. Rondinelli then provided a “provisional impairment rating” based upon the 
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  (CE 1:8-9).  Dr. 
Rondinelli opined that Mr. Morgan qualified for the DRE lumbar category II impairment 

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 12 
based upon Table 15-3 of the Guides.  (CE 1:8).  This provided an estimated 5 percent 
to 8 percent provisional whole person impairment.  (CE 1:8).  He then provided an 
estimated impairment rating based upon Section 15.8 of the Guides for the “Range of 
Motion” method.  (CE 1:8).  Using this method, Mr. Morgan had an estimated 5 percent 
whole person impairment due to the lumbar spine issues.  (CE 1:8).  Dr. Rondinelli 
added on a 12 percent whole person impairment due to issues with flexion and 
extension in the lumbar spine.  (CE 1:8).  Because the 12 percent whole person 
impairment was higher, Dr. Rondinelli opined that this would be the appropriate 
impairment rating to consider.  (CE 1:8).   
The doctor concluded that Mr. Morgan should work in a light work category of 
“occasional lifting of no more than 20 lbs. and frequent lifting of up to 10 lbs.”  (CE 1:9).  
He also recommended that Mr. Morgan avoid repetitive bending or twisting of the torso 
or working with his arms extended and elevated away from his body on a repetitive 
basis.  (CE 1:9).  Finally, Dr. Rondinelli recommended a “transitional return-to-work trial 
and a generic functional capacity evaluation…” when Mr. Morgan achieved MMI in order 
to validate the doctor’s recommendations.  (CE 1:9).   
Ms. Keane examined Mr. Morgan again on November 15, 2023.  (JE 5:63-64).  
Mr. Morgan noted that the prior restrictions were not accepted by John Deere.  (JE 
5:63).  Ms. Keane recommended an MRI to evaluate his lumbar spine for “….any 
abnormality that could be contributing to his persistent pain despite improvement in his 
x-rays.”  (JE 5:63).  She also considered a referral to other providers.  (JE 5:63).  Mr. 
Morgan requested a handicap placard, but Ms. Keane declined to provide one.  (JE 
5:63).  She continued to diagnose Mr. Morgan with chronic bilateral low back pain 
without sciatica.  (JE 5:63).   
At the order of Ms. Keane, Mr. Morgan had an MRI at Iowa Diagnostic Imaging 
West on December 1, 2023.  (JE 4:56).  The MRI showed minimal degenerative 
changes of the lumbar spine, with no spinal canal or foraminal stenosis.  (JE 4:56).  Ms. 
Keane updated her November 15, 2023, Progress Note with the results of the MRI, 
noting, “[m]inimal degenerative changes on the MRI.  Would he like to pursue pain 
clinic?”  (JE 5:6).     
At the time of the hearing, Mr. Morgan had difficulty sitting or standing for too 
long before pain set in.  (Testimony).  He also experienced difficulty with long walks or 
jogging.  (Testimony).  Pushing anything heavy like a pallet jack caused him pain.  
(Testimony).  Lifting heavy items weighing more than 30 to 40 pounds caused him pain, 
as well.  (Testimony).  He lived with roommates and his girlfriend.  (Testimony).  He was 
able to perform household tasks with pain.  (Testimony).   
He described his pain as stabbing in his back, while his “discomfort” was akin to 
stiffness.  (DE A:5).  He described a general feeling of abnormality in his low back.  (DE 
A:5).   
He no longer plays as much disc golf as he used to due to his back pain.  
(Testimony).  He also no longer played pool as much.  (Testimony).   

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 13 
Mr. Morgan expressed a desire that more physical therapy be ordered.   
(Testimony).  He felt that with more physical therapy he could fully explore the 
possibility of returning to work with John Deere.  (Testimony).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.904(3).   
Affirmative Defense Under Iowa Code Section 85.16 
Before considering the remaining portions of the claims, I am examining whether 
the defendants have proven an affirmative defense pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.16, by a preponderance of the evidence.  The defendants allege that the claimant’s 
actions on the date of his injury were horseplay that resulted in his willful injury.   
Iowa Code section 85.16(2) states that: “[n]o compensation under this chapter 
shall be allowed for an injury caused: (1) By the employee’s willful intent to injure the 
employee’s self or to willfully injure another…”  The burden of proof in asserting an 
affirmative defense rests upon the employer.  See e.g. Reddick v. Grand Union Tea 
Co., 296 N.W. 800, 230 Iowa 108 (1941).   
Compensation may be barred under the “horseplay deviation.”  See  Xenia Rural 
Water Dist. v. Vegors, 786 N.W.2d 250, 256 (Iowa 2010).  The Iowa Supreme Court has 
held that the inquiry into barring compensation based upon the so-called horseplay 
deviation is the action of the claimant.  Id.  Namely, the claimant’s actions should be 
judged based upon the extent the claimant departed from their work.  Id.  The Court 
cited favorably to four considerations for determining whether the claimant’s actions are 
a deviation from the course of the claimant’s employment that bars recovery.  Id.  These 
considerations are: 
(1) the extent and seriousness of the deviation, (2) the completeness of the 
deviation (i.e., whether it was commingled with the performance of duty 
or involved an abandonment of duty), (3) the extent to which the practice 
of horseplay had become an accepted part of the employment, and (4) 
the extent to which the nature of the employment may be expected to 
include some horseplay. 
Id. (citing Phillips v. John Morrell & Co., 484 N.W.2d 527, 530-31 (S.D. Iowa 1992)).  
The claimant admitted that he operated the four-wheeler provided by Advanced 
at about 25 miles per hour at the time of the work incident.  He also admitted that he 
was looking at a laptop computer while driving to another soil sampling site when he 
rode off the side of a 13-foot terrace.  There is a dispute as to whether or not the 
claimant was provided with topographical maps of the farm field in question.  The 
claimant alleges he was not provided with topographical maps.  The defendants allege 
that he was provided with a number of maps on his laptop, including a topographical 

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 14 
map of the field in question.  Unfortunately, the defendants did not provide evidence of 
the same besides the testimony of Mr. Metzger.  Mr. Metzger’s testimony was not very 
clear on this and a number of issues, which raised questions about his credibility.  Had 
the defendants provided a copy of the map in question, it could have bolstered their 
defense.   
Mr. Morgan was driving a four-wheeler on behalf of Advanced when he was 
injured.  He did not deviate from his employment.  He was not engaged in horseplay.  
The defendants did not meet their burden of proof to prove their affirmative defense that 
the claimant willfully injured himself.  The claimant may have been negligent or reckless, 
but there is a lack of evidence that he willfully injured himself.  
Arising Out Of and In the Course Of… and Causation 
The defendants dispute whether the claimant’s lower back injury arose out of, 
and in the course of his employment with Advanced.  Specifically, the parties point to 
two subsequent flare-ups as areas of dispute.   
To receive workers’ compensation benefits, an injured employee must prove, by 
a preponderance of the evidence, that the employee’s injuries arose out of, and in the 
course of the employee’s employment with the employer.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 
528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 1995).  The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place and 
circumstances of the injury.  Id.  An injury arises out of employment when a causal 
relationship exists between the employment and the injury.  Quaker Oats v. Ciha, 552 
N.W.2d 143, 151 (Iowa 1996).  The injury must be a rational consequence of a hazard 
connected with the employment and not merely incidental to the employment.  Koehler 
Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held that an 
injury occurs “in the course of employment” when:  
it is within the period of employment at a place where the employee 
reasonably may be in performing his duties, and while he is fulfilling those 
duties or engaged in doing something incidental thereto.  An injury in the 
course of employment embraces all injuries received while employed in 
furthering the employer’s business and injuries received on the employer’s 
premises, provided that the employee’s presence must ordinarily be 
required at the place of the injury, or, if not so required, employee’s 
departure from the usual place of employment must not amount to an 
abandonment of employment or be an act wholly foreign to his usual work.  
An employee does not cease to be in the course of his employment merely 
because he is not actually engaged in doing some specifically prescribed 
task, if, in the course of his employment, he does some act which he deems 
necessary for the benefit or interest of his employer.    
Farmers Elevator Co. v. Manning, 286 N.W.2d 174, 177 (Iowa 1979).    

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 15 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  However, increased disability from a prior injury, 
even if brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury.  St. Luke’s Hosp. 
v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440 
(Iowa 1999); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985).  An 
occupational disease covered by Iowa Code 85A is specifically excluded from the 
definition of personal injury.  Iowa Code 85.61(4)(b); Iowa Code section 85A.8; Iowa 
Code section 85A.14. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is 
probable, rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 
148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); 
Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).    
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156.  When considering 
the weight of an expert opinion, the factfinder may consider whether the examination 
occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the 
nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and 
practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  
Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985).  Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994).  Supportive lay testimony may be used 
to buttress expert testimony, and therefore is also relevant and material to the causation 
question.    
Iowa employers take an employee subject to any active or dormant health 
problems and must exercise care to avoid injury to both the weak and infirm and the 
strong and healthy.  Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 176 N.W. 823 (1920).  While a 
claimant must show that the injury proximately caused the medical condition sought to 
be compensable, it is well established that a cause is “proximate” when it is a 
substantial factor, or even the primary or most substantial cause to be compensable 
under the Iowa workers’ compensation system.  Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 
N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 
1980).    

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 16 
It is well established in workers’ compensation that “if a claimant had a 
preexisting condition or disability, aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or ‘lighted up’ by 
an injury which arose out of and in the course of employment resulting in a disability 
found to exist,” the claimant is entitled to compensation.  Iowa Dep’t. of Transp. v. Van 
Cannon, 459 N.W.2d 900, 904 (Iowa 1990).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held, 
[A] disease which under any rational work is likely to progress so as to finally 
disable an employee does not become a “personal injury” under our 
Workmen’s Compensation Act merely because it reaches a point of 
disablement while work for an employer is being pursued.  It is only when 
there is direct causal connection between exertion of the employment and 
the injury that a compensation award can be made.  The question is whether 
the diseased condition was the cause or whether the employment was a 
proximate contributing cause.   
Musselman v. Central Telephone Co., 261 Iowa 352, 359-60, 154 N.W.2d 128, 132 
(1967).   
It is also well settled in Iowa that an employer is liable for all consequences that 
naturally and proximately flow from an accident to an employee in the usual course of 
their employment.  Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 767-68, 266 N.W. 480, 
482 (1936).  Further disability is compensable when the further disability is the 
proximate result of the original injury.  Id.   
On September 26, 2022, the claimant was driving a four-wheeler across a farm 
field in Iowa.  He was working for Advanced at the time, taking soil samples from 
various fields.  He proceeded at about 25 miles per hour, while reviewing a laptop for 
the location of the next sample.  He did not observe a terrace in the field until he was 
within a short distance of the edge of the terrace.  The four-wheeler went over the edge 
of the terrace and fell about 13 feet.  It landed on all four wheels, bounced with the 
claimant on it, at which time he was slightly thrown from the four-wheeler.   
The claimant felt immediate pain in his lower back.  He stowed his four-wheeler 
and was taken to the hospital.  Imaging revealed mild fracture deformities at the upper 
L1 and L2 endplates, a 10 percent compression fracture of L2, and no 
spondylolisthesis.  He was discharged from the emergency room with a 
recommendation to follow-up with neurosurgery in one month.  He was never provided 
with restrictions by the emergency room.  He also failed to follow-up with the 
recommended neurosurgery practice.   
Mr. Morgan testified that he simply went to bed following his release from the 
emergency room.  He then spent several weeks resting and recovering.  He testified to 
being in a lot of pain during this time, especially while getting out of bed, walking 
around, or standing up.   
It was not until October 20, 2022, that Mr. Morgan followed-up with another 
medical provider.  He recounted his compression fracture and told Dr. Holzer that he 

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 17 
still had lumbar and point tenderness over L1, L2, and L3.  X-rays performed during this 
visit showed no displaced fracture.  He was diagnosed with collapsed vertebra and 
vertebrogenic low back pain.  Dr. Holzer released the claimant to duty with no 
restrictions and referred him to physical therapy.   
Starting on October 27, 2022, Mr. Morgan attended a number of sessions of 
physical therapy.  He progressed through therapy with minimal complaints of pain.  He 
improved during this period.  It was not until he moved a bed frame that he reported 
pain again towards the end of his therapy.  He was discharged without restrictions.   
During this time, Mr. Morgan determined that he wanted to return to work.  He 
testified that he did not wish to return to work with Advanced.  He claimed that this was 
due to some alleged statements made by Mr. Metzger, including his alleged urging that 
Mr. Morgan allow Advanced to pay for his medical expenses in cash to avoid a workers’ 
compensation claim.  Mr. Morgan also alleged that Mr. Metzger told him to report to 
medical providers that he was not injured in the course of his work.  Mr. Morgan alleged 
that he no longer wished to work at Advanced.  Mr. Morgan confirmed that no one from 
Advanced attempted to contact him following his injury.  Because of these claimed 
issues, Mr. Morgan simply stopped showing up to work with Advanced.  He never 
informed anyone at Advanced that he was quitting, nor was he ever formally terminated 
from his employment with Advanced.   
Mr. Morgan subsequently sought employment with John Deere.  In a pre-
employment physical, he was medically cleared for employment with John Deere.  He 
worked there until an incident on March 1, 2023.  During that incident, he attempted to 
catch a falling jack-stand.  Upon catching it, he jerked his back.  He attributed this to a 
flare-up of his September 26, 2022, work injury.  Mr. Morgan alone opined that this was 
not a separate injury, but was from his original injury; however, he admitted that John 
Deere did not consider this a flare-up and paid him workers’ compensation benefits 
stemming from this incident.  He treated with John Deere Occupational Health with a 
diagnosis of a thoracic and lumbar strain.  He was provided restrictions and continued 
to work.  These restrictions were gradually progressed until he was returned to work full 
duty on March 13, 2023.   
In July of 2023, the claimant recounted another incident that he termed a flare-up 
of his injury of September 26, 2022.  He was changing a tire on his Honda Civic.  He 
lifted the tire, placed a new tire on the wheel when he felt a sudden jolt of pain in his 
lower back.  Mr. Morgan then visited with a physician assistant, to whom he recounted 
the alleged reinjury while working on his car.  He noted a referral from a chiropractor to 
neurosurgery.  Ms. Keane took Mr. Morgan off work and diagnosed him with chronic 
bilateral low back pain without sciatica.  Ms. Keane indicated that his need to be off 
work was due to an “underlying spinal traumatic injury.”  A form that she filled out made 
mention of September 26, 2022, but it is unclear as to the context of this mention.   
John Deere provided certain restrictions, and placed Mr. Morgan off work.  He 
saw Ms. Keane again on October 4, 2023, with normal range of motion and no 
tenderness to examination.  Ms. Keane again diagnosed Mr. Morgan with chronic low 

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 18 
back pain without sciatica.  She allowed the claimant to return to work with certain 
restrictions.   
Ms. Keane saw Mr. Morgan again in November of 2023.  She noted that the 
claimant needed an MRI to rule out any abnormality that may be contributing to his pain 
despite the improvement seen on x-ray studies.  The MRI was done on December 1, 
2023.  It showed no remaining fractures, and minimal degenerative changes.   
At the time of the hearing, Mr. Morgan testified to difficulties with standing or 
sitting for long periods of time.  He also had difficulty lifting heavy items.  He had 
minimal to no issues with household tasks, though he experienced pain while he 
performed them.  He described a generalized feeling of discomfort or abnormality in his 
lower back.    
At the arrangement of Mr. Morgan’s counsel, he had an IME with Dr. Rondinelli in 
November of 2023.  Dr. Rondinelli reviewed some of the claimant’s medical history.  Mr. 
Morgan claimed to tell Dr. Rondinelli about his alleged flare-ups; however, Dr. 
Rondinelli’s report is silent as to these issues.  Dr. Rondinelli opined that Mr. Morgan 
sustained a buckle fracture or superior endplate deformity of the L1 vertebra with mild 
compression, a mild depressed superior endplate fracture at L2 with an approximate 10 
percent loss of vertebral height, and “possible neuropathic pain syndrome, persisting 
cerebrogenic back pain, and mild issues potentially affecting his bowel control.”  Dr. 
Rondinelli opined further that these diagnoses were consistent with the described 
mechanism of injury of vertical loading that occurred during the incident.  Dr. Rondinelli 
did not offer any causal opinion as to the claimant’s ongoing pain issues.  He 
recommended an MRI to rule out certain issues.  He concluded that the claimant had 
not achieved MMI.  He also provided a provisional impairment rating and provided the 
claimant with certain proposed restrictions.   
As noted, the parties dispute whether the claimant’s injuries arose out of, and in 
the course of his employment with Advanced.  There is little question that the claimant’s 
fractures in his lower back arose out of, and in the course of his employment with 
Advanced.  He was working, sampling soil in a field, when the four-wheeler that he 
operated fell off of a 13-foot terrace.  The result was compression fractures to his L1 
and L2 vertebra.  While he may have been operating his four-wheeler in an imprudent 
manner, the claimant’s fractures arose out of his employment.   
The question becomes whether the claimant’s subsequent “flare-ups” arose out 
of and in the course of his employment with Advanced.  The claimant failed to provide 
adequate evidence that these “flare-ups” were not new injuries and instead arose out of 
and in the course of his employment with Advanced as “flare-ups” of his fractures.  The 
claimant was fully capable of working following his full duty release from physical 
therapy.  He had a full duty release to work.  He sought no medical care for a time.  He 
then experienced a subsequent injury in the form of a low back strain while working at 
John Deere.  This appears to have been a new injury, as no doctor opined in a 
convincing manner that this was related back to the original September 26, 2022, injury.  
The claimant may point to Dr. Rondinelli’s report in support of the notion that this “flare-

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 19 
up” was related to the original injury.  The problem with this assertion is that Dr. 
Rondinelli makes no mention of this incident in his report.  He also reviewed no medical 
records related to the claimant’s alleged ongoing issues.  Therefore, his opinion as it 
relates to this issue is fatally flawed.  I find that the claimant failed to carry his burden to 
prove that the first subsequent flare-up arose out of and in the course of his 
employment or as a result of his September 26, 2022, work injury.  Instead, it appears 
that the claimant sustained a separate and distinct injury in the form of a thoracic and 
lumbar strain caused by his work with John Deere. 
The next issue is whether the claimant’s July of 2023, “flare-up” arose out of, and 
in the course of his employment as a result of the September 26, 2022, work incident.  
Again, the evidence is not sufficient to support the claimant’s contention.  He is the sole 
person who attributed this “flare-up” to his September 26, 2022, work injury.  Dr. 
Rondinelli’s opinions are again fatally flawed, as they are silent as to this alleged “flare-
up.”  The additional records contain a dearth of information relating the “flare-up” to the 
original September 26, 2022, work injury.  This appears to have been a separate and 
distinct personal injury incurred in the process of performing maintenance on his 
vehicle.   
Considering I found the claimant’s March of 2023 and July of 2023 “flare-ups” did 
not arise out of, and in the course of his employment with Advanced, I do not need to 
determine whether they were a cause of temporary and/or permanent disability.   
The claimant alleged that he was temporarily disabled from September 26, 2022, 
to November 28, 2022.  It would seem reasonable that the claimant would be off work 
during this time, as he sustained fractures to his lower back.  However, the medical 
records are silent as to any restrictions promulgated from the emergency room 
physicians to the claimant.  Mr. Morgan was discharged with instructions to follow-up 
with a neurosurgeon in one month.  He failed to schedule or proceed with a 
neurosurgical follow-up.  It was not until October 20, 2022, that the claimant sought 
follow-up care, which was with Dr. Holzer at a walk-in clinic.  She declared him fit for 
duty without restrictions at that time but ordered physical therapy.   
Dr. Rondinelli’s opinions remain fatally flawed.  He made these opinions without 
knowing the full picture of Mr. Morgan’s medical care as he lacked all the records 
regarding the claimant’s treatment.  He also made no mention of the previously 
discussed “flare-ups” in his report.  This lack of information eviscerates the credibility of 
Dr. Rondinelli’s opinions.   
The claimant makes unsubstantiated claims that Advanced attempted to engage 
in some sort of fraud-adjacent scheme to pay the claimant out of pocket for his workers’ 
compensation benefits or medical expenses.  As a result of this alleged scheme, Mr. 
Morgan asserted a discomfort with returning to employment with the defendant-
employer.  However, Mr. Morgan never expressly quit, nor was he ever fired by the 
defendant-employer.   

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 20 
Due to a lack of evidence in the record, the claimant failed to carry his burden of 
proof that the September 26, 2022, work injury was a cause of temporary disability.   
Finally, I turn to the claimant’s allegations that his September 26, 2022, injury 
was a cause of permanent disability.  As previously noted, Dr. Rondinelli is the only 
provider who has opined that the claimant may have permanent impairment as a result 
of the September 26, 2022, injury.  Dr. Rondinelli’s opinions are unrebutted.  However, 
Dr. Rondinelli’s opinions are not based upon a complete review of the record.  He 
lacked vital information, especially as it pertained to the claimant’s subsequent injuries 
that were not related to his work with Advanced.  He then made opinions as to the 
claimant’s ongoing issues without records related to these injuries.  It is also unclear 
whether he was actually told about these issues by Mr. Morgan as the doctor made no 
mention of them in his report.  Additionally, the claimant was cleared to work with no 
restrictions by both Dr. Holzer, a physical therapist and a medical examiner at John 
Deere.  This indicates a lack of permanent disability when considering the claimant’s 
subsequent unrelated incidents in March of 2023 and July of 2023.  Therefore, I find 
that the claimant has failed to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that his 
September 26, 2022, work injury resulted in permanent impairment to his body as a 
whole.   
Payment of Medical Expenses 
The claimant requests that the undersigned order the defendants to reimburse 
the claimant for a number of medical bills, as outlined in Claimant’s Exhibit 2.   
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers’ compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening, October 1975).   
Pursuant to Iowa Code 85.27, claimant is entitled to payment of reasonable 
medical expenses incurred for treatment of a work injury.  Claimant is entitled to an 
order of reimbursement if he/she has paid those expenses.  Otherwise, claimant is 
entitled only to an order directing the responsible defendants to make such payments 
directly to the provider.  See Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988).   
In cases where the employer’s medical plan covers the medical expenses, 
claimant is entitled to an order of reimbursement only if he has paid treatment costs; 
otherwise, the defendants are ordered to make payments directly to the provider.  See 
Krohn, 420 N.W.2d at 463.  Where medical payments are made from a plan to which 
the employer did not contribute, the claimant is entitled to a direct payment.  Midwest 
Ambulance Service v. Ruud, 754 N.W.2d 860, 867-68 (Iowa 2008) (“We therefore hold 
that the commissioner did not err in ordering direct payment to the claimant for past 

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 21 
medical expenses paid through insurance coverage obtained by the claimant 
independent of any employer contribution.”).  See also Carl A. Nelson & Co. v. Sloan, 
873 N.W.2d 552 (Iowa App. 2015)(Table) 2015 WL 7574232 15-0323.   
The employee has the burden of proof to show medical charges are reasonable 
and necessary and must produce evidence to that effect.  Poindexter v. Grant’s Carpet 
Service, I Iowa Industrial Commissioner Decisions, No. 1, at 195 (1984); McClellon v. 
Iowa S. Util., 91-92, IAWC, 266-272 (App. 1992).    
The employee has the burden of proof in showing that treatment is related to the 
injury.  Auxier v. Woodward State Hospital-School, 266 N.W.2d 139 (Iowa 1978), 
Watson v. Hanes Motor Company , No. 1 Industrial Comm’r Report 356, 358 (1980) 
(claimant failed to prove medical charges were related to the injury where medical 
records contained nothing related to that injury)  See also Bass v. Veith Construction 
Corp., File No 5044438 (App. May 27, 2016) (Claimant failed to prove causal 
connection between injury and claimed medical expenses); Becirevic v. Trinity Health, 
File No. 5063498 (Arb. December 28, 2018) (Claimant failed to recover on unsupported 
medical bills). 
Nothing in Iowa Code section 85.27 prohibits an injured employee from selecting 
his or her own medical care at his or her own expense following an injury.  Bell Bros. 
Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 205 (Iowa 2010).  In order to 
recover the reasonable expenses of the care, the employee must still prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that unauthorized care was reasonable and beneficial.  
Id.  The Court in Bell Bros. concluded that unauthorized medical care is beneficial if it 
provides a “more favorable medical outcome than would likely have been achieved by 
the care authorized by the employer.”  Id.  Iowa Code section 85.27(4) also allows for a 
claimant to choose their own care at the employer’s expense in the event of an 
emergency, provided an agent for the employer cannot be immediately reached.   
The claimant sustained a compensable injury; however, the claimant did not 
prove an entitlement to temporary or permanent disability benefits.  Nevertheless, the 
initial September 26, 2022, injury was compensable.  Therefore, it is appropriate for the 
defendants to reimburse the claimant, or appropriate providers for the billing from 
MercyOne, Diagnostic Imaging Associates, ATI, and DoctorsNow.  However, once the 
claimant was declared fit for work the compensability ended.  Accordingly, I decline to 
order the defendants to reimburse the claimant or provider for the December 1, 2023, 
MRI, as this is related to one of the claimant’s subsequent injuries.   
IME Reimbursement Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39 
The claimant seeks reimbursement for an IME performed by Dr. Rondinelli, 
amounting to three thousand three hundred and 00/100 dollars ($3,300.00).   
Iowa Code 85.39(2) states:   
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 22 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and upon 
delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its insurance 
carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, and reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses incurred for the examination.     
. . .    
An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined to be compensable under this 
chapter or chapter 85A or 85B.  An employer is not liable for the cost of 
such an examination if the injury for which the employee is being examined 
is determined not to be a compensable injury.  A determination of the 
reasonableness of a fee for an examination made pursuant to this 
subsection shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider 
to perform an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is 
conducted.     
Iowa Code section 85.39(2).     
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant’s 
independent medical examination.  The claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  An opinion finding 
a lack of causation is tantamount to a zero percent impairment rating.  Kern v. Fenchel, 
Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 2021 WL 3890603 (Iowa App. 2021).     
It is well accepted Iowa law that a claimant is only entitled to reimbursement for 
one IME pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.  Larson Mfg. Co. v. Thorson, 763 
N.W.2d 842, 861 (Iowa 2009).   
No provider retained by the defendants ever opined as to the claimant’s alleged 
permanent disability or causation.  Therefore, the prerequisites for reimbursement 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39(2) were not met.  The claimant is not entitled to 
reimbursement for Dr. Rondinelli’s IME.   
Costs 
The claimant seeks an assessment of costs as listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 3.  
Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner hearing the 
case.  See 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33; Iowa Code section 10A.328.  876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 4.33(6) provides:  
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand 
reporter or presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential 
depositions, (2) transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service 

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 23 
of the original notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as 
provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of 
doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs 
do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 
622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including 
convenience fees incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) 
costs of persons reviewing health service disputes.   
Pursuant to the holding in Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 
867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015), only the report of an IME physician, and not the 
examination itself, can be taxed as a cost according to 876 IAC 4.33(6).  The Iowa 
Supreme Court reasoned, “a physician’s report becomes a cost incurred in a hearing 
because it is used as evidence in lieu of the doctor’s testimony,” while “[t]he underlying 
medical expenses associated with the examination do not become costs of a report 
needed for a hearing, just as they do not become costs of the testimony or deposition.”  
Id.  (noting additionally that “[i]n the context of the assessment of costs, the expenses of 
the underlying medical treatment and examination are not part of the costs of the report 
or deposition”).  The commissioner has found this rationale applicable to expenses 
incurred by vocational experts.  See  Kirkendall v. Cargill Meat Solutions Corp., File No. 
5055494 (App. December 17, 2018); Voshell v. Compass Group, USA, Inc., File No. 
5056857 (App. September 27, 2019).   
The claimant seeks to recover the costs of the filing fee and Dr. Rondinelli’s IME 
report.  The claimant did not prevail on the pertinent issues.  Dr. Rondinelli’s report was 
deeply flawed and incomplete.  Based upon my discretion, I decline to award the 
claimant any costs.   
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
That the defendants failed to prove their affirmative defense. 
That the claimant sustained an injury on September 26, 2022, that arose out of, 
and in the course of his employment with the defendant-employer.   
That the claimant’s injury was not a cause of temporary disability. 
That the claimant’s injury was not a cause of permanent disability. 
That the defendants shall reimburse the claimant, and or his providers, for certain 
medical expenses. 
That the claimant shall take nothing further. 

MORGAN V. ADVANCED CROP MANAGEMENT, INC. 
Page 24 
That the defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by 
this agency pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 3.1(2) and 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 11.7.   
Signed and filed this ___8th _ day of May, 2024. 
 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Mark Hedberg 
 
(via WCES) 
Rene Charles Lapierre 
(via WCES) 
Julia Catherine Adams 
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
   ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
