Case Number: 1656402.03
Case Title:  KLEIN, BRIAN V. WHIRLPOOL CORPORATION
Doc Type:    Decision - Court of Appeals
Source:      Klein - COA Decision.PDF
========================================================================

 
 
1 
 
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF IOWA 
_______________ 
No. 25-0458 
Filed January 7, 2026 
_______________ 
Brian Dale Klein, 
Petitioner–Appellant, 
 
v. 
 
Whirlpool Corporation, 
Respondent–Appellee. 
_______________ 
Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Iowa County, 
The Honorable Lars G. Anderson, Judge. 
_______________ 
AFFIRMED 
_______________ 
Thomas M. Wertz (argued), and Mindi M. Vervaecke of Wertz Law Firm, 
Cedar Rapids, attorneys for appellant. 
 
Kent M. Smith (argued) of Smith Mills Law P.C., West Des Moines, 
attorney for appellee. 
_______________ 
Heard at oral argument 
by Greer, P.J., and Schumacher and Ahlers, JJ.  
Opinion by Schumacher, J. 
 
1 of 15
ELECTRONICALLY FILED            JAN 07, 2026            CLERK OF SUPREME COURT
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2026-Jan-16  10:30:36     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

 
 
2 
 
SCHUMACHER, Judge. 
An injured claimant, Brian Klein, appeals, asserting the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner improperly used agency discretion and judicial 
notice in determining the impairment rating for his shoulder to be nine 
percent, as opposed to fifteen percent as advocated by a medical expert.  
Upon our review, we affirm. 
I. 
Background Facts & Proceedings 
While working at Whirlpool Corporation (Whirlpool), Klein was 
feeding tubing through a machine and injured his right shoulder when 
attempting to pry the tubing.  Klein had been working at Whirlpool for thirty-
five years.  He went to the University of Iowa Hospitals & Clinics for an 
evaluation on his shoulder, which was conducted by Dr. Matthew Bollier. 
Dr. Bollier determined that the incident at Whirlpool was a significant 
factor which aggravated or worsened Klein’s previous shoulder condition and 
recommended surgery.  Dr. Bollier performed the surgery which included 
arthroscopy, SLAP repair, extensive debridement, distal clavicle excision, 
subpectoral biceps tenodesis, and decompression.  Several months later, 
Klein received a corticosteroid injection.  At a follow-up appointment, Klein 
reported to Dr. Bollier that the injection reduced his everyday pain but he 
continued to experience tenderness and anterior pain.  Klein also reported 
that his shoulder felt weak and he could not lift two and one-half pound boxes 
above his shoulders in physical therapy. 
Dr. Bollier informed Klein that he could use his shoulder freely as he 
was not causing any new damage to it and that Klein had achieved maximum 
improvement.  Dr. Bollier stated that Klein had sustained a four percent 
upper extremity impairment.   
2 of 15

 
 
3 
 
Klein then underwent a functional capacity evaluation with Greg 
Munson, PT, who determined Klein could do medium duty work below 
shoulder level and light duty work above shoulder level.  Dr. Bollier reviewed 
the evaluation report and recommended permanent work restrictions. 
In preparation for his workers’ compensation claim, Klein underwent 
an independent medical evaluation with Dr. Mark Taylor who found that 
Klein had an upper extremity impairment of fifteen percent due to his right 
shoulder.  The fifteen percent was attributed to six percent impairment to 
range of motion and ten percent because of distal clavicle excision.  In 
performing this evaluation, Dr. Taylor used Table 16-27 of the American 
Medical Association (AMA) Guides (Guides) for the distal clavicle excision. 
Klein underwent another independent medical evaluation with 
Dr. Robert Broghammer, who determined Klein had sustained only a two-
percent upper extremity impairment due to range of motion.  Likewise, 
Dr. Broghammer used the Guides for the finding, with this impairment rating 
solely based on range of motion loss.   
Following an arbitration hearing, the deputy commissioner issued a 
decision which weighed the testimony of medical experts, including 
Dr. Taylor, and considered the parties’ legal arguments:   
Dr. Taylor assigned a 6 percent impairment to the right upper 
extremity based on the loss of range of motion and an additional 10 percent 
for the distal clavicle excision. Combined, the two impairments result in a 
15 percent impairment. 
[Whirlpool] argues the issue regarding the impairment value of the 
distal clavicle excision should be governed by the [agency] case of Jay v. 
Archer Skid Loader Service, [Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’n] 
No. 19003586.01, [2022 WL 17078713 (Aug. 23, 2022) (affirmed by Jay v. 
Archer Skid Loader Serv., LLC, Case No. CVCV064318 (Iowa Polk Cnty. 
Dist. Ct. May 22, 2023))].  
3 of 15

 
 
4 
 
 
In Jay, the appropriate rating for a distal clavicle excision applies a 
25 per[cent] modifier.  [Klein] argues that Jay is not controlling because 
the use of the modifier was based on the opinion of Dr. Kuhnlein in another 
agency decision and that if there is a disagreement in medical 
determination pursuant to the Guides, the opinion of one side of the 
dispute cannot become agency precedent.  Applying the modifier, argues 
[Klein], is tantamount to using agency expertise which is prohibited 
according to Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(x) [(2023)]. 
 
In reviewing the Jay decision, the District Court addressed this 
argument.  The injured worker in Jay argued that the Commissioner acted 
outside the scope of his authority by issuing his own impairment rating 
applying the modifier instead of adopting one offered by an expert.  [Klein] 
submits that Dr. Taylor’s uncontroverted opinion cannot be superseded or 
substituted by the agency’s “judgment.”  However, the District Court in 
Jay directs the agency to do exactly that.  If an expert opinion is flawed, it 
is the agency’s duty to calculate the ratings in conformance with the AMA 
guidelines and to do otherwise would controvert the plain meaning of Iowa 
Code § 85.34(2)(x).   
 
While Dr. Taylor’s opinion is given more weight in this case, the 
appropriate impairment rating must include a 25 percent modifier.  Thus, 
the impairment is 2.5 plus 6 percent.  In the combined chart, this is 
9 percent as a rating must be a whole number per the Guides. 
(Citations to the record omitted.) 
  
Following the deputy commissioner’s ruling, Klein filed a motion for 
rehearing while each party appealed the arbitration decision.  The 
commissioner then entered an appeal decision that affirmed the deputy’s 
arbitration findings.  Included within the appeal decision was an analysis of 
Klein’s assertion that “utilization of the modifier specified by the AMA 
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, is use of 
agency expertise”: 
Pursuant to statute and administrative rule, this agency is required to 
utilize the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, to determine functional disability 
of an injured worker in a scheduled member injury case such as this.  
4 of 15

 
 
5 
 
Reading the provisions of the AMA Guides and applying those provisions 
is not utilization of agency expertise.  It is akin to an application of the law 
to the facts of the case. 
[Klein] asserts that this agency must accept either the impairment rating 
offered by his evaluator, or the impairment rating urged by [Whirlpool], 
essentially without reference to the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  [Klein]’s 
argument or urged approach requires this agency to read the competing 
impairment ratings offered without context and without determining their 
compliance with the AMA Guides, which were specifically incorporated by 
statute and administrative rule. 
The commissioner also analyzed Klein’s argument that the deputy 
improperly utilized judicial notice of the Guides in the arbitration decision 
without providing the required notice to the parties: 
[T]he Iowa legislature specifically adopted the AMA Guides as a legal basis 
for award of permanent functional impairment.  This agency enacted an 
administrative rule adopting the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, as the binding 
standard for determining the extent of permanent functional impairment 
in scheduled member cases such as this case. 
 
Courts and administrative agencies are not required to give notice 
of an intention to follow prior precedent . . . [or] statutory provisions or 
properly enacted administrative rules.  By their very nature, statutes and 
administrative rules are duly enacted and parties should be aware that this 
agency would be following such enacted laws and rules. 
 
. . . .  [O]fficial notice is required if factual findings are to be made 
based on something outside of the evidentiary record.  Official notice is not 
required under Iowa Code section 17A.14(4) to utilize and apply binding 
legal standards to the facts of this case. 
 
. . . . 
 
[Klein]’s argument essentially flips the statutory provision of Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(x) on its head and seeks to preclude this agency 
from actually reading and applying the governing standards outlined in the 
AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, as adopted by Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) 
and [Iowa Administrative Code rule 876–2.4].  Therefore, I reject 
claimant’s legal challenge. . . . 
5 of 15

 
 
6 
 
After this appeal decision by the commissioner, Klein filed a motion 
for rehearing, asserting the agency went further than the standards of the 
Guides and used agency expertise to interpret those standards, in violation of 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x).  The commissioner concluded that if the 
agency was prohibited from reviewing and interpreting the Guides, there 
would be no objective standard with which a decision could be made and 
would require the decision to be based on a selected medical opinion, absent 
a procedure to determine accuracy.  The commissioner accordingly affirmed 
the appeal decision.  Klein then petitioned for judicial review in district court. 
The district court found that section 85.34(2)(x) is ambiguous, as it 
requires the use of the Guides but does not explicitly state who is to interpret 
the Guides.  In promoting the objectives of the statute, the court concluded 
“[t]he statute clearly requires that the AMA Guides be the polestar of the 
decision, and it is in the best interest of workers to have predictable, 
consistent results for comparable injuries.”  The court also found that it was 
not the legislature’s intention to preclude the commission from “inspecting 
modifiers and correcting them if necessary,” and this practice does not 
qualify as prohibited usage of agency expertise.   
As to the issue of judicial notice of the Guides, the district court 
determined the deputy commissioner did not utilize official notice of the 
medical findings in the Jay decision.  Instead, the deputy relied on the AMA 
Guides and not the medical findings in the Jay case.  The court found that the 
reference to Jay was to show it was acceptable to use the twenty-five percent 
modifier and that it is appropriate to utilize the Guides “if a physician fails to 
apply the standard modifier for a distal clavicle excision.” 
Lastly, the court found that statutory rules regarding judicial notice 
“are only applicable to adjudicative facts, not legislative or otherwise non-
6 of 15

 
 
7 
 
adjudicative facts,” citing Rhoades v. State, 848 N.W.2d 22, 31 (Iowa 2014).  
The district court clarified that “[t]he AMA Guides are non-adjudicative in 
nature and are not susceptible to these rules” and found the deputy 
commissioner’s utilization of the Guides was not improper. 
II. 
Discussion  
We review decisions by the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commission according to Iowa Code section 17A.19.  Section 17A.19(10) 
permits relief from agency decisions which are unreasonable, arbitrary, 
capricious, or otherwise an abuse of discretion.  Arbor Ct. Healthcare, LLC v. 
Iowa Dep’t of Health & Hum. Servs., No. 24-0697, 2025 WL 403639, at *3 
(Iowa Ct. App. Feb. 5, 2025).  “The petitioner challenging agency action has 
the burden of proving the invalidity [of the action] or prejudice asserted.”  
Banilla Games, Inc. v. Iowa Dep’t of Inspections and Appeals, 919 N.W.2d 6, 11 
(Iowa 2018) (citing Iowa Code § 17A.19(8)(a)).   
When we review an agency’s interpretation of a statute, we first 
determine whether the agency has been vested with interpretive authority.  
See P.M. Lattner Mfg. Co. v. Rife, 2 N.W.3d 859, 865 (Iowa 2024).  “If the 
legislature has clearly vested an agency with interpretive authority over a 
provision of law, we defer to the agency’s interpretation.”  Bridgestone 
Americas, Inc. v. Anderson, 4 N.W.3d 676, 681–82 (Iowa 2024).  Otherwise, if 
the legislature didn’t clearly vest the agency with interpretive authority over 
the statute at issue, we review the agency’s decision for the correction of 
errors at law.  Id. at 682. 
7 of 15

 
 
8 
 
(a) Whether the Commissioner’s Decision is an Error at Law Due 
to Reliance on the AMA Guides  
Our analysis begins with Iowa Code section 85.34.  The relevant 
portion states, “the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
can be determined by use of the guides to the evaluation of permanent 
impairment, published by the American medical association, as adopted by 
the workers’ compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A.”  
Iowa Code § 85.34(2).  Section 85.34(2)(x) goes on to state:  
[W]hen determining functional disability . . . , the extent of loss or 
percentage of permanent impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing 
the guides . . . published by the American medical association . . . .  Lay 
testimony or agency expertise shall not be utilized in determining loss or 
percentage of permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” through 
“u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not loss 
of earning capacity.   
(Emphasis added.) 
Klein argues that the agency’s reliance on the Guides is an 
impermissible interpretation based upon agency expertise, as prohibited by 
section 85.34(2)(x), and rather the agency is bound by the expert physician 
opinion.  Whirlpool asserts that because the Guides are incorporated by 
administrative rule and statute, their employment by the agency is not 
prohibited. 
As to the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commission, our courts have 
determined its commissioners do not possess interpretive authority over 
chapter 85.  Bridgestone Americas, Inc., 4 N.W.3d at 682.  So we must then 
interpret section 85.34(2)(x) to determine the legislative intent behind the 
language “shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides.”  See Bryant v. 
8 of 15

 
 
9 
 
State, No. 18-1270, 2019 WL 1953518, at *1 (Iowa Ct. App. May 1, 2019).  We 
adhere to the following principles of statutory interpretation: 
The purpose of statutory interpretation is to determine the legislature’s 
intent.  We give words their ordinary and common meaning by considering 
the context within which they are used, absent a statutory definition or an 
established meaning in the law.  We also consider the legislative history of 
a statute, including prior enactments, when ascertaining legislative intent. 
When we interpret a statute, we assess the statute in its entirety, not just 
isolated words or phrases.  We may not extend, enlarge, or otherwise 
change the meaning of a statute under the guise of construction. 
Id. (quoting Willard v. State, 983 N.W.2d 52, 60–61 (Iowa 2017)).  Also, when 
interpreting a statute to find legislative intent, we must first decide whether 
the statute is ambiguous.  Colwell v. Iowa Dep’t of Human Servs., 923 
N.W.2d 225, 232 (Iowa 2019).  “A statute is ambiguous if reasonable minds 
could disagree as to its meaning.  Ambiguity may arise from either the 
meaning of particular words or the general scope and meaning of a statute.”  
Id. (citations omitted). 
The language of section 85.34(2)(x) does not specifically address who 
must interpret the Guides.  As we are not at liberty to supplement additional 
statutory requirements by deviating from the statute’s plain language, we 
agree with the district court that section 85.34(2)(x) is ambiguous.  See 
Robinson v. Cent. Power Coop., 21 N.W.3d 842, 851 (Iowa 2025).  So, “[w]e 
construe [the] statute ‘liberally with a view to promoting its objects and 
assisting the parties in obtaining justice.’”  State v. Haglin, No. 17-0447, 2018 
WL 2084840, at *2 (Iowa Ct. App. May 2, 2018) (citation omitted).  Our 
courts have found that “[t]he primary purpose of the workers’ compensation 
statute is to benefit the worker and [their] dependents, insofar as statutory 
requirements permit.”  Mid Am. Constr. LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838, 850 
(Iowa 2024) (citation omitted).   
9 of 15

 
 
10 
 
The plain language of section 85.34(2)(x) indicates that use of the 
AMA Guides is meant to be the basis of qualifying the severity of 
impairments, providing uniform results for similar injuries.  As section 
85.34(2)(x) reads, we agree with the district court that “there is no distinction 
between commissioners and physicians interpreting the AMA Guides.”  Also, 
nothing in the plain language of the statute precludes the commissioner from 
reviewing an expert’s choice of Guides modifiers and verifying them.  To hold 
otherwise would allow experts to vary in their application of modifiers, 
leading to inconsistent or absurd results, which we strive to avoid.  See Borst 
Bros. Constr., Inc. v. Fin. of Am. Com., LLC, 975 N.W.2d 690, 700 (Iowa 2022).   
This is not to say that a commissioner may completely substitute an 
expert’s medical opinion with their own prohibited expertise.  See Severin v. 
Second Inj. Fund, File No. 1521101.01, 2021 WL 4709717, at *5–6 (Iowa 
Workers’ Comp. Comm’n Oct. 4, 2021) (rejecting application of Table 17-31 
of the Guides, holding it did not apply to claimant’s injury when there was 
“no other expert has opined” to that effect and decision was not based on 
evaluation of a factual or credibility finding).  Although a “commissioner may 
accept or reject [an] expert opinion in whole or in part,” it cannot do so by 
relying on the agency’s own expertise and instead must weigh the expert’s 
credibility and factual determinations.  See Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care Ctr., 
780 N.W.2d 549, 560 (Iowa 2010) (citation omitted).  Here, the 
Commissioner simply corrected Dr. Taylor’s expert opinion to conform with 
the Guides and did not substitute the opinion with agency expertise.   
Klein argues that the commission and the district court improperly 
relied upon Jay as agency precedent in applying the twenty-five percent 
modifier to the distal clavicle excision impairment rating provided by 
10 of 15

 
 
11 
 
Dr. Taylor.  Klein asserts that the Commission’s reliance on the Jay decision 
as precedent is prohibited usage of agency expertise.   
We agree with the district court that the deputy commissioner’s 
reliance on Jay “was to illustrate the regular use of the 25 percent modifier, 
[and] that she is enabled to read the AMA Guides if a physician fails to apply 
the standard modifier for a distal clavicle excision.”1  As stated above, the 
commissioner has discretion to reject or accept an expert’s opinion “in whole 
or in part,” and section 85.34(2)(x) requires the utilization of the Guides to 
ensure consistent results for claimants.  See Schutjer, 780 N.W.2d at 560.  We 
find no error in the deputy commissioner’s rejection of Dr. Taylor’s 
impairment rating and application of the Guides as required by statute.  See 
Barry v. John Deere Dubuque Works of Deere & Co., No. 22-1000, 2023 
WL 3612394, at *3 (Iowa Ct. App. May 24, 2023) (holding the commissioner, 
facing two competing expert opinions, one which correctly applied the 
Guides, did not abuse discretion by relying on the Guides “when weighing 
witness credibility”). 
(b) Whether the Commissioner Improperly Utilized Judicial 
Notice in Applying the AMA Guides’ Multiplier 
Klein asserts that the deputy commissioner’s reliance on the Guides 
and Jay in applying a twenty-five percent multiplier to Dr. Taylor’s 
impairment rating was improper use of judicial notice.  Klein argues it was 
application of a fact not generally known and not capable of verification.  
Concerning judicial notice, the relevant statute states: 
 
1 In Jay, the claimant’s physicians had differing opinions on whether distal clavicle 
excisions should be included within the Guides, and the Commission responded by 
applying instructions within the Guides. 
11 of 15

 
 
12 
 
Official notice may be taken of all facts of which judicial notice may be 
taken and of other facts within the specialized knowledge of the agency.  
Parties shall be notified at the earliest practicable time, either before or 
during the hearing, or by reference in preliminary reports, preliminary 
decisions or otherwise, of the facts proposed to be noticed and their 
source, including any staff memoranda or data, and the parties shall be 
afforded an opportunity to contest such facts before the decision is 
announced unless the agency determines as part of the record or decision 
that fairness to the parties does not require an opportunity to contest such 
facts.   
Iowa Code § 17A.14(4).  The facts which may be judicially noticed are as 
follows: 
 
a. Scope.  This rule governs judicial notice of an adjudicative fact 
only, not a legislative fact. 
 
b. Kinds of facts that may be judicially noticed.  The court may 
judicially notice a fact that is not subject to reasonable dispute because it: 
 
 
(1) Is generally known within the trial court’s territorial 
 
jurisdiction; or 
 
 
(2) Can be accurately and readily determined from 
 
sources whose accuracy cannot reasonably be questioned. 
Iowa R. Civ. P. 5.201.  Adjudicative facts are “controlling or operative fact[s], 
rather than a background fact; a fact that concerns the parties to a judicial or 
administrative proceeding and that helps the court or agency determine how 
the law applies to those parties.”  Rhoades, 848 N.W.2d at 31 (citation 
omitted).   
We agree with the district court that the above rules regarding judicial 
notice apply only to adjudicative facts, of which the Guides and the Jay 
decision do not qualify.  The Iowa legislature adopted section 85.34(2)(x) and 
12 of 15

 
 
13 
 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876-2.42 as the legal basis for determinations 
concerning permanent functional impairment.  The utilization of the Guides 
and reference to previous agency decisions are not factual issues to which 
section 17A.14(4) applies.  See Brummer v. Iowa Dep’t of Corr., 661 
N.W.2d 167, 
172 
(Iowa 
2003) 
(describing 
adjudicative 
facts 
as 
“individualized facts peculiar to the parties, which ordinarily answer the 
questions of who did what, where, when, how, why, with what motive or 
intent” (cleaned up)).  Instead, it should be expected that the Commission 
would adhere to statutory requirements and guidance from previous 
decisions to weigh the evidence, comparable to our courts and other 
administrative agencies.  See Stone Container Corp. v. Castle, 657 N.W.2d 485, 
490 (Iowa 2003) (“The common meaning of statutory terms is not a matter 
upon which a party would offer formal proof and, consequently, is not a fact 
of which an agency must take official notice within the contemplation of 
section 17A.14(4).”); Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(h) (noting the court can 
reverse an agency decision if it finds the “substantial rights of the person 
seeking judicial relief have been prejudiced” because of “[a]ction other than 
a rule that is inconsistent with the agency’s prior practice or precedents”).   
 
 
 
2 Iowa Administrative Code rule 876-2.4 provides in part: 
The Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition, published by the [AMA] are adopted for determining the extent of 
loss or percentage of impairment for permanent partial disabilities and 
payment of weekly compensation for permanent partial scheduled injuries 
under Iowa Code section 85.34(2) not involving a determination of 
reduction in an employee’s earning capacity.  
13 of 15

 
 
14 
 
Accordingly, we affirm for the reasons stated above. 
AFFIRMED.          
14 of 15

State of Iowa Courts
Case Number
Case Title
25-0458
Klein v. Whirlpool Corporation
Electronically signed on 2026-01-07 08:15:45
15 of 15
