Case Number: 22700947.02
Case Title:  MCGEE, JASEN V. CALACCI CONSTRUCTION CO. INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      McGee Jasen - 22700947.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JASEN MCGEE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                      File No. 22700947.02 
CALACCI CONSTRUCTION CO., 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
MIDWEST BUILDERS CASUALTY 
  : 
MUTUAL COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :        Head Note No. 1100, 1108, 1802, 2800 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Jasen McGee, filed a petition for arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from Calacci Construction Co., employer, and Midwest Builders 
Casualty Mutual Company, insurance carrier.  The claimant was represented by Casey 
Steadman.  The defendants were represented by Jessica Voelker. 
The matter came on for hearing on December 1, 2023, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom.  The record in 
the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 3; Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 7; and 
Defense exhibits A through F.  The claimant testified at hearing, in addition to Shawn 
Behrends, Christina Belew, Dustin Johnson and Shawn Ford.  Darcy Kriens served as 
the court reporter.  The matter was fully submitted on January 29, 2024. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and the course of his 
employment on or about March 23, 2021. 
2. Whether the alleged work injury is a cause of temporary disability. 
3. Whether the claimant provided notice under Iowa Code section 85.23. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Jun-17  15:26:22     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MCGEE V. CALACCI CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 2 
 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to a running award of healing period benefits. 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibits 4 and 5. 
6. Whether the claimant is entitled to IME expenses. 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to a penalty for unreasonably denied payments. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1.  The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
2. While defendants deny responsibility for any healing period benefits, the 
parties do stipulate that if the defendant(s) are liable for the alleged injury, 
claimant is entitled to benefits for this period of time [January 27, 2022, 
through June 13, 2023; Running Award Beginning November 1, 2023]. 
3. The claim is not ripe for permanency. 
4. The elements comprising the weekly rate of compensation are stipulated and 
the parties contend the appropriate rate is $665.81 per week. 
5. Credit is not an issue in the case. 
6. Affirmative defenses have been waived other than notice as set forth above. 
7. The parties further stipulate that if the claim is found compensable treatment 
will continue with the present providers and Rock Valley Physical Therapy 
and University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Jason McGee was 49 years old as of the date of hearing.  He testified 
live and under oath at the video hearing.  I find his testimony to be generally credible.  
Mr. McGee was certainly not a sophisticated witness; however, his answers were 
usually short and responsive.  He did appear somewhat nervous at times; however, this 
is fairly normal.  His answers were consistent with other credible evidence in the record.   
Mr. McGee completed the 10th grade and eventually earned his GED in 2001.  
He worked in various jobs including truck tank washing, assembly and machine 
operator.  He was incarcerated for nearly six years because of OWI charges.  He 
obtained a certification in construction work in 2015, at which time he became a 
member of Laborers Local 43, in Cedar Rapids, Iowa.  He was qualified as a 
journeyman.  The evidence in the file reflects that Mr. McGee had no preexisting 

MCGEE V. CALACCI CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 3 
 
medical issues in his shoulder. 
Mr. McGee obtained his jobs through Local 43.  In March 2021, he began to work 
for Calacci Construction performing demolition and cleanup work at the Iowa City VA 
Hospital.  He testified that he spent significant time tearing out doorways from brick and 
cinderblock walls and setting 30-foot wall panels.  (Transcript, pages 34-35)  He spent a 
significant amount of time using a jackhammer, sometimes at odd angles, as well as a 
sledge hammer and other heavy power tools.  The heavy nature of his work is 
unrebutted in this record.  The work he was performing is undoubtedly the type of heavy 
manual labor work which could lead to a shoulder injury.  He further testified that he 
worked closely with Shawn Behrens, another union laborer. 
Prior to March 23, 2021, Mr. McGee testified that he was having some symptoms 
in his shoulders from performing this heavy work.   
Well, constantly jackhammering and using a sledgehammer to bust 
through the bricks and then the cinder blocks, which was, you know, a part 
of the job.  I really believe it was just, like, a constant, and the heavy lifting 
and the different angles and the vibration.  At that time I didn’t think 
nothing of it.  I just started feeling weird around that time.  Just the 
numbness. 
It was just something – an odd feeling that really aspirins just 
wouldn’t take away, wouldn’t do anything. 
(Tr., pp. 39-40)  It is apparent from his testimony that he believed his pain began 
gradually from his repetitive work activities.  He testified that on March 23, 2021, he 
knew something was really wrong in his shoulders.  “That day I knew something was 
wrong.  Like I just had to stop.”  (Tr., p. 41)  Mr. McGee testified that he told Mr. 
Behrens about his shoulder pain on that date before seeking out Dustin Johnson, the 
Superintendent.  (Tr., pp. 42-44)  He testified he asked Mr. Johnson if there was 
something else he could do for work.  “So he told me take some aspirins, relax for a 
minute, 20, 30 minutes, and go back to the job, which it was right around lunchtime 
anyway.”  (Tr., p. 44)  He testified that he never saw his direct supervisor at this time, 
Shawn Ford. 
As mentioned above, he testified that he did tell his co-worker, Shawn Behrens 
about his shoulder pain just before going to see Mr. Johnson.  Mr. Ford testified live and 
under oath at the video hearing and confirmed this testimony.  Mr. Behrens provided 
specific details of seeing and hearing at least portions of this conversation.  (Tr., pp. 19-
20) 
Mr. McGee testified that over the next few days, he continued to tell Mr. Johnson 
that his shoulders were hurting while asking for different assignments.  (Tr., p. 45)  Mr. 
Johnson testified that none of this ever happened.  (Tr., p. 110) 

MCGEE V. CALACCI CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 4 
 
Mr. McGee testified that he was terminated on April 2, 2021.  He testified that he 
was given no explanation and was required to clean Mr. Johnson’s truck, a “rare” 
assignment, just prior to his termination.  (Tr., pp. 35, 45)  He testified he was given no 
reason for the termination.  There is no paper documentation of the termination at all in 
this file. Mr. Johnson could not recall terminating Mr. McGee.  He could not recall asking 
Mr. McGee to clean his truck but admitted it was possible that he did so.  (Tr., p. 113)  
This testimony was interesting because he agreed that assigning someone to clean out 
his truck would be a rare duty ordinarily only assigned to someone on “light-duty.”  (Tr., 
p. 113) Apparently, Calacci Construction was removed from the VA construction project 
sometime shortly after Mr. McGee’s termination because of its’ failure to pay into the 
union benefit fund and other debt issues.  (Tr., pp. 38, 115)  In any event, Mr. Johnson 
vouched for Calacci and testified he was a good employer. 
Overall, I do not find Mr. Johnson to be a particularly credible witness.  He 
appeared to have selective memory at times.  For example, he testified he had a clear 
recollection of terminating Mr. Behrens, as well as another injured employee who failed 
a drug test, but did not recall terminating Mr. McGree.  He also did not recall having Mr. 
McGee clean his truck, admitting that he would not assign this task to any worker other 
than a light-duty worker because he had more important tasks that needed completed.  
Mr. Johnson’s demeanor was confident and generally responsive; however, it is noted, 
he often looked away while testifying, especially when discussing matters such as Mr. 
McGee’s termination.  I also find it unusual that there was no documentation in evidence 
or even an explanation of any kind from the employer regarding the termination.  It is 
evident the employer had a significant job to complete.  The timing of the 
undocumented, unexplained termination is suspicious:  less than two weeks after Mr. 
McGee claims he first told him about a bilateral shoulder injury.  For all of these 
reasons, I find the credible, sworn testimony of Mr. McGee and Mr. Behrens more 
credible than the testimony of Mr. Johnson.  A greater weight of evidence supports the 
finding that Mr. McGee’s shoulders were hurting in March 2021, and that he did inform 
Mr. Johnson of this condition. 
After being terminated, Mr. McGee sought out and secured employment with 
Western Waterproofing.  He testified that this work was not heavy at all, particularly in 
comparison to the demolition work he was performing for Calacci.  He was, however, 
applying waterproof coating using hand rollers and brushes on the bleachers at Kinnick 
Stadium.  (Tr., p. 82)  Mr. McGee first sought treatment for his shoulders in October 
2021, some six months after his condition had manifested. 
On October 29, 2021, Physicians’ Clinic of Iowa (PCI) documented the following: 
47-year-old male construction worker presents with a 6 month history of 
right greater than left shoulder arm and hand pain.  Notes associated 
numbness.  He rates his pain rather severe clinically able to demonstrate 
shoulder movement without distress.  Throbbing aching burning sensation.  
No other treatment.  No injury 

MCGEE V. CALACCI CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 5 
 
(Joint Exhibit 1, page1)  Mr. McGee was diagnosed with a right shoulder sprain and 
“bilateral shoulder pain”.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 3) 
He returned to PCI on November 9, 2021, and saw James Huber, D.O.  Dr. 
Huber took the following history: 
Jasen is a 47-year-old gentleman who works in construction who presents 
for bilateral arm and hand pain.  Is [sic] been going on for about a year 
and worsening.  Lifting, reaching, twisting are aggravating factors.  It is 
also worse in the morning when he wakes up and does disturb his sleep.  
Pain can be as high as 8 out of 10.  He has had x-rays of both shoulders 
that are negative for any osseous abnormalities.  No significant arthritis 
seen. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 4)  Dr. Huber diagnosed thoracic outlet and recommended physical 
therapy.  After a short course of physical therapy, he was eventually referred on to a 
specialist at University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics.   
In January 2022, Matthew Bollier, M.D., a shoulder specialist at UIHC, evaluated 
him.  Dr. Bollier took the following history: 
Jasen E McGee is a 47 y.o. male who presents to clinic for evaluation of 
bilateral shoulder pain.  L>R.  RHD.  He works in construction and had an 
onset of pain approximately 8 months ago.  Denies any acute fall or injury.  
No history of previous injury.  Today he states that his pain continues to 
worsen.  Describes pain along the lateral shoulder with numbness/tingling 
throughout the entire arm and popping/catching in his finger.  Has been 
seen by two providers in Cedar Rapids and is very frustrated with the lack 
of care he has received. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 120)  Dr. Bollier quickly ordered an MRI of the left shoulder which showed 
a partial thickness tear at the conjoined tendon.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 125)  Surgery was quickly 
scheduled for January 28, 2022.  The surgery was performed on that date, and he was 
taken off work.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 127)  The parties have stipulated that Mr. McGee was off 
work from January 27, 2022, through June 13, 2022, as a result of this surgery. 
Mr. McGee’s physical therapy records are in evidence.  He began his course of 
postoperative physical therapy on February 9, 2022.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 19)  The therapy 
records document the following: 
He had been working to build a cross walk at the VA hospital.  Punched 
out a door while building this building while consistently using a sledge 
hammer.  He mentioned it to the superintendent.  He didn’t realize at the 
same time what he was doing and he was tearing his shoulder up, but he 
had to keep going.  Worked with another guy in the Labor Union to share 
the job.  Helped to carry along the way. 

MCGEE V. CALACCI CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 6 
 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 19)  He spoke with her about the injury again in May 2022, where he 
provided a more accurate history of the injury.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 82)  He had a normal 
course of postoperative treatment following his surgery, including follow up visits with 
Dr. Bollier, an injection for pain and extensive physical therapy.  In June, 2022, Mr. 
McGee was released to work without restrictions in June 2022.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 144)  The 
parties stipulated June 13, 2022, as the date healing period benefits were to end from 
this surgery. 
Mr. McGee returned to Dr. Bollier on July 8, 2022.  Dr. Bollier documented that 
he had “no complaints” and confirmed he could work without restrictions.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 
147-148)  The July 15, 2022, physical therapy report documented ongoing soreness.  
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 108) 
On October 6, 2022, there is a note from a UIHC nurse documenting a phone 
conversation with Mr. McGee.  The following is documented: 
Patient notes that he was attempting to get his shoulder claim completed 
through Work Comp.  He had hired a work comp lawyer who denied his 
claim as he did not speak with Dr. Bollier about any specific injury that 
happened at work for his shoulder.  He was requesting a note or a change 
in documentation stating that this was something that he and Dr. Bollier 
had discussed.  I explained to patient that the chances of this were highly 
unlikely as it is very fraudulent to change notes and patient was seen for 
this problem starting almost a year ago.  Explained that injuries at work 
had to be thououghly [sic] documented and that the chances were almost 
zero but I would of course send Dr. Bollier a message notifying him that 
patient feels this injury was caused at work. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 150A)  Mr. McGee testified that this is not how the conversation went.  He 
testified that when he sought out an attorney, he had been told that Dr. Bollier’s notes 
did not reflect any work injury.  (Tr., pp. 52-53)  He testified that he had told Dr. Bollier 
about the heavy work he was performing at UIHC for Calacci and suggested he was 
simply attempting to have Dr. Bollier acknowledge that he had discussed this with him.  
(Tr., pp. 50, 54)  He testified the nurse told him she would look into it and she did not 
mention anything about it being “fraudulent.”  (Tr., p. 55) 
In December 2022, Mr. McGee sought an MRI and evaluation for his right 
shoulder.  Dr. Bollier evaluated Mr. McGee on December 15, 2022.  Dr. Bollier 
documented the following: 
48-year-old male patient presents today for evaluation of right shoulder 
pain.  He has had ongoing chronic right shoulder pain for over a year with 
the right shoulder.  Secondary to manual labor construction job.  Patient 
describes pain across the anterior shoulder superior shoulder also 
radiates down the back.  Patient complains of catching grinding and 
popping.  Pain is worsened with overhead motions.  Patient complains of 

MCGEE V. CALACCI CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 7 
 
pain at night.  He has been doing physical therapy for both shoulders over 
the last year secondary to a left shoulder surgery.  Is not improving with 
over-the-counter medications and physical therapy and modification of 
activities. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 153)  Dr. Bollier recommended an MRI which was performed on the same 
date.  The MRI showed a small partial undersurface tear of the supraspinatus tendon 
with intrasubstance component involving less than 50 percent of the tendon.  (Jt. Ex. 3, 
p. 158)  For treatment, an injection was attempted in January 2023.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 159)  
In July 2023, Mr. McGee called in and indicated the shot did not help and requested 
more therapy for both shoulders.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 161)  After attempting some further 
physical therapy, surgery was recommended.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 162)  The therapy notes 
document that his left shoulder had regressed some.  The surgery was performed in 
November 2023, just prior to hearing.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 172) 
The parties have stipulated that if the defendants are found liable for the alleged 
injury, a running award of healing period is appropriate beginning November 1, 2023. 
Christina Belew, claimant’s longtime girlfriend testified live and under oath at the 
video hearing.  Her testimony is generally credible.  She testified that she drove him to 
his surgeries and stayed in the room with him while he discussed postoperative follow 
up with Dr. Bollier.  (Tr., pp. 26-27)  She further testified that while Mr. McGee healed 
well from the first surgery, he continued to have some limitations following his recovery. 
Dr. Bollier wrote a letter to defendants regarding medical causation on October 
10, 2023, in response to a letter from defense attorney.   
He does have a right shoulder partial rotator cuff tear and type 3 
acromion.  This was seen on the December 15, 2022 right shoulder MRI.  
To the nearest degree of medical certainty, his right shoulder pain and 
rotator cuff tear was not aggravated or caused by his work at Calacci 
Construction.  He told us in January 2022 that there was no injury to either 
of his shoulders.  I would not assign any permanent partial impairment to 
the right shoulder because there was no work injury reported.  MMI is not 
applicable for the right shoulder.  I would not assign any restrictions to the 
right shoulder. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 170-171)  I read Dr. Bollier’s opinion to mean that Mr. McGee did not 
specifically report a work injury to him at their first meeting and that he believed Calacci 
Construction that he never reported a work injury.  He essentially accepted the 
defendants’ version of the facts as true and issued an opinion based upon that version 
of the events. 
David Hart, M.D., performed an independent medical evaluation for Mr. McGee 
on September 12, 2023.  Dr. Hart interviewed Mr. McGee, took history and reviewed 
appropriate medical records.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-4)  He performed a thorough physical 

MCGEE V. CALACCI CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 8 
 
examination.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 4-5)  Regarding the left shoulder, Dr. Hart diagnosed a 
partial tear of the subscapularis tendon, partial tear of the long head biceps tendon and 
osteoarthritis.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 6)  Regarding the right, he diagnosed partial supraspinatus 
tear, tenosynovitis and a possible partial tear of the long head biceps tendon.  (Cl. Ex. 1, 
p. 6)  He opined that all of these conditions were related to his work activities at Calacci.  
(Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 3, 6)  He went on to assign an impairment rating on the left side of 17 
percent of the upper extremity.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 7)  He also recommended permanent 
restrictions. 
I find Dr. Hart’s medical opinions to be more consistent with the underlying facts 
of this case.  By a greater weight of evidence, I find that the claimant sustained this 
injury which arose out of and in the course of his employment on or about March 23, 
2021, and provided notice to his employer right away.  I find that the injury is a cause of 
temporary disability during a period of recovery and the defendants are responsible for 
healing period benefits during the dates stipulated in the Hearing Report.  I find that the 
claimant is entitled to both past and future medical expenses which are causally 
connected to this injury, as well as the reasonable IME expenses set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 6. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first question submitted is whether Mr. McGee sustained a cumulative injury 
to his bilateral shoulders which arose out of and in the course of his employment on or 
about March 23, 2021. 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
 
When the injury develops gradually over time, the cumulative injury rule applies.  
The date of injury for cumulative injury purposes is the date on which the disability 
manifests.  Manifestation is best characterized as that date on which both the fact of 
injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant’s employment would be 
plainly apparent to a reasonable person.  The date of manifestation inherently is a fact 
based determination.  The fact-finder is entitled to substantial latitude in making this 

MCGEE V. CALACCI CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 9 
 
determination and may consider a variety of factors, none of which is necessarily 
dispositive in establishing a manifestation date.  Among others, the factors may include 
missing work when the condition prevents performing the job or receiving significant 
medical care for the condition.  For time limitation purposes, the discovery rule then 
becomes pertinent so the statute of limitations does not begin to run until the employee, 
as a reasonable person, knows or should know, that the cumulative injury condition is 
serious enough to have a permanent, adverse impact on his or her employment.  
Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284 (Iowa 2001); Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 
483 N.W.2d 824 (Iowa 1992); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 
(Iowa 1985). 
By a preponderance of evidence, for the reasons stated in the findings of fact, I 
find that the claimant has carried his burden of proof that he sustained an injury to his 
bilateral shoulders which arose out of and in the course of his employment.  This 
cumulative injury manifested on or about March 23, 2021. 
The next issue is notice. 
Iowa Code section 85.23 requires an employee to give notice of the occurrence 
of an injury to the employer within 90 days from the date of the occurrence, unless the 
employer has actual knowledge of the occurrence of the injury. 
 
The purpose of the 90-day notice or actual knowledge requirement is to give the 
employer an opportunity to timely investigate the facts surrounding the injury.  The 
actual knowledge alternative to notice is met when the employer, as a reasonably 
conscientious manager, is alerted to the possibility of a potential compensation claim 
through information which makes the employer aware that the injury occurred and that it 
may be work related.  Dillinger v. City of Sioux City, 368 N.W.2d 176 (Iowa 1985); 
Robinson v. Department of Transp., 296 N.W.2d 809 (Iowa 1980). 
 
Failure to give notice is an affirmative defense which the employer must prove by 
a preponderance of the evidence.  DeLong v. Iowa State Highway Commission, 229 
Iowa 700, 295 N.W. 91 (1940). 
By a preponderance of evidence for the reasons stated in the findings of fact, I 
find that the defendants have failed to prove a valid notice defense.  The weight of 
evidence supports a finding that Mr. McGee made his superintendent aware of his 
condition at approximately the same time as it manifested. 
The next issue is medical causation. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 

MCGEE V. CALACCI CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 10 
 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
For the reasons set forth in the findings of fact, I find that the claimant has met 
his burden of proof that his bilateral shoulder condition is causally connected to his work 
injury.  This finding is based upon the opinion of Dr. Hart, contemporaneous medical 
documentation, as well as the credible testimony of the claimant. 
Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an injured 
worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has returned to 
work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or intermittent.  
Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
Having found a causally connected injury, I accept the parties’ stipulation that Mr. 
McGee is entitled to healing period benefits from January 27, 2022, through June 13, 
2022; and from November 1, 2023, continuing until such time that benefits should be 
terminated under Section 85.34(1). 
The next issue is medical expenses. 
Evidence in administrative proceedings is governed by section 17A.14.  The 
agency’s experience, technical competence, and specialized knowledge may be utilized 
in the evaluation of evidence.  The rules of evidence followed in the courts are not 
controlling.  Findings are to be based upon the kind of evidence on which reasonably 
prudent persons customarily rely in the conduct of serious affairs.  Health care is a 
serious affair.  
 

MCGEE V. CALACCI CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 11 
 
Prudent persons customarily rely upon their physician’s recommendation for 
medical care without expressly asking the physician if that care is reasonable.  Proof of 
reasonableness and necessity of the treatment can be based on the injured person’s 
testimony.  Sister M. Benedict v. St. Mary’s Corp., 255 Iowa 847, 124 N.W.2d 548 
(1963).  
 
It is said that “actions speak louder than words.”  When a licensed physician 
prescribes and actually provides a course of treatment, doing so manifests the 
physician’s opinion that the treatment being provided is reasonable.  A physician 
practices medicine under standards of professional competence and ethics.  Knowingly 
providing unreasonable care would likely violate those standards.  Actually providing 
care is a nonverbal manifestation that the physician considers the care actually provided 
to be reasonable.  A verbal expression of that professional opinion is not legally 
mandated in a workers' compensation proceeding to support a finding that the care 
provided was reasonable.  The success, or lack thereof, of the care provided is 
evidence that can be considered when deciding the issue of reasonableness of the 
care.  A treating physician’s conduct in actually providing care is a manifestation of the 
physician’s opinion that the care provided is reasonable and creates an inference that 
can support a finding of reasonableness.  Jones v. United Gypsum, File 1254118 (App. 
May 2002); Kleinman v. BMS Contract Services, Ltd., File No. 1019099 (App. 
September 1995); McClellon v. Iowa Southern Utilities, File No. 894090 (App. January 
1992).  This inference also applies to the reasonableness of the fees actually charged 
for that treatment.   
I find the defendants are responsible for the medical expenses set forth in 
Claimant’s Exhibits 4 and 5.  I find the defendants are responsible for these expenses. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay all benefits at the stipulated rate of six hundred sixty-five 
and 81/100 dollars ($665.81). 
Defendants shall pay healing period benefits from January 27, 2022, through 
June 13, 2022, and a running award commencing November 1, 2023. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants are responsible for the medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibits 4 and 5. 
Defendants are responsible for the IME expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 
6, in the amount of five thousand two hundred fifty and 00/100 dollars ($5,250.00). 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 

MCGEE V. CALACCI CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 12 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants in the amount of two hundred thirty-one and 
55/100 dollars ($231.55). 
Signed and filed this __17th __ day of June, 2024. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Casey Steadman  (via WCES) 
Jessica Voelker 
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days from 
the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal must be filed via 
Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be 
filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des 
Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation 
within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to 
appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 

MCGEE V. CALACCI CONSTRUCTION CO. 
Page 13 
 
 
