Case Number: 5050047
Case Title:  SANDS, RANDY ALLEN V. SIOUX CITY, CITY OF
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Sands, Randy-5050047.District Court Decision.pdf
========================================================================

1 
 
 
IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR WOODBURY COUNTY 
  
CITY OF SIOUX CITY, IOWA, 
                    
                   Petitioner, 
 
vs. 
 
RANDY A. SANDS, 
 
                    Respondent.                    
 
 
 
CVCV190717 
 
 
 
RULING ON PETITION FOR JUDICIAL 
REVIEW 
 
 
This matter comes before the Court on Petition for Judicial Review filed by 
Petitioner, City of Sioux City, Iowa, on February 5, 2020.  Respondent, Randy Sands, 
timely filed an Answer to the Petition on February 21, 2020.  Each party has filed a brief 
in support of their position (“City’s Brief” and “Respondent’s Brief”) and Petitioner has filed 
a brief in reply (“City’s Reply Brief”).  Oral arguments were heard telephonically in this 
matter on April 20, 2020, at which time Petitioner appeared telephonically through counsel 
of record, Connie Anstey, and Respondent appeared telephonically through counsel of 
record, Dennis Mahr.  The proceeding was formally reported by Kara Holland. 
 
The Court, having heard arguments of the parties, reviewed the briefs and filings 
herein, reviewed the administrative record, and considered applicable law, now enters 
the following ruling. 
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
 
On December 20, 2016, Randy Sands (Respondent herein) received an arbitration 
award which found him to be totally and permanently disabled and awarded him benefits 
from and after October 5, 2013.  Respondent’s employer, City of Sioux City (Petitioner 
herein), applied for and was granted a rehearing, from which a ruling was issued on 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

2 
 
January 31, 2017, which ruling clarified an issue regarding medical bills but did not disturb 
the underlying award of benefits for total and permanent disability.  No appeal was taken 
of the arbitration award. 
 
On February 13, 2017, Respondent filed a petition for partial commutation of his 
disability benefits seeking a lump-sum payout for all but the final month of his benefit 
period. 
 
On May 29, 2018, a contested hearing was held on Respondent’s petition for 
partial commutation.  The hearing was held before Deputy Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner Jennifer S. Gerrish-Lampe, who issued a “Partial Commutation Decision” 
on August 7, 2018, which granted Respondent’s petition for partial commutation (Partial 
Commutation Decision, p. 8). 
 
On August 22, 2018, Petitioner filed Notice of Appeal to the Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner.  On appeal, Petitioner raised four issues, as follows: 
1. Whether Claimant’s Petition for Partial Commutation should have been granted. 
2. Whether the order for commutation violates the provisions of the Iowa Constitution. 
3. Whether the commutated portion of the award should be limited to work life vs. 
calculated life expectance. 
4. Whether the mortality table adopted by rule is the appropriate table for use in 
determining present value. 
On January 17, 2020, Workers’ Compensation Commissioner Joseph S. Cortese 
II issued an “Appeal Decision,” in which he affirmed the Partial Commutation Decision in 
its entirety (Appeal Decision, p. 3). 
Petitioner now seeks judicial review of the agency decision pursuant to Iowa Code 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

3 
 
§§ 86.26 and 17A.19.  Petitioner herein identifies six issues for judicial review, as follows: 
1. Whether Claimant’s Petition for Partial Commutation should have been granted. 
2. Whether the initial decision of the deputy should have been affirmed by the 
Commissioner. 
3. Whether the order for partial commutation violates the provisions of the Iowa 
Constitution. 
4. Whether the commutated portion of the award should be limited to work life vs. 
calculated life expectance. 
5. Whether the mortality table adopted by rule is the appropriate table for use in 
determining present value. 
6. Whether the agency decisions are fatally flawed for failure to include citation to the 
correct partial commutation versus full commutation section and for failure to 
comply with the express provisions of Iowa Code Section 85.48. 
LEGAL STANDARDS 
 
Review of decisions of the workers’ compensation commissioner was outlined in 
the case of Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512 (Iowa 2012).  Judicial review 
of such decisions is governed by Iowa Code Chapter 17A and is generally limited to 
correction of errors at law.  Iowa Code Section 17A.19; Neal, 814 N.W.2d at 518.  See 
also, Hager v. Iowa Department of Transportation, 687 N.W.2d 106, 108 (Iowa App. 
2004); Lee v. Employment Appeals Board, 616 N.W.2d 661, 664 (Iowa 2000).  The District 
Court may affirm the decision of the workers’ compensation commissioner or remand the 
case to the commissioner for further proceedings; and shall reverse, modify, or grant 
other appropriate relief from the commissioner’s decision if the Court determines that 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

4 
 
substantial rights of the person seeking judicial relief have been prejudiced because the 
commissioner’s decision is any one of the characterizations enumerated in Iowa Code 
Section 17A.19(10)(a)-(n).   
 
The District Court acts in an appellate capacity when exercising its authority to 
review such an agency decision.  Neal, 814 N.W.2d at 518; Hager, 687 N.W.2d at 108. 
 
Review of a decision of the workers’ compensation commissioner varies 
depending on the type of error alleged.  If the error alleged is one of fact, this Court is 
bound by the findings of fact made by the commissioner if they are supported by 
substantial evidence in the record as a whole.  Iowa Code Section 17A.19(10)(f); Neal, 
814 N.W.2d at 518.  See also, Gaborit v. Employment Appeal Board, 743 N.W.2d 554, 
556 – 557 (Iowa App. 2007); Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 219 (Iowa 2006).  In 
determining whether substantial evidence supports the commissioner’s factual findings, 
the District Court engages in a fairly intensive review of the record to make sure the factual 
findings are reasonable; however, the District Court does not engage in a scrutinizing 
analysis.  Neal, 814 N.W.2d at 525.  The question also is not whether the evidence in the 
record as a whole supports a different finding or whether the District Court would make a 
different finding; but, rather, whether the evidence in the record as a whole supports the 
findings actually made.  Neal, 814 N.W.2d at 527.  See also, Grant v. Iowa Department 
of Human Services, 722 N.W.2d 169 (Iowa 2006); Hy-Vee, Inc. v. Employment Appeal 
Board, 710 N.W.2d 1, 3 – 4 (Iowa 2005) (noting that the court must not reassess the 
weight to be accorded various items of evidence which remains within the agency’s 
exclusive domain).   
 
If the alleged error challenges the commissioner’s application of law to facts when 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

5 
 
such application has clearly been vested by a provision of law in the discretion of the 
commissioner, such application will not be disturbed unless it is “irrational, illogical, or 
wholly unjustifiable.”  Iowa Code Section 17A.19(10)(m); Neal, 814 N.W.2d at 518, 526.  
See also, Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 219.   
 
Finally, if the alleged error challenges the commissioner’s interpretation of law, the 
District Court will give deference to the commissioner’s interpretation if the commissioner 
has clearly been vested with the discretionary authority to interpret the specific provision 
in question.  If the commissioner has not clearly been vested with such discretion, the 
District Court will substitute its judgment and interpretation of the statutory provision in 
question for that of the commissioner’s if the Court concludes the commissioner made an 
error of law.  Iowa Code Section 17A.19(10)(c), (l); Neal, 814 N.W.2d at 518.  See also, 
Gaborit, 743 N.W.2d at 556-557; Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 219.   
 
Determination of whether an agency such as the workers’ compensation 
commissioner has been delegated the authority to interpret a provision of law was clarified 
in the case of Renda v. Iowa Civil Rights Commission, 784 N.W.2d 8, (Iowa 2010).  In 
making such determination, the Court looks carefully at the specific language or statutory 
provision that the commissioner has interpreted as well as the specific duties and 
authority given to the commissioner with respect to enforcing the particular statute.  
Renda, 784 N.W.2d at 13.  See also, Neal, 814 N.W.2d at 518 (citing Renda).  Factors or 
indications considered by the Court in determining whether the legislature has clearly 
vested interpretive authority to the commissioner include rule-making authority, decision-
making or enforcement authority that requires the commissioner to interpret the statutory 
language, and the commissioner’s expertise on the subject or on the term to be 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

6 
 
interpreted.  Neal, 814 N.W.2d at 518-519 (citations omitted).   If the Court determines 
such interpretive authority has clearly been vested in the commissioner, deference to that 
interpretation is given, and the commissioner’s interpretation will be affirmed by the Court 
unless it is “based upon an irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable interpretation.”  Iowa 
Code Section 17A.19(10)(l).   
 
Interconnected findings of fact, interpretations of law, and applications of law to 
fact pose a uniquely difficult problem on judicial review: 
[t]hese different approaches to our review of mixed questions of law 
and fact make it essential for counsel to search for and pinpoint the 
precise claim of error on appeal.  If the claim of error lies with the 
agency’s findings of fact, the proper question on review is whether 
substantial evidence supports those findings of fact.  If the findings 
of fact are not challenged, but the claim of error lies with the agency’s 
interpretation of the law, the question on review is whether the 
agency’s interpretation was erroneous, and we may substitute our 
interpretation for the agency’s.  Still, if there is no challenge to the 
agency’s findings of fact or interpretation of the law, but the claim of 
error lies with the ultimate conclusion reached, then the challenge is 
to the agency’s application of the law to the facts, and the question 
on review is whether the agency abused its discretion by, for 
example, employing wholly irrational reasoning or ignoring important 
and relevant evidence.  In sum, when an agency decision on appeal 
involves mixed questions of law and fact, care must be taken to 
articulate the proper inquiry for review instead of lumping the fact, 
law, and application questions together within the umbrella of a 
substantial-evidence issue. 
Burton v. Hilltop Care Center, 813 N.W.2d 250, 259 (Iowa 2012), 
citing Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 219 (Iowa 2006) 
 
 
The commissioner need not discuss every evidentiary fact and the basis for 
its acceptance or rejection so long as the commissioner’s analytical process can 
be followed on appeal… the commissioner’s duty to furnish a reasoned opinion is 
satisfied if “it is possible to work backward… and to deduce what must have been 
[the agency’s] legal conclusions and [its] findings of fact.”  Id., at 260, citing 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

7 
 
Bridgestone/Firestone v. Accordino, 561 N.W.2d 60, 62 (Iowa 1997). 
When a constitutional issue is raised in a petition for judicial review, the district 
court performs a de novo review.  Office of Consumer Advocate v. Iowa State Commerce 
Commission, 465 N.W.2d 280, 281 (Iowa 1991); Silva v. Employment Appeal Bd., 547 
N.W.2d 232, 234 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996).  No deference is given to the view of the agency 
with respect to the constitutionality of a statute or administrative rule because it is 
exclusively up to the judiciary to determine the constitutionality of legislation and rules 
enacted by the other branches of the government.  ABC Disposal Systems, Inc. v. 
Department of Natural Resources, 681 N.W.2d 596, 605 (Iowa 2004).  Statutes are 
cloaked with a presumption of constitutionality.  The challenger bears a heavy burden 
because it must prove the unconstitutionality beyond a reasonable doubt.  Moreover, the 
challenger must refute every reasonable basis upon which the statute could be found to 
be constitutional.  City of Eagle Grove v. Cahalan Investments, LLC, 904 N.W.2d 552, 
559 (Iowa 2017) citing State v. Hernandez-Lopez, 639 N.W.2d 226, 233 (Iowa 2002); See 
also State v. Thompson, 836 N.W.2d 470, 483 (Iowa 2013). 
“The district court shall reverse, modify, or grant other appropriate relief from 
agency action… if it determines that substantial rights of the person seeking judicial relief 
have been prejudiced because the action is… unconstitutional on its face or as applied…”  
Iowa Code §17A.19(10)(a). 
FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS 
1. 
Whether Claimant’s Petition for Partial Commutation should have 
been granted. 
 
Iowa Code §85.45 sets forth the conditions under which commutation of benefits 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

8 
 
may be granted by the agency.  The provisions of that section applicable to this review 
are: 1) When the period during which compensation is payable can be definitely 
determined; and 2) When it shall be shown to the satisfaction of the workers’ 
compensation commissioner that such commutation will be for the best interest of the 
person or persons entitled to the compensation.  Iowa Code §85.45. 
Preliminarily, the Court notes that Petitioner urges consideration of a recent 
amendment to this statute which now requires consent of all parties to a proposed 
commutation before it may be granted.  Petitioner argues that although the amendment 
was not effective until after the agency decision, the amendment had been passed by the 
legislature at the time and that, therefore, the Court should consider the “legislative intent” 
regarding commutations as expressed by the amendment (City’s Brief, pp. 13-14).  The 
Court rejects this argument and finds that the matter should be decided upon the law in 
effect at the time of the agency decision, which is the law of this case. 
Petitioner’s primary contention on judicial review is that the agency’s decision was 
not supported by substantial evidence in the record, particularly with regard to whether it 
was in Respondent’s best interest.  In Petitioner’s claims of error, the Court finds some 
interplay as between findings of fact and application of law to fact, as discussed in Burton 
v. Hilltop Care Center, above.  This interplay is illustrated by Petitioner’s assertion that 
“[s]ubstantial evidence does not exist to support the initial decision or the finding by the 
commissioner that substantial evidence support [sic] the decision regarding partial 
commutation.” (City’s Brief, p. 11).  The “ultimate conclusion” of the agency in granting 
the partial commutation is a matter of the application of law to fact, which, as set forth in 
Burton, does not implicate a “substantial evidence” analysis as Petitioner suggests, but 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

9 
 
rather an analysis of whether the decision was irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.  
The Court will evaluate this claim of error under that standard.  On the other hand, the 
agency’s finding that the commutation was in Respondent’s “best interest” is a finding of 
fact, which is properly analyzed under a “substantial evidence” inquiry. 
The Court first addresses Petitioner’s assertion that the agency’s finding, that 
commutation was in the best interest of Respondent, was not supported by substantial 
evidence in the record as a whole.  Petitioner quite properly frames this issue in light of 
the factors for determining “best interest” as set forth by the Iowa Supreme Court in 
Dameron v Neumann Bros., Inc., 339 N.W.2d 160, 165 (Iowa 1983), which are: 
1. The worker’s age, education, mental and physical condition, and 
actual life expectancy (as contrasted with information provided by 
actuarial tables). 
2. The worker’s family circumstances, living arrangements, and 
responsibilities to dependents. 
3. The worker’s financial condition, including all sources of income, 
debts and living expenses. 
4. The reasonableness of the worker’s plan for investing the lump sum 
proceeds and the worker’s ability to manage invested funds or 
arrange for management by others (for example, by a trustee or 
conservator). 
 
As set forth above, this Court is bound by the findings of fact made by the 
commissioner if they are supported by substantial evidence in the record as a whole, and 
the question is not whether the evidence in the record as a whole supports a different 
finding or whether the District Court would make a different finding; but, rather, whether 
the evidence in the record as a whole supports the findings actually made. 
With regard to the first Dameron factor, Petitioner points to Respondent’s 
advanced age, limited educational background, difficulty with concentration, difficulty 
performing simple arithmetic, deteriorating overall health, and decreased life expectancy, 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

10 
 
particularly as contrasted with that provided by actuarial tables.  However, Petitioner 
offers no explanation as to why these facts mitigate against Respondent’s best interest 
under this prong of the analysis, arguing only that these facts make Respondent less 
likely to be able to effectively manage the funds of a commuted lump-sum payment, which 
is more appropriately applied under the fourth Dameron factor.  Respondent, on the other 
hand, argues that these factors mitigate in favor of commutation and offers some authority 
in support of this argument in the form of a citation to a treatise (Respondent’s Brief, p. 
27, citing J. Lawyer, Worker’s Compensation, §27.9 (2017-2018): “If the claimant has a 
shortened life expectancy, an argument can be made that it is better for him to collect a 
reduced lump sum before he dies than never to realize the full value of his claim”).  The 
Court tends to agree, and can see a reasonable argument that all of the factors raised by 
Plaintiff may be viewed as evidence that a commutation would, in fact, be in Respondent’s 
best interest under this prong of the Dameron analysis.  In any event, the facts raised by 
Petitioner were clearly considered by the agency, being referenced throughout the Partial 
Commutation Decision (Partial Commutation Decision, pp. 3, 4, 7), and the Court, having 
examined the record itself, finds substantial evidence for the agency to have determined 
that this Dameron factor weighs in favor of Respondent’s best interest. 
As to the second Dameron factor, “the worker’s family circumstances, living 
arrangements, and responsibilities to dependents,” Petitioner lumps this factor together 
with factor number three (“the worker’s financial condition, including all sources of income, 
debts and living expenses”), and argues primarily that Petitioner’s financial condition does 
not indicate that commutation in his best interest.  Petitioner does emphasize that 
Respondent has very limited retirement planning and insurance options for the future, 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

11 
 
including a lack of long-term care insurance or life insurance.  Again, however, unless 
viewed through the lens of the fourth Dameron factor, as implicating Respondent’s ability 
to manage funds, these facts may reasonably be viewed as mitigating in favor of a 
commutation so that the funds may be invested, as proposed by Respondent, to supply 
the long-term security for him and his spouse which he currently lacks.  The agency 
addressed Respondent’s family circumstances, living arrangements, and responsibilities 
to dependents at some length, including the fact that he is married; that his wife is 65 
years old; that he and his wife live in a condominium which they purchased with funds 
from the sale of their home and rental property and which they own outright; that they 
plan to move to Florida upon her retirement; that he is not responsible for money-
management in the household; that he is currently covered by his wife’s health insurance 
policy; and that he likely will be unable to obtain private health insurance coverage after 
she retires.  (See Partial Commutation Decision, pp. 2, 3, 5, 7).  The Court, considering 
the facts addressed by the agency and also having examined the record itself, finds 
substantial evidence for the agency to have determined that this Dameron factor weighs 
in favor of Respondent’s best interest. 
As to the third factor under Dameron, “the worker’s financial condition, including 
all sources of income, debts and living expenses,” the agency found Respondent and his 
wife to be in sound financial condition, stating, for example, “[t]hey live in the condominium 
that they have purchased with the proceeds from the sale of a rental property and their 
personal home.  They are debt free and can cover all living expenses with the current 
stream of income including her salary, and benefits from Social Security” (Partial 
Commutation Decision, p. 7).  The agency, in determining whether commutation was in 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

12 
 
Respondent’s best interest, clearly looked with favor upon the facts demonstrating his 
sound financial condition. 
Petitioner herein cites these same facts and others indicating Respondent’s sound 
financial condition (such as his purchase of a time-share and a classic car) to argue 
against the commutation award, stating, “[u]nlike the individuals in many of the cases 
where commutations have been found to be in the best interest of the Claimant, Mr. Sands 
did not have any high interest or other debt that it would be beneficial for him to retire to 
increase his financial security” (City’s Brief, p. 8).  Petitioner similarly argues, without 
providing authority, that “[t]he intent of the legislature in this area is to provide for medical 
treatment and to provide for replacement of lost wages in order to provide the essentials 
of food, clothing and shelter; not to provide an individual windfall or legacy to offset the 
lack of retirement and estate planning by an individual” (City’s Brief, p. 13). 
Petitioner’s argument in this regard is that, because Respondent’s financial 
condition is sound, Respondent does not need a commutation of benefits.  The Court 
certainly understands why an employer, and particularly a self-insured one, would take 
this position.  But necessity is not the standard for commutation.  “Best interest” is the 
standard, which may be shown or not shown irrespective of any necessity or lack thereof.  
The Court, considering the facts noted by the agency and those noted by Plaintiff, and 
having examined the record itself, finds that the record contains substantial evidence for 
the agency to have determined that this Dameron factor weighs in favor of Respondent’s 
best interest. 
As to the fourth and final factor under Dameron, “the reasonableness of the 
worker’s plan for investing the lump sum proceeds and the worker’s ability to manage 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

13 
 
invested funds or arrange for management by others (for example, by a trustee or 
conservator),” this is perhaps the hardest fought issue on judicial review. 
First, Petitioner takes issue with the investment plans that were proposed by 
Respondent at hearing before the agency, arguing that they are not in Respondent’s best 
interest because they do not allow sufficient liquidity without penalty or loss of earnings; 
because monies ultimately realized from the proposed investments would be fully taxable, 
as opposed to monthly payments which are not; because the lump-sum payment would 
render Respondent more susceptible to garnishment; and because the financial experts 
who advocated for these particular investment plans were not privy to all pertinent 
information, including Respondent’s impulsivity, lack of money-management ability, and 
other issues, when they determined these investment plans were appropriate for 
Respondent (City’s Brief, pp. 9-11). 
The agency expressly weighed these facts in determining whether commutation 
was in Respondent’s best interest.  The agency described in some detail the investment 
plans proposed by Respondent (Partial Commutation Decision, pp. 4-5) and determined 
that “[t]he plan set forth wherein the claimant would purchase an annuity and allow his 
funds to remain untouched and grow exponentially is reasonable” (Partial Commutation 
Decision, p. 7).  The agency then considered the “potential detriments,” which include 
many of the issues raised by Petitioner here, and found that despite these shortcomings, 
Respondent and his wife had consolidated real estate holdings to buy an unencumbered 
home, that Respondent had conserved the majority of his prior lump sum payout in 
annuities, and that Respondent and his wife had approximately $40,000.00 in liquid 
assets available. (Partial Commutation Decision, p. 7).  And as for such liquidity and the 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

14 
 
potential loss of funds under the proposed annuity plan in the event of a future need, the 
agency specifically considered this issue and noted that under the “present system” (of 
monthly payments), Respondent would be “unable to access any large lump sums from 
his workers’ compensation benefits” (Partial Commutation Decision, p. 7), thus rendering 
the commutation in Respondent’s best interest even in regard to liquidity. 
Next, Petitioner strenuously argues that the facts in this case demonstrate that 
Respondent is not sufficiently capable of properly managing the funds that would be paid 
under a commutation award, citing his purchase of a classic car; his purchase of a time-
share in Branson, Missouri; his previous investments of funds in a manner that does not 
provide liquidity in the event of emergency or declining health; the results of his 
psychological examination that showed poor impulse control and incapability of managing 
his own money; his failure to obtain life and health insurance; and others. 
Again, the agency expressly weighed these factors in finding “best interest,” stating: 
“Based on the Dameron test, it is found that the greater weight of the 
evidence supports an order granting partial commutation.  While 
claimant has made a few unwise and impulsive decisions with his 
money, and he has been found to be incapable of managing his own 
money by the Social Security administration, his overall financial 
picture is healthy.  He has no debt.  He owns his condominium 
outright.  He has sufficient monthly income to meet all of his monthly 
bills.  He is covered by his wife’s health insurance.  Between the two 
of them they have nearly $100,000.00 in savings.  In addition, his 
wife has a pension plan of $145,000.00. 
 
Claimant has made some frivolous decisions in the past with his 
money – purchasing the time share, buying a classic car when he 
already owns two other functional vehicles.  However, none of these 
actions imperiled his financial standing.  It is in claimant’s best 
interests to grant a partial commutation of his award.”  
(Partial Commutation Decision, p. 8). 
 
The Court, having considered the facts referenced in the agency decision and 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

15 
 
those raised by Plaintiff, and having examined the record itself, finds in the record 
substantial evidence for the agency to have determined that this Dameron factor weighs 
in favor of Respondent’s best interest.  Having found substantial evidence in support of 
the agency’s decision on all four of the Dameron factors, the Court accordingly finds that 
the agency’s finding of fact, that a partial commutation was in the “best interest” of 
Respondent, is supported by substantial evidence in the record when viewed as a whole. 
Next, Petitioner argues that there is “no guarantee, given Mr. Sands’ history of 
classic car and time-share purchases, that he would retain ownership of the annuity and 
not cash it out as soon as possible even if it was established in the first place” (City’s 
Brief, p. 10).  The agency expressly considered this possibility, stating, “[t]here is no 
guarantee that the claimant will purchase the annuity once the commutation is granted, 
but the aforementioned plan is a careful and considered one.”  The Court, having 
examined the record and the evidence therein, finds this conclusion to be reasonable, or 
at least not irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustified.  The Court also looks with favor upon 
the point advanced by Defendant in this regard from an administrative decision in 
Bajramovic v. Deerfield Retirement Community, File No. 5026550 (App. Dec. April 15, 
2013), to wit:  “… it is a reasonable expectation that claimant will follow the advice of the 
financial planner hired to work on [his] behalf” (Defendant’s Brief, p. 26, quoting 
Bajramovic at p. 6). 
Next, Petitioner contends that the partial commutation should not have been 
awarded because it was sought by Respondent for the purpose of providing a “nest egg” 
for his wife after his demise by leaving her either a considerable sum of money or a stream 
of additional income (City’s Brief, p. 12).  Petitioner argues that this purpose is an 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

16 
 
improper basis for commutation of benefits, citing the former administrative decision in 
Mahaffey v. Cardinal Cleaners (Iowa Industrial Commissioner, April 8, 1974) for the 
proposition that “the purpose of leaving an estate… does not fall within the purposes of 
commutation or the Iowa Workman’s Compensation Law” (City’s Brief, p. 12, quoting 
Mahaffey).  The Court finds this argument is without merit.  Even if enhancing 
Respondent’s estate after his death were the only basis asserted in this case as to why 
partial commutation was in Respondent’s best interest, which this Court finds it was not, 
Defendant correctly counters that the precedent set in Mahaffey on this issue was 
reconsidered and expressly rejected by the Commissioner in the later decision of 
Sporleder v. Crouse Cartage Company, File Number 1254033 (Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner 2011).  In Sporleder, the Commissioner found that “[t]he agency’s analysis 
in Mahaffey is not legally sound under the Iowa Supreme Court’s prior guidance in 
Diamond v. Parsons or the later Dameron case.”  Sporleder, at p. 2 (citation omitted).  
The Court agrees with this statement regarding Diamond and Dameron, finding that 
adoption of the rule espoused by Mahaffey opens a pandora’s box with regard to analysis 
of best interest and that rejection of such a rule was proper by the Commissioner under 
the law as interpreted by the Iowa Supreme Court.  Petitioner asserts that such precedent 
is “a creature of expansive court action” (City’s Reply Brief, p. 10).  Whether such is the 
case or not is not the purview of this Court to determine, whose duty it is to apply the law 
as it exists. 
Next, Petitioner contends that because Respondent’s original award of disability 
benefits was based in large part upon health conditions that were unrelated to his work 
injury, and because those non-injury-related health conditions decrease his life 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

17 
 
expectancy, the commutation should not have been awarded.  Respondent argues that 
Respondent’s reduction in life expectancy “is not the fault of the employer,” and that 
“[r]equiring the employer, whether a public or private employer, to compensate the 
Claimant for lost income/earning capacity beyond that which he would have is not the 
purpose or intent of the workers’ compensation laws…” (City’s Brief, p. 13).  In this regard, 
Petitioner also claims the partial commutation will result in unjust enrichment of 
respondent for the same reason (Petition, para. 11).  Petitioner attempts to cast this issue 
as determinative of Respondent’s “best interest” (City’s Brief, p. 13), but the Court does 
not agree.  This argument clearly goes to the best interest of the employer.  Fairness to 
the employer, or best interest of the employer, is not the relevant standard in a 
commutation decision.  Best interest of the Claimant is.  See French & Hecht v. Arlingdale, 
432 N.W.2d 705, 707 (Iowa 1988), citing Dameron, 339 N.W.2d 160 at 165 (“It has 
already been established that commutation turns on what is in the best interest of the 
worker, not on what is in the best interest of the employer or insurance carrier).  The Court 
also notes that this argument is in large part analogous to that addressed in section (4), 
below, regarding “work-life expectancy.”  Petitioner’s argument is essentially the same, 
which is that under a partial commutation, the City would pay benefits that it otherwise 
would not have paid, or would pay benefits to replace income that Respondent otherwise 
would not have earned.  The Court finds that the analysis of this argument under the law 
is also essentially the same as that set forth in section (4) below, including that Petitioner’s 
contention in this regard would more properly be directed toward the original decision 
fixing the extent and duration of benefits, rather than the commutation decision, as the 
original award is determinative of the commutation award (see section (4), infra).   
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

18 
 
Finally, the Court must address Petitioner’s assignment of error as to the “ultimate 
conclusion” that the partial commutation should not have been awarded in this case 
because of the above arguments.  The Court finds that the agency’s finding that 
commutation was in the best interest of Respondent is supported by substantial evidence 
in the record when viewed as a whole.  The Court finds that the agency’s interpretation 
of its own rules, particularly that the use of life expectancy tables as adopted in 876 IAC 
6.3 renders the period during which compensation is payable “definitely determinable,” is 
not irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.  The Court further considers Petitioner’s 
arguments regarding improper purpose under Mahaffey, decrease in life expectancy due 
to non-work-related injuries, unfairness to the employer, and unjust enrichment, and finds 
that the agency’s decision to award partial commutation in this case was not irrational, 
illogical, or wholly unjustifiable. 
The Court finds that the decision of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner should be affirmed on this issue. 
2. 
Whether the initial decision of the deputy should have been affirmed 
by the Commissioner. 
 
The Court finds this “issue” raised by Petitioner on appeal to be surplusage 
because: 1) It is merely a restatement of issue number (1), above, as to whether the 
partial commutation should have been granted by the agency, as the Commissioner’s 
affirmance of the Deputy Commissioner’s decision is the final agency decision scrutinized 
here on judicial review; and 2) It is merely a restatement of the ultimate question 
embodied in the other issues asserted, to wit:  If the Court affirms the agency’s decision 
on all of the other issues raised, the answer to this question is “yes.”  If the Court does 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

19 
 
not affirm the agency’s decision on any of the other issues raised, the answer to this 
question is “no.”  Thus, the Court finds that any separate analysis of this “issue” for review 
is neither necessary nor appropriate. 
3. 
Whether the order for partial commutation violates the provisions of 
the Iowa Constitution. 
 
Petitioner alleges that because it is a self-insured municipality, rather than a private 
employer, a commutation in this case represents a potential violation of Article III, Section 
31, of the Iowa Constitution, which provides, in pertinent part, that “… no public money or 
property shall be appropriated for local, or private purposes, unless such appropriation, 
compensation or claim, be allowed by two thirds of the members elected to each branch 
of the general assembly.” IA Const. art. III, §31. 
In this case, Petitioner concedes that pursuant to the December 20, 2016, award 
of benefits to Respondent, the City is “obligated as a matter of law and public policy to 
make payments from public funds during the life of the [Respondent]” (City’s Brief, p. 14), 
and that Petitioner is “not exempt from compliance with workers’ compensation statutes” 
(City’s Reply Brief, p. 15).  The Court agrees.  Under the Iowa Worker’s Compensation 
Act, an “employer” is defined as “a person, firm, association, or corporation, state, county, 
municipal corporation, school corporation…” (Iowa Code §85.61(2)(a) (emphasis 
supplied).  Municipal corporations are not exempt from workers’ compensation statutes.  
They are expressly subject to them. 
 Petitioner argues, however, that “it is medically clear that [Respondent] will not 
meet or exceed the projected life expectancy… provisions found in IAC 8746-6.3(1)” 
(City’s Brief, pp. 15-16), and therefore a commutation award would “almost certainly” 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

20 
 
result in the expenditure of public funds for a private purpose (Id., p. 14).  The logic is that 
if Respondent should die before his projected life expectancy, upon which the award is 
based, then Petitioner will have pre-paid benefits under the commutation order that would 
be in excess of those required by periodic payments without commutation.  These excess 
amounts, Petitioner alleges, would presumably be used to provide security for 
Respondent’s spouse, which would constitute the appropriation of public funds for a 
“private purpose.” 
This issue was raised by Petitioner on appeal to the Commissioner, who declined 
to make any constitutional determinations, citing lack of authority to do so.  (Appeal 
Decision, p. 3). 
A party challenging the use of public funds on the ground that they are being used 
to support private purposes, in violation of the Iowa Constitution, has the burden to show 
that “there is an absence of all public interest in the purposes for which the appropriation 
is made.”  McMurry v. City council of City of West Des Moines, 642 N.W.2d 273, 283 
(Iowa 2002), citing Richards v. City of Muscatine, 237 N.W.2d 48, 61 (Iowa 1975).  See 
also Dickinson v. Porter, 35 N.W.2d 88, 81 (Iowa 148). 
The purpose of workers’ compensation statutes in Iowa has been stated as follows: 
The fundamental reason for the enactment of this legislation is to 
avoid litigation, lessen the expense incident thereto, minimize 
appeals, and afford a speedy tribunal to determine and award 
compensation under the terms of this act.” 
Zomer v. West River Farms, Inc., 666 N.W.2d 130, 133 (Iowa 2003) 
(distinguished on other grounds), citing Flint v. City of Eldon, 183 
N.W. 344, 345 (Iowa 1921). 
 
Also, “[t]he primary purpose of the workers’ compensation statute is to benefit the 
worker and the worker’s dependents insofar as the statute permits,” and “the statute is 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

21 
 
intended to cast upon the industry in which the worker is employed a share of the burden 
resulting from industrial accidents.”  Caterpillar Tractor Co. v. Shook, 313 N.W.2d 503 
(Iowa 1981) (internal citations omitted). 
Specifically with regard to commutation of benefits, the “fundamental touchstone” 
set forth by Iowa Legislature is the “best interest of the claimant.”  Dameron v. Neumann 
Brothers, Inc., 339 N.W.160, 165 (Iowa 1983) (discussing and reaffirming the principles 
of Diamond v. Parsons Co., 129 N.W.2d 608 (Iowa 1964)).   The Court further finds that 
the statutes governing commutation further the public policy objectives of the Workers’ 
Compensation Act in general, and that the statutes and administrative rules governing 
commutation at the time of Respondent’s award were enacted in the public interest, 
including the statutes and rules related to calculation of the period of commuted benefits. 
The Court finds that the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, specifically including 
the provisions for commutation which were in effect at the time of the Commissioner’s 
decision in this case, was and is based upon sound principles of public policy and that 
Petitioner herein does not meet its burden of demonstrating an “absence of all public 
interest in the purposes for which the appropriation is made.” 
Additionally, the Court acknowledges but disagrees with Petitioner’s attempt to 
distinguish this case from other commutations involving public employers simply because 
in this case Respondent’s life expectancy is more questionable than usual.  Put simply, 
in every commutation case there is the possibility that the claimant will not live to his or 
her life expectancy.  A perfectly healthy claimant could be awarded a commutation and 
then be killed in an automobile accident the next day.  If Petitioner’s logic is accepted that 
payment of commuted benefits for a claimant’s life expectancy represents a violation of 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

22 
 
the Iowa Constitution if the claimant does not live to his or her life expectancy, then every 
commutation involving a public employer is subject to the same peril.   
This leads to another, more fatal flaw in Petitioner’s argument as to 
constitutionality, which is reasonable doubt.  Even if Petitioner’s argument were to be 
accepted regarding the constitutionality of commutated benefits given a reduced life 
expectancy, all that would exist at present would be a potential for future violation of the 
Iowa Constitution under the facts of this case.  The Court need look no further than 
Petitioner’s own assertion that this commutation would “almost certainly” result in the 
expenditure of public funds for a private purpose.  Despite Petitioner’s assertion that “it is 
medically clear” that Respondent will not live to the life expectancy adopted for him by the 
Commissioner, the fact is that nobody knows exactly how long Petitioner will live, such 
fact being unknowable.  And despite Petitioner’s conviction that Respondent in this case 
would use any excess funds for the support of his wife, such use is also an uncertainty.  
There is admittedly evidence in the record to support both assertions, but both remain 
uncertainties, which leaves reasonable doubt as to any violation under the facts of this 
case.  To find a violation of the Iowa Constitution, beyond a reasonable doubt, based 
solely upon the hypothetical possibility that such may occur in the future, would be 
untenable.   
The Court finds no violation of the Iowa Constitution by the agency decision 
granting partial commutation in this case. 
4. Whether the commutated portion of the award should be limited to work life 
vs. calculated life expectance. 
 
This issue calls into question the commissioner’s interpretation of law, specifically 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

23 
 
of Iowa Code §85.34(3)(a), §85.48, and relevant case law, in deciding whether the 
commuted portion of the award should be based upon Respondent’s total life expectancy 
or upon his “work life” expectancy. 
Historically speaking, the interpretation of statutes and case law is not found to be 
vested in the discretion of the agency.  See, e.g., Finch v. Schneider Specialized Carriers, 
Inc., 700 N.W.2d 328, 330 (Iowa 2005) and Mycogen Seeds v. Sands, 686 N.W.2d 457, 
464 (Iowa 2004).  However, the analytical framework provided by Renda v. Iowa Civil 
Rights Commission, as discussed above, requires a more thorough examination of the 
particular provision(s) to be interpreted.  Applying the Renda framework, the Court 
considers the specific language or statutory provision(s) that the commissioner has 
interpreted as well as the specific duties and authority given to the commissioner with 
respect to enforcing the particular statute.  In making such a determination, the Court 
considers the factors from Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., which are rule-making authority, 
decision-making or enforcement authority that requires the commissioner to interpret the 
statutory language, and the commissioner’s expertise on the subject or on the term to be 
interpreted.   
Applying this analysis to the instant case, particularly considering the 
commissioner’s expertise on the subject and the authority that requires the commissioner 
to interpret the statutory language, the Court acknowledges a colorable argument that 
interpretive authority regarding this particular issue may be vested in the discretion of the 
workers’ compensation commissioner.  However, the Court is not sufficiently persuaded 
to give deference to the Commissioner’s decision in this particular matter, especially in 
light of the case law surrounding such interpretation, in which the Iowa Supreme Court 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

24 
 
has interpreted the law on this issue without providing deference to the agency (see 
discussion, infra).  Thus, the Court finds that this particular matter has not been clearly 
vested by a provision of law in the discretion of the agency.  Therefore, the Court does 
not give deference to the commissioner’s interpretation, but rather reviews the 
commissioner’s interpretation for correction of errors at law and accordingly will substitute 
its judgment and interpretation of the statutory provision in question for that of the 
commissioner’s if the Court concludes the commissioner made an error of law.  Iowa 
Code Section 17A.19(10)(c), (l); Neal, 814 N.W.2d at 518.  See also, Gaborit, 743 N.W.2d 
at 556-557; Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 219. 
Iowa Code §85.34(3)(a) provides that under the circumstance of permanent total 
disability, compensation is “payable until the employee is no longer permanently and 
totally disabled.”  In Sidles Distributing Co. v. Heath, 366 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 1985), a case 
directly on point with the present case with regard to this issue, the Iowa Supreme Court 
clearly and unambiguously determined that an award of permanent total disability is 
payable for the injured employee’s life expectancy and that a commutation of such an 
award is likewise based upon the employee’s life expectancy.  Id, at 2-4. The Court, in 
Sidles, also unequivocally rejected the argument that a commutation of permanent 
disability benefits should be limited to the employees “work life,” as was proposed by the 
appellant therein and likewise by Petitioner herein.  Id.   
The Sidles court also expressly rejected the argument that Iowa Code 
§85.45(1)(d), which was then codified in slightly different form at §85.45(4), limits a partial 
commutation of permanent disability benefits to “work life” expectancy, explaining: 
Prior to [the statute’s] enactment, we had suggested in [Diamond v. 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

25 
 
Parsons Co., 129 N.W.2d 608, 613 (Iowa 1964)] that, where weekly 
disability payments have been ordered for a fixed period of time, that 
period shall be used to compute the lump sum award in commutation 
cases even in those instances where life expectancy tables indicate 
that the claimant will not live to the end of the benefit period.  We 
believe that subsection 4 of section 85.45, enacted in 1973, is aimed 
at reversing the import of the Diamond decision in situations where 
it is probable that death or remarriage will shorten the length of the 
time benefits are payable.  This statute does not purport to establish 
the criteria under which the length of the benefit period is to be fixed 
in the first instance nor do we believe that it suggests, even by 
implication, a legislative recognition of appellants’ “work-life” theory. 
Sidles, 366 N.W.2d at 3-4 (emphasis added). 
 
Of consequence to the instant case, the Iowa Supreme Court, in Sidles, also found 
that in a commutation action, the issue of the duration of disability payments was 
“governed by the earlier decision fixing the extent and duration of the employee’s 
benefits,” and that the payments ordered by the earlier decision in that case were ordered 
payable “during the period of the employee’s disability,” and that the length of the period 
of disability as previously ordered is a “determinative factor in computing the proper 
amount of the lump sum commutation award.”  Id., at 2-3 (internal citations omitted).   
This exact chain of reasoning, which this Court finds cogent and entirely applicable 
to the case at hand, was echoed by the Commissioner in this case in support of  his 
affirmation of the Partial Commutation Decision (Appeal Decision, p. 2). 
Finally, the Sidles Court expressly acknowledged the legislature’s approval of the 
use of mortality tables in making determinations of a person’s life expectancy. Sidles, 366 
N.W.2d 1, at 4.  
In short, this Court finds no error at law on this issue and is in full agreement with 
the analysis set forth in the Appeal Decision by the commissioner, to wit:  1) the underlying 
arbitration decision ordered payments “during the period of employee’s disability”; 2) that 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

26 
 
language is properly construed under the law to mean that the duration of benefits is for 
the employee’s life expectancy and specifically does not mean “work life” expectancy; 3) 
the length of the period of disability, as determined in that underlying arbitration decision, 
is a determinative factor in computing the proper amount of the lump sum commutation 
award; and 4) Petitioners did not appeal the original arbitration decision and cannot now 
seek to overturn it under the guise of a commutation argument. 
The Court finds that the decision of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner should be affirmed on this issue. 
5. Whether the mortality table adopted by rule is the appropriate table for use 
in determining present value. 
 
This alleged error requires examination from two different viewpoints.  First, on the 
face of this particular agency action, the decision by the agency in this case to apply the 
life expectancy table cannot be said to have erroneously interpreted existing law or to 
have erroneously applied existing law to the facts of this case, as the life expectancy table 
that was used by the Deputy Commissioner, and expressly affirmed by the 
Commissioner, is found in 876 IAC 6.3, along with the direction that, “[t]he following tables 
are to be used in determining the sum to be paid in appropriate commutation 
proceedings.”  The agency followed existing law when utilizing the life expectancy table, 
and the table was correctly applied to the facts of this case. 
The other viewpoint, however, is that Petitioner’s assignment of error intends to 
question the agency’s adoption of this particular life expectancy table in the first place, 
which viewpoint is borne out by the Petitioner’s language used in framing of the issue 
(“Whether the mortality table adopted by rule is the appropriate table…”). 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

27 
 
Iowa Code Section 86.8 vests the commissioner with the broad authority to “adopt 
and enforce rules necessary to implement [Chapter 86] and Chapters 85, 85A, 85B, and 
87.”  Additionally, Iowa Code §85.45(1)(d) provides that “when a person seeking a 
commutation is… an employee with a permanent and total disability… the future 
payments which may be commuted shall not exceed the number of weeks which shall be 
indicated by probability tables designated by the workers’ compensation commissioner 
for death and remarriage, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17A” (emphasis supplied). 
 
The Court finds that this particular matter (i.e., the designation of life expectancy 
tables to be used in computing commutations) has been clearly vested by a provision of 
law in the discretion of the agency, and therefore the action of the commissioner should 
not be disturbed unless it is irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustified, or it is otherwise 
unreasonable, arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion.  Iowa Code §17A.19(10)(l, 
n). 
Petitioner argues that the current life expectancy table adopted by rule does not 
identify the date or source of the table, does not distinguish between males and females 
in projecting life expectancies, and leads to disparities and inequities under the law, 
particularly citing the difference in life expectancies computed for workers’ compensation 
claimants (using the commissioner’s table) versus the life expectancies computed for 
Petitioners in tort actions for damages (which utilize the 2001 CS.O Mortality Tables). 
The Court cannot disagree that Petitioner’s contentions may be persuasive 
arguments for the use of a different table in computing workers’ compensation benefits, 
but they fall far short, in the view of the Court, of demonstrating that the commissioner’s 
adoption of the table contained in 876 IAC 6.3 was irrational, illogical, wholly unjustified, 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

28 
 
or otherwise arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion.   
In so finding, the Court also acknowledges Defendant’s argument that 876 IAC 6.3 
was duly adopted under the Administrative Procedures Act and “is currently the law of the 
land,” and that Petitioner’s arguments as to its suitability for use in the calculation of 
workers’ compensation benefits would have been more properly raised during the rule-
making process. 
Petitioner, in response, concedes that “… the ability of the City to object to the 
adoption of the rule appears to have passed…” (City’s Reply Brief, p. 17), but asserts that 
“the Petitioner is not estopped from raising the issue of the inequity of the application of 
the rule to this case.” (Id.) 
With regard to the application of the agency rule to this case, the Court finds that 
tdhis application of law to fact has been clearly vested by a provision of law in the 
discretion of the agency, and therefore reviews the decision under the “irrational, illogical, 
or wholly unjustified” standard. 
The Court cannot find that the agency’s application of the rule to this case was 
irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustified, nor does the Court find that such application was 
even “inequitable,” as it is the rule applied to every case in which the commuted value of 
workers’ compensation benefits is calculated.   
Although not specifically identified as such, Petitioner’s allegation of “inequity in 
the application of the rule to this case,” and the arguments offered in support of such 
argument, are akin to a claim of denial of Equal Protection under the law.  Petitioner 
makes no specific Equal Protection claim under either the United States Constitution or 
the Iowa Constitution, nor was any such issue raised before the agency below, so this 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

29 
 
Court does not engage in an analysis of Equal Protection on this issue.  However, the 
analogy of Petitioner’s argument to an Equal Protection claim is illuminating to a portion 
of the Court’s reasoning herein.  Broadly speaking, a violation of Equal Protection occurs 
when similarly situated persons receive disparate treatment under the law.  Petitioner’s 
arguments regarding the inequity of using the life expectancy table in IAC 876-6.3 for 
workers’ compensation cases, while using the C.S.O Mortality Table for Petitioners in tort 
cases, misses the mark in large part because Petitioners in tort cases are not similarly 
situated to workers’ compensation claimants.  There may be many reasons why different 
calculations might be made under those very different circumstances, and the 
Commissioner’s act of adopting the life expectancy table he has adopted, under the 
discretion vested in him by law, cannot be said to be irrational, illogical, or wholly 
unjustified simply because it leads to a different result than that reached in tort cases. 
The Court finds that the decision of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner should be affirmed on this issue. 
In the interest of thoroughness, the Court notes that Petitioner also uses language 
in its brief that appears to be an attempt to raise a Due Process claim (See, e.g., 
Petitioner’s Brief in Support of Petition for Judicial Review, pp. 17-18, stating, “[t]he use 
of the unsourced table as the method for determining the amount to be awarded… denies 
the City due process to challenge the table without knowing its origin or accuracy”).  Like 
the Equal Protection issue, no express claim is made of any violation of Due Process 
under either the United States Constitution or the Iowa Constitution, but this language 
even more directly implicates due process than did the language analogous to Equal 
Protection. 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

30 
 
A party is precluded from raising issues in the district court that were not raised 
and litigated before the agency.  Interstate Power Co. v. Iowa State Commerce Comm’n, 
463 N.W.2d 69, 701 (Iowa 1990).  Even constitutional issues must be raised at the agency 
level to be preserved for judicial review.  Garwick v. Iowa Dep’t of Transp., 611 N.W.2d 
286, 288-89 (Iowa 2000).   
No claim of denial of Due Process, by use of the life expectancy table contained in 
IAC 876-6.3, was raised either at hearing before the deputy commissioner or in 
Petitioner’s appeal to the Commissioner, thus Petitioner is precluded from asserting such 
arguments upon judicial review.  The same analysis applies to any assertion of an Equal 
Protection claim that might be construed from Petitioner’s briefs, as discussed supra. 
6. Whether the agency decisions are fatally flawed for failure to include citation 
to the correct partial commutation versus full commutation section and for 
failure to comply with the express provisions of Iowa Code Section 85.48. 
 
This issue for judicial review, as stated by Petitioner, is really two issues: 1) 
incorrect citation by the agency to Iowa Code §85.47, rather than §853.48; and 2) alleged 
failure to comply with §85.48 by failing to fix the lump sum to be paid.  
A party is precluded from raising issues in the district court that were not litigated 
before the agency.  Neither of these issues was raised at the agency level, including on 
appeal to the commissioner (the same alleged errors having been present in the deputy 
commissioner’s Partial Commutation Decision), thus Petitioner is precluded from raising 
them on judicial review. 
For this reason, the Court finds that the decision of the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner should be affirmed on this issue. 
Having so found on the basis of failure to preserve error, the Court includes the 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

31 
 
following remarks in the interest of clarity only:  
1. With regard to the agency’s incorrect citation to §85.47 rather than §85.48: 
a. Having examined the Appeal Order and the statutes in question, the Court 
agrees with Petitioner that as between §85.47 and §85.48, the latter is the 
applicable statute for a partial commutation and the agency incorrectly cited 
the former in the “Order” sections of its decisions. 
b. The agency only cited §85.47 for one purpose: as authority for its order that 
“Defendant shall be entitled to a discount rate on the commuted benefits 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.47 and Iowa Code Section 535.3.”  In this 
regard, Sections 85.47 and 58.48 contain identical language regarding the 
application of interest pursuant to §535.3, which is that future payments 
shall be “capitalized at their present value and upon the basis of interest at 
the rate provided in section 535.3 for court judgments and decrees.” Iowa 
Code §§ 85.47 and 85.48. 
c. The agency correctly cited to §85.48 in the body of its Partial Commutation 
Decision, as affirmed by the Commissioner on appeal (Partial Commutation 
Decision, p. 5). 
d. There is evidence that the incorrect citation to §85.47 was merely a 
typographical error and not an error at law, which is that the remainder of 
the Appeal Decision complies with §85.48 and the agency correctly cited 
§85.48 in the body of its Partial Commutation Decision.  However, even if 
the incorrect citation was not a typographical error, but was in fact an error 
at law by the agency, it cannot be found to be anything other than a 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

32 
 
harmless error, as both statutes require, in identical language, the 
application of an interest rate as provided in §535.3, which is precisely what 
the agency ordered.  
e. For these reasons, even if this issue could be raised by Petitioner in this 
judicial review action, the Court affirms the agency decision, finding that 
pursuant to Iowa Code §17A.19(10), the substantial rights of Petitioner have 
not been prejudiced by the agency action in citing the incorrect statute.  
Indeed, there has been no prejudice at all. 
2. With regard to alleged non-compliance with §85.48 by failing to fix the lump sum 
to be paid: 
a. This Court has previously expressed misgivings as to the language used by 
the agency to “fix the lump sum to be paid” as required by §85.48 (See 
“Ruling on Respondent’s Request for Judgment Entry and Petitioner’s 
Motion For Stay,” filed in this matter on March 17, 2020). 
b. This concern by the Court, however, was expressed in the context of 
determining whether a sum certain existed upon which to enter judgment 
pursuant to the court’s “ministerial function” under Iowa Code §86.42.  The 
Court found on that question that the manner in which the agency “fixed” 
the sum had not, at that time, adequately determined a sum certain because 
under the terms set forth in the agency decisions, the process established 
for calculating such sum had not been completed.   
c. That is a different question from the one which would be before the Court 
now, if this matter were properly raised on judicial review.  In this context, 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

33 
 
the Court finds that the agency has complied with §86.42 by adequately 
“fixing” the lump sum to be paid, but in so doing, established a process by 
which to compute the final dollar amount.  “Fixing” the lump sum to be paid 
is distinguishable from calculating the dollar amount that has been fixed, 
and it is only the latter which remained uncompleted at the time of the 
Court’s ruling on entry of judgment.  To the Court’s knowledge, such 
computation has not been completed to date.   
d. For this reason, the Court finds that this matter, although affirmed in all 
respects, should be remanded to the agency for computation of the final 
dollar amount of the commutation award, either pursuant to the procedure 
set forth in the Appeal Decision (appointment of a financial expert), or by 
the agency itself.  
ORDER 
WHEREFORE IT IS ORDERED AS FOLLOWS: 
1. For the reasons set forth herein, the Appeal Decision of the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner is AFFIRMED in all respects. 
2. This matter is REMANDED to the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner for 
computation of the precise dollar amount of the commuted lump-sum payment, 
either through the process established by the agency (appointment of a financial 
expert), or by the agency itself. 
3. Costs of this Judicial Review action are assessed to Petitioner. 
SO ORDERED. 
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

State of Iowa Courts
Type:
OTHER ORDER
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV190717
CITY OF SIOUX CITY VS. SANDS, RANDY A
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2020-05-12 16:42:32     page 34 of 34
E-FILED  2020 MAY 12 4:42 PM WOODBURY - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT
