Case Number: 22014213.01
Case Title:  ISKE, JEFFREY V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Iske Jeffrey-22014213.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JEFFREY ISKE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                     File No. 22014213.01 
GRAPHIC PACKAGING 
  : 
INTERNATIONAL, L.L.C., 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
LIBERTY INSURANCE CORP., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos.:  1402.40, 1402.60, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
  
1802, 1803, 2501, 2502, 2701, 
 
Defendants. 
  :                  2907 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Jeffrey Iske, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from defendants, Graphic Packaging International, L.L.C., as the 
employer and Liberty Insurance Corporation, as the insurance carrier.  Hearing was 
held on March 4, 2024 and was conducted via Zoom videoconference.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision.  No factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or 
discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 6, including defendants’ 
supplemental additions to Joint Exhibits 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, and 9.  The record also includes 
Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 9, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through K.  All exhibits 
were received into the evidentiary record without objection.    
Claimant testified on his own behalf.  No other witnesses testified live at the 
hearing.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.  
However, counsel for the parties were ordered to file post-hearing briefs.  The parties 
filed post-hearing briefs on April 9, 2024, and April 17, 2024, and this case was 
considered fully submitted to the undersigned on April 18, 2024. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Jun-10  07:36:41     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

ISKE V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL 
Page 2 
 
 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained temporary disability as a result of the January 17, 
2022 work injury and, if so, the extent of claimant’s entitlement to temporary 
total disability, temporary partial disability, or healing period benefits. 
2. Whether claimant sustained permanent disability as a result of the January 
17, 2022 work injury. 
3. Whether claimant’s permanent disability, if any, should be compensated as a 
scheduled member injury or as an unscheduled injury. 
4. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any. 
5. The proper commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any. 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of past medical expenses. 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
evaluation. 
8. Whether claimant is entitled to an order for alternate medical care. 
9. Whether defendants are entitled to a credit for short-term disability benefit 
payments to claimant. 
10. Whether defendants are entitled to a credit for medical or hospitalization 
expenses paid by a private health insurance carrier. 
11. Whether defendants have proven apportionment of some or all of the 
permanent disability proven to have arisen from claimant’s January 17, 2022 
work injury. 
12. Whether costs should be assessed against either party. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Jeffrey Iske, claimant, is a 58-year-old gentleman, who lives in Newton, Iowa.  
Mr. Iske has worked as a maintenance technician at Graphic Packaging International, 

ISKE V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL 
Page 3 
 
 
L.L.C. (hereinafter “Graphic Packaging”) since 2012.  On January 17, 2022, Mr. Iske 
slipped on ice on the roof of the employer’s premises and fell onto his right shoulder.  
He experienced pain in his right shoulder and down his right arm. 
Defendants initially accepted the injury as compensable and authorized medical 
care for claimant.  I find claimant’s testimony about his fall and subsequent symptoms to 
be credible and convincing.  It is clear that claimant sustained the fall and injury to his 
right shoulder.  Defendants stipulate that the injury occurred.  However, defendants 
dispute whether claimant’s request for healing period benefits from June 8, 2023 
through December 4, 2023 are causally related to the work injury.  Defendants also 
dispute whether the January 17, 2022 work injury caused permanent disability. 
Defendants authorized treatment through an orthopaedic surgeon, Steven A. 
Aviles, M.D.  On July 12, 2022, Dr. Aviles reviewed the MR arthrogram and indicated it 
“shows no evidence of labral disease or biceps disease.  His rotator cuff does show 
some significant tendinosis and possibly some bursal-sided tearing of the rotator cuff 
along the anterior supraspinatus.”  (Joint Exhibit 3, page 3)  On that date, Dr. Aviles 
recommended alternative treatment paths, including therapy, steroid injections, or 
surgical intervention.  Claimant did not desire an injection or surgery at that time. 
Mr. Iske returned to Dr. Aviles on August 23, 2022.  He reported physical therapy 
did not improve his symptoms.  Dr. Aviles recommended a steroid injection and 
claimant consented to the injection.  Claimant continued his physical therapy after the 
injection.  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 6)  
Mr. Iske again returned for evaluation with Dr. Aviles on October 25, 2022.  At 
that appointment, claimant reported, “He thought he was doing reasonably well, but he 
turned over in his sleep and developed acute onset of significant pain last night.”  (Joint 
Ex. 3, p. 7)  Dr. Aviles recommended surgical intervention for claimant’s right shoulder.   
Mr. Iske consented to the recommended surgery and Dr. Aviles took claimant to 
surgery on December 13, 2022.  Dr. Aviles performed a right shoulder arthroscopy, 
rotator cuff repair, biceps tenodesis, and extensive glenohumeral debridement.  (Joint 
Ex. 4)  Defendants continued to authorize post-surgical treatment through May 2023. 
However, in May 2023, defendants inquired of Dr. Aviles whether claimant’s 
ongoing condition was causally related to the initial work injury in January 2022.  Dr. 
Aviles authored a thoughtful and convincing report dated May 10, 2023.  He opined: 
Based upon the new information provided for me, particularly the physical 
therapy notes dated October 25, November 2, November 15, I feel 
comfortable with stating that within a reasonable degree of medical 
certainty that the surgery performed in December of 2022 is not causally 
related to any work incident he alleges in January of 2022. 

ISKE V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL 
Page 4 
 
 
Mr. Iske’s MRI in summer of 2022 showed a little bit of bursal-sided 
fraying of the rotator cuff, which is on the outside of the rotator cuff.  
Intraoperatively, I identified a high-grade partial tear, articular-sided, that 
also created biceps instability near the anterior cable.  This is a very 
different type of tear that was identified in the MRI that was performed in 
December of 2022.  
I have reviewed the physical therapy records that were provided on 
October 25, 2022.  Mr. Iske indicated that he had turned over in bed and 
did something wrong to his shoulder, developing acute onset of pain.  He 
did not provide this information to me when I had seen him in the office. 
On November 2, he further indicated that he was lying on his stomach in 
bed, moved wrong and felt a pulling or popping sensation in his shoulder 
and he was unable to move his arm indicating, “I think I tore my shoulder.”  
He had also told the therapist that he had been feeling much better until 
this incident had occurred.  At that point, he could not even lift his arm 
secondary to the pain.  Mr. Iske did not provide this history to me in the 
office. 
It would certainly make sense that something had occurred to Mr. Iske’s 
right shoulder between the MRI in the summer of 2022 and the actual 
surgery as it was a fairly significantly different finding that was identified on 
that MRI.  Based upon this information, I do think it is reasonable to state, 
once again within a reasonable degree of medical certainty, that Mr. Iske’s 
need for surgery in December of 2022 was not causally connected to any 
work incident, but more likely associated with his activities at home in 
October of 2022. 
The current need for surgery for the tear on his right shoulder, once again 
in my opinion is not related to any work-related injury in January of 2022 
and more related to his home activities. 
Mr. Iske’s current rotator cuff tear is a new tear that is more medial to the 
stitches, stating that it tore at the stitch site as opposed to at the repair 
site.  I think it is difficult to say one way or the other whether a new 
substantial or significant insult would cause this type of injury.  It is 
possible that it may just have been the quality of his rotator cuff.  I cannot 
say anything within a reasonable degree of medical certainty regarding 
this. 
Once again, it is my opinion, within a reasonable degree of medical 
certainty that Mr. Iske’s current need for shoulder surgery is unrelated to 
any work incident in January of 2022. 
(Defendants’ Ex. A, pp. 1-2) 

ISKE V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL 
Page 5 
 
 
Based upon the written opinion of Dr. Aviles, defendants denied that the need for 
either the first or second surgery was related to the initial work injury as of May 17, 
2023.  Defendants declined to authorize further medical care at that point.  (Defendants’ 
Ex. D, p. 22)  Claimant elected to pursue further medical care through a different 
orthopaedic surgeon.  Mr. Iske selected Jason Sullivan, M.D. to provide further 
orthopaedic care.  Dr. Sullivan first evaluated claimant on June 1, 2023.  He diagnosed 
claimant with a recurrent full-thickness rotator cuff tear in the right shoulder.  Dr. 
Sullivan recommended a revision repair of the right rotator cuff. 
On June 8, 2023, Dr. Sullivan performed a right revision rotator cuff repair and a 
suture removal from the prior surgery performed by Dr. Aviles.  (Joint Ex. 7)  Claimant 
had a reasonably good result from that surgery and reported “Doing very well with 
minimal pain” and “No complaints” by September 5, 2023.  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 9)  Dr. 
Sullivan released claimant to return to work on that date with work limited to waist level 
only, no overhead lifting, and no overhead work with the right arm.  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 11) 
In response to the causation opinion offered by Dr. Aviles, Mr. Iske obtained an 
independent medical evaluation performed by Sunil Bansal, M.D., on January 11, 2024.  
Dr. Bansal appears to have had the May 10, 2023 causation report authored by Dr. 
Aviles available for his review.  However, Dr. Bansal’s history does not appear to 
document or discuss the possibility that claimant suffered an injury to his right shoulder 
while sleeping as opposed to the work injury.  In fact, Dr. Bansal’s report has a 
causation section in which he discusses the mechanism of injury at work and the 
possibility that it caused claimant’s injury and resulting surgeries.  Yet, that causation 
section makes no mention of the potentially contrary evidence, including the physical 
therapy records or the causation report from Dr. Aviles.   
To generate a credible and convincing expert opinion and carry his burden of 
persuasion, claimant should have asked his medical expert to directly acknowledge and 
address the alternative theories expressed by claimant’s treating orthopaedic surgeon.  
I find it is a significant weakness in Dr. Bansal’s report to not directly address the 
contrary causation opinion, competing evidence of injury, or to explain why all of 
claimant’s treatment relates back to the initial injury instead of a potential intervening 
event or injury.  Dr. Bansal’s failure to acknowledge the contrary evidence and opinion, 
as well as his failure to explain the alleged error in Dr. Aviles’ analysis renders Dr. 
Bansal’s opinion less credible or convincing. 
Defendants further inquired of claimant’s second treating orthopaedic surgeon, 
Dr. Sullivan, to obtain his opinion about the cause of claimant’s ongoing condition and 
treatment.  Dr. Sullivan authored a report dated January 31, 2024.  Dr. Sullivan 
reviewed the MRIs, Dr. Aviles’ letter as well as Dr. Bansal’s IME report.  He opined: 
After reviewing all plausible information at my disposal, my opinion is that 
his right shoulder injury is not work-related.  There was an MRI showing a 
bursal-sided partial tear.  He had an incident that he relayed to physical 
therapy that was unrelated to work, and when Dr. Aviles scoped his 

ISKE V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL 
Page 6 
 
 
shoulder, his tear was a different morphology and different location.  For 
this reason, I think it is reasonable to conclude that the injury was 
independently related to something else and not work itself. 
(Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 6)   
Dr. Sullivan was selected by Mr. Iske as his treating physician.  Given that 
claimant selected him and trusted Dr. Sullivan to perform the revision surgery on his 
right shoulder, lends significant credibility to Dr. Sullivan’s opinions.  In rendering his 
causation opinion, Dr. Sullivan clearly considered the competing evidence and 
ultimately concluded that Dr. Aviles was correct.   
I find that the opinions of two treating orthopaedic surgeons (one of which was 
selected by the claimant) are credible and convincing.  Both Dr. Aviles and Dr. Sullivan 
examined claimant’s right shoulder in office as well as intra-operatively.  Both Dr. Aviles 
and Dr. Sullivan are respected orthopaedic surgeons.  Both are highly qualified to offer 
analysis and opinions on the cause of claimant’s right shoulder injuries, condition, and 
the cause of his surgeries and treatment.  I specifically find the opinions of Dr. Aviles 
and Dr. Sullivan to be more convincing than the causation opinion offered by Dr. 
Bansal.  I find that claimant failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that his 
need for either the first or second right shoulder surgeries are causally related to the 
January 2022 work injury. 
Nevertheless, I find that defendants authorized care with Dr. Aviles through May 
16, 2023.  Defendants did not deny liability or decline to authorize further medical care 
until May 17, 2023. 
The initial benefit claim asserted by claimant is a healing period claim for time off 
work between June 8, 2023 and December 4, 2023.  Having found that claimant failed 
to prove his treatment during this time period was causally related to the work injury, I 
similarly find that the claimant’s time off work during the period between June 8, 2023 
and December 4, 2023 is not proven to be causally related to the January 2022 work 
injury. 
Mr. Iske also asserts a claim for permanent disability related to the January 17, 
2022 work injury.  Dr. Bansal clearly awarded permanent impairment for claimant’s right 
shoulder and additional permanent functional impairment for claimant’s right biceps 
condition.  However, it appears from the MRI and the opinions of Dr. Aviles and Dr. 
Sullivan that the biceps injury is not related to the work injury.  While it is possible that 
the initial work injury could have resulted in a permanent functional impairment, there 
was an intervening non-work-related injury.  Claimant did not prove that his permanent 
functional impairment in either his right shoulder or right arm is directly or causally 
related to the January 17, 2022 work injury.  Therefore, I find that claimant failed to 
prove permanent disability as a result of the January 2022 work injury. 

ISKE V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL 
Page 7 
 
 
Mr. Iske also asserts a claim for past medical expenses and a request for 
alternate medical care moving forward.  Claimant has not proven that the medical 
expenses after May 17, 2023 are causally related to his work injury or authorized by 
defendants.  Mr. Iske also failed to prove that any ongoing or future medical care is 
directly related to the work injury. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Claimant clearly sustained a fall onto his right shoulder on January 17, 2022.  
Defendants admit the injury occurred and arose out of and in the course of claimant’s 
employment.  However, defendants challenge claimant’s assertion that he sustained 
lost time and is entitled to healing period benefits as a result of the work injury.  
Defendants also challenge whether claimant has proven he sustained permanent 
disability as a result of the work injury. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or for loss of earning capacity under section 85.34(2)(v).  The 
extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is 
determined by using the functional method.  Functional disability is "limited to the loss of 
the physiological capacity of the body or body part.”  Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 
502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998).  
The fact finder must consider both medical and lay evidence relating to the extent of the 
functional loss in determining permanent disability resulting from an injury to a 

ISKE V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL 
Page 8 
 
 
scheduled member.  Terwilliger v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 529 N.W.2d 267, 272-273 
(Iowa 1995); Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 420 (Iowa 1994).  
The initial claim asserted by claimant is a claim for temporary total disability, or 
healing period, benefits from June 8, 2023 through December 4, 2023.  Defendants 
stipulate that claimant was off work during this period of time.  (Hearing Report)  
However, defendants dispute whether this lost time from work is causally related to the 
January 17, 2022 work injury.   
When an injured worker has been unable to work during a period of recuperation 
from an injury that did not produce permanent disability, the worker is entitled to 
temporary total disability benefits during the time the worker is disabled by the injury.  
Those benefits are payable until the employee has returned to work, or is medically 
capable of returning to work substantially similar to the work performed at the time of 
injury.  Section 85.33(1).  
Healing period compensation describes temporary workers’ compensation 
weekly benefits that precede an allowance of permanent partial disability benefits.  
Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440 (Iowa 1999).  Section 85.34(1) provides 
that healing period benefits are payable to an injured worker who has suffered 
permanent partial disability until the first to occur of three events.  These are:  (1) the 
worker has returned to work; (2) the worker medically is capable of returning to 
substantially similar employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical 
recovery.  Maximum medical recovery is achieved when healing is complete and the 
extent of permanent disability can be determined.  Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. 
Kubli, Iowa App., 312 N.W.2d 60 (Iowa 1981).  Neither maintenance medical care nor 
an employee's continuing to have pain or other symptoms necessarily prolongs the 
healing period. 
In this case, I found that claimant sustained an intervening injury to his right 
shoulder outside of work in October 2022.  Having accepted the opinions of Dr. Aviles 
and Dr. Sullivan as most convincing and credible, I also found that claimant failed to 
prove his lost time from work from June 8, 2023 through December 4, 2023 was related 
to the January 17, 2022 work injury.  Given that claimant failed to prove his time off 
work during the claimed healing period is causally related to his January 2022 work 
injury, I conclude claimant failed to prove entitlement to either temporary total disability 
or healing period benefits.  
Mr. Iske next asserts a claim for permanent disability.  Iowa Code section 85.34 
provides for healing period benefits and permanent partial disability benefits, “[i]f an 
employee has suffered a personal injury causing permanent partial disability.”  Iowa 
Code section 85.34(1).  However, I accepted the causation opinions of the treating 
orthopaedic surgeons.  Claimant failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence 
that the January 17, 2022 work injury caused permanent impairment or permanent 
disability to his right shoulder or right arm.  Ultimately, I conclude claimant failed to 
prove entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits. 

ISKE V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL 
Page 9 
 
 
Mr. Iske asserts a claim for past medical expenses contained in Joint Exhibit 8.  
An employer is obligated to provide reasonable medical care for injuries arising out of 
and in the course of an injured worker’s employment.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Having 
found that claimant sustained a work injury on January 17, 2022, I must determine 
whether the claimed medical expenses are causally related to the work injury. 
The claimed medical expenses in Joint Exhibit 8 are for medical services 
provided from June 1, 2023 through December 27, 2023.  Defendants denied liability 
and declined to authorize additional medical care as of May 17, 2023.  All of the claimed 
medical expenses in Joint Exhibit 8 occurred after that denial.  Having found that 
claimant failed to prove the treatment occurring after May 17, 2023 is causally related to 
the January 2022 work injury, I conclude claimant failed to prove entitlement to an 
award of the medical expenses contained in Joint Exhibit 8. 
Mr. Iske also asserted a claim for alternate medical care.  Indeed, claimant is 
entitled to ongoing medical care if related to the January 17, 2022 work injury.  
However, having found that the treatment after May 17, 2023 is not related to the work 
injury, I conclude claimant failed to prove entitlement to alternate medical care moving 
forward.  Iowa Code section 85.27. 
In their post-hearing brief, defendants assert entitlement to a credit for all medical 
expenses paid, including for the expense of claimant’s December 2022 surgery and 
follow-up care through May 16, 2023.  (Defendants’ Post-Hearing Brief, p. 12)  This 
claim for a credit is not delineated or preserved in the hearing report.  Regardless, to the 
extent that claim could be raised by defendants in their post-hearing brief, I reject the 
claim for a credit for past medical expenses paid by defendants. 
Defendants clearly accepted the claim and authorized medical care for claimant’s 
work injury.  Defendants continued to authorize medical care until their denial on May 
17, 2023.  Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, “If the employer chooses the care, the 
employer shall hold the employee harmless for the cost of care until the employer 
notifies the employee that the employer is no longer authorizing all or any part of the 
care and the reason for the change in authorization.”  In this case, defendants selected 
and authorized the claimant’s medical provider through May 16, 2023.  Defendants are 
obligated to hold claimant harmless for the cost of the care they selected through May 
16, 2023 and are not entitled to a credit for any medical expenses paid prior to May 17, 
2023.  Iowa Code section 85.27(4). 
Mr. Iske also asserts a claim for reimbursement of his independent medical 
evaluation with Dr. Bansal.  Iowa Code section 85.39 grants claimant the right to seek 
an evaluation with a physician of his own choosing to be reimbursed by defendants 
under certain circumstances.  Claimant’s right to reimbursement is triggered if the 
employer has obtained an evaluation with a physician of its choosing and claimant 
believes the evaluation of permanent impairment to be too low.  However, “[a]n 
employer is not liable for the cost of such an examination if the injury for which the 

ISKE V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL 
Page 10 
 
 
employee is being examined is determined not to be a compensable injury.”  Iowa Code 
section 85.39(2). 
In this case, defendants stipulated that claimant sustained an injury on January 
17, 2022.  Dr. Bansal evaluated claimant for purposes of evaluating that injury.  The 
Iowa Court of Appeals concluded that an opinion from a physician chosen by 
defendants that claimant’s condition is not causally related to the alleged work injury is 
tantamount to a zero percent permanent impairment rating and qualifies claimant for an 
evaluation under Iowa Code section 85.39(2).  Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 
966 N.W.2d 326 (Iowa App. 2021) (2021 WL 3890603) (Table of Unpublished 
Decisions).   
Dr. Aviles was selected and authorized by defendants to provide care for 
claimant through May 16, 2023.  Dr. Aviles provided a written report opining that 
claimant’s ongoing condition is not causally related to the January 2022 work injury.  
Pursuant to the holding in Kern, Dr. Aviles’ opinion that there is no causation is 
tantamount to a zero percent permanent impairment rating from a physician chosen by 
defendants.  Id.  Therefore, claimant is entitled to reimbursement of his independent 
medical evaluation charges.  Iowa Code section 85.39(2). 
I find that Dr. Bansal’s charges, outlined in Claimant’s Exhibit 9, page 4 are 
reasonable.  I specifically find the fee of $3,786.00 is based on a typical fee charged by 
a medical provider to perform an impairment rating in the local area where Dr. Bansal’s 
examination was conducted.  Iowa Code section 85.39(2).  The Iowa Supreme Court 
has held that the fee associated with review of medical records and drafting a written 
report is reimbursable as well as the expense of the examination under Iowa Code 
section 85.39(2).  Mid American Construction, L.L.C. v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838 (Iowa 
2024).  Therefore, I conclude the full $3,786.00 independent medical evaluation fee 
should be reimbursed by defendants. 
Finally, claimant asserts a claim for reimbursement of his costs.  Costs are 
assessed at the discretion of the agency.  Iowa Code section 10A.328.  Claimant failed 
to prove entitlement to any additional weekly or medical benefits in this arbitration 
proceeding.  Exercising the agency’s discretion, I reject any claim for assessment of 
costs.  All parties shall bear their own costs associated with the arbitration hearing.  All 
other disputed issues noted in the hearing report are rendered moot by these findings 
and conclusions. 
ORDER 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s independent medical evaluation fees in 
the amount of three thousand seven hundred eighty-six and 00/100 dollars ($3,786.00). 
 
Claimant takes no further weekly or medical benefits. 
 
All parties shall bear their own costs. 

ISKE V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL 
Page 11 
 
 
Signed and filed this ____10th __ day of June, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Eric Loney (via WCES) 
Stephen Spencer (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
