Case Number: 21006717.01
Case Title:  MONSALVO LOPEZ, ONOFRE V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      MansalvoLopez Onofre-21006717.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ONOFRE MONSALVO LOPEZ, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                    File No. 21006717.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, INC.,   : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
CCMSI, 
  :    Head Note Nos.:  1400, 1402, 1402.20, 
 
 
  : 
 
     1402.40,1800, 1801, 1801.1,  
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
     1802, 1803, 2700 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
The claimant, Onofre Monsalvo Lopez, filed a petition for arbitration seeking 
workers’ compensation benefits from employer Seaboard Triumph Foods (“Seaboard”) 
and their insurer CCMSI.  Steven Howard appeared on behalf of the claimant.  Meredith 
Ashley appeared on behalf of the defendants.  Also present was Beatriz Bermudez.  
 
The matter came on for hearing on October 5, 2022, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips.  Pursuant to an order of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, the hearing occurred electronically via Zoom.  
The hearing proceeded without significant difficulty.  
The record in this case consists of Claimant’s Exhibits 1-12, and Defendants’ 
Exhibits A-F.  The defendants initially decided to not offer Defendants’ Exhibit D.  The 
claimant then indicated that they would offer Defendants’ Exhibit D into evidence as a 
Claimant’s Exhibit.  The defendants objected to this, as Defendants’ Exhibit D relates to 
an eye condition.  In a previous ruling denying a continuance of this matter, the claimant 
represented that the eye was a separate issue and not relevant to the hearing.  The 
claimant argued that the exhibit was relevant to the question of whether the claimant 
refused available work due to his termination.  The objection was sustained and 
Defendants’ Exhibit D was excluded from evidence.  The remainder of the exhibits were 
received into the record without objection.   
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Jan-05  14:16:47     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 2 
The claimant testified on his own behalf with the assistance of interpreter Joel 
Turcios.  Gina Castro was appointed the official reporter and custodian of the notes of 
the proceeding.  The hearing lasted a considerable amount of time, and another 
reporter was called in to complete the official transcript.  That reporter is Roxann 
Zuniga.  The evidentiary record closed at the end of the hearing, and the matter was 
fully submitted on November 11, 2022, after briefing by the parties.     
STIPULATIONS 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged 
injury.   
  
2. The claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of, and in the course of, 
employment on October 14, 2020.   
 
3. That, at the time of the alleged injury, the parties believe that the weekly 
compensation rate is five hundred thirty and 33/100 dollars ($530.33) per 
week.   
 
4. That the costs listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 1 have been paid. 
The defendants waived their affirmative defenses.     
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery.    
  
2. Whether the claimant is entitled to temporary partial disability benefits from 
October 19, 2020, through January 27, 2021.   
 
3. Whether the claimant is entitled to a running award of temporary total 
disability and/or healing period benefits on a running basis from January 28, 
2021, through the October 5, 2022, date of the hearing, and ongoing.   
 
4. Whether the claimant was off work from January 28, 2021, through October 5, 
2022, and ongoing.   
 
5. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 3 
 
6. The extent of permanent partial disability benefits, should any be awarded. 
 
7. Whether the disability is an industrial disability.   
 
8. Whether the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any are awarded, is October 25, 2021.   
 
9. Whether the claimant is entitled to alternate medical care pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.27.   
 
10. Whether an assessment of costs is appropriate.   
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Onofre Monsalvo Lopez, the claimant, was 52 years old at the time of the 
hearing.  (Testimony).  He currently resides in South Sioux City, Nebraska, but was 
born in Mexico.  (Testimony).  He came to the United States of America in 2002.  
(Testimony).  He possesses a work permit so that he can work in the United States.  
(Testimony).  He has a sixth-grade education.  (Testimony).  He did not pursue 
additional education since moving to the United States.  (Testimony).  He speaks very 
little English.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Lopez worked at Tyson for about nine years.  (Testimony).  He worked in a 
cleaning role where he washed areas with hoses.  (Testimony).  He estimated that the 
hoses that he used weighed between 60 and 70 pounds.  (Testimony).  He used the 
hose for about four hours per day.  (Testimony).  He earned eight and 00/100 dollars 
($8.00) per hour in that role.  (Testimony).  He quit this job because he was displeased 
with the pay.  (Testimony).   
From 2014 to 2016, Mr. Lopez worked for Curly’s, a subsidiary of Smithfield 
Foods.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 2:6; Testimony).  He performed clean-up work at a 
meatpacking plant.  (Testimony).  He washed material with hoses and hot water.  
(Testimony).  He estimated that the hoses weighed between 60 and 70 pounds.  
(Testimony).  He held the hose for about four hours.  (Testimony).  He left Curly’s 
because they were bought and the new company paid him less.  (Testimony).   
Between his work at Curly’s and his next job, Mr. Lopez worked in a metal shop 
for a rancher.  (Testimony).  He painted pig fencing.  (Testimony).  This was a seasonal 
position, and he worked June to September of 2016.  (Testimony).   
For five months between 2016 and 2017, Mr. Lopez worked for Palmer Candy.  
(CE 2:6).  He packed candy and cookies into little bags.  (Testimony).  He earned ten 

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 4 
and 00/100 dollars ($10.00) per hour.  (Testimony).  He was laid off from Palmer 
because their work is seasonal in nature.  (Testimony).   
Prior to beginning work with Seaboard, Mr. Lopez had a pre-employment 
physical examination at UnityPoint Occupational Medicine, on July 26, 2017.  
(Claimant’s Exhibit 2:2-9).  Mr. Lopez denied having any prior health issues, nor had he 
sought any treatment by a doctor for a pre-existing injury or had any surgeries.  (CE 2:4-
5).  Mr. Lopez also denied having any prior workers’ compensation claims.  (CE 2:5).  
He indicated that he could work in extreme hot and cold environments, and could stand 
8 to 10 hours without pain.  (CE 2:5).  Mr. Lopez had functional range of motion in all 
measured areas during his examination.  (CE 2:7).  The examination was completed, 
including a lift test that Mr. Lopez was able to complete.  (CE 2:8).   
Mr. Lopez began work for Seaboard in August of 2017.  (Testimony).  Mr. Lopez 
worked as a janitor in the cooler/main break area at the Seaboard plant.  (CE 10:68).  
He testified that he picked up pieces of pigs that would fall on the ground.  (Testimony).  
This included hams weighing 30 to 35 pounds.  (Testimony).  After picking up pig 
scraps, he would place them into a garbage bin.  (Testimony).  According to a document 
in evidence, one of the essential functions of the job was to “[p]ick up downed hogs.”  
(CE 11:70).  The job also required the claimant to push items weighing up to 60 pounds 
up to 35 inches on an occasional basis.  (CE 11:70).  He was required to pull hoses this 
distance, as well.  (CE 11:70).  The claimant needed to have 30 pounds of grip strength 
when controlling the aforementioned hoses.  (CE 11:70).  He constantly needed to 
reach an arm’s length in order to access rails and overhead areas for cleaning.  (CE 
11:70).  He needed to be able to occasionally horizontally pull downed hog carcasses 
weighing up to 40 pounds from a 37-inch height up to 50 feet.  (CE 11:70).  He also 
needed to occasionally grip up to 55 pounds while moving carcasses on the floor.  (CE 
11:70).  He had to constantly balance and stand, while occasionally walking on the 
cement floor.  (CE 11:70).  Mr. Lopez also needed to be able to frequently bend, 
occasionally crawl, and occasionally crouch or kneel.  (CE 11:70).  Finally, in a 
document provided in evidence, it was noted that Mr. Lopez was required to lift 50-
pound tubs of scraps to dump down a chute, and use a squeegee to move product from 
under a machine.  (CE 11:72).   
Mr. Lopez described his typical day of work at Seaboard.  (Testimony).  He would 
arrive at 5:15 a.m., and collect refuse containers and trays.  (Testimony).  Once the 
production line started, he would begin to gather leftovers and garbage as they fell from 
the line.  (Testimony).  This included items like hams or loins.  (Testimony).  If they were 
larger items like half pigs, “other men” would be called in to pick them up and dump 
them.  (Testimony).  He testified that he was “not supposed” to be picking up those kind 
of items.  (Testimony).  He would then discard the refuse which he collected, and clean 
the bins and containers.  (Testimony).  His day ended about one hour after the line shut 
down, as he and his co-employees would continue until they had everything cleaned up.  
(Testimony). 

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 5 
The claimant was terminated for a short period of time in 2019 due to a 
misunderstanding.  (Testimony).  He went on vacation, and when he returned, he was 
not allowed back into the plant.  (Testimony).  He thought that he had approval for 
taking a vacation before leaving.  (Testimony).  His union then advocated for him with 
human resources and he was given his job back.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Lopez testified that on October 14, 2020, he was working on the line at 
Seaboard.  (Testimony).  His supervisor asked him to bring down three hog carcasses 
from above him on a ledge.  (Testimony).  Mr. Lopez alleged that he told his supervisor 
that the hog would need to be cut first “because they were too heavy for me to bring 
them down unless they were cut in half…”  (Testimony).  He estimated that the hog 
weighed 100 to 130 pounds.  (Testimony).  He testified that his supervisor told him to 
bring them down because no one was available to cut the hog carcasses.  (Testimony).  
He began to pull down a hog carcass and lifted it, when he “immediately felt a crack and 
pop in [his] back.”  (Testimony).  After feeling the pop, he developed a lump in his back.  
(Testimony).  He dropped the carcass, and sat still.  (Testimony).  He testified that he 
developed a fever, as well.  (Testimony).  He told his supervisor that he injured himself, 
at which time his supervisor sent him to the infirmary.  (Testimony).  He further testified 
that Seaboard took him to a doctor in Omaha on this day.  (Testimony).  However, there 
is no record of a visit on October 14, 2020.  Mr. Lopez testified that he did not return to 
work the next day because he could not stand up straight due to pain.  (Testimony).  He 
indicated that he did not return to work until five days later, as he could not get out of 
bed for four days.  (Testimony).  He contradicted this a little bit, in testifying that his 
family had to help him out of bed so that he could use the bathroom.  (Testimony).   
On October 19, 2020, Mr. Lopez reported to CompChoice, where Darin Gregory, 
M.D., examined him.  (CE 3:10-13).  Mr. Lopez told Dr. Gregory that he had left low 
back pain since October 14, 2020.  (CE 3:10).  He also complained of initial 
paresthesias and weakness in his entire left leg, along with continued paresthesias 
down the posterior part of his leg to the knee.  (CE 3:10).  He also had soreness with 
bending.  (CE 3:10).  Dr. Gregory diagnosed the claimant with a left lumber strain.  (CE 
3:10).  He recommended that the claimant pursue physical therapy, use ice and heat, 
and take naproxen.  (CE 3:10).  Dr. Gregory provided restrictions for the claimant 
including: lifting up to 10 pounds “but not from the floor,” pushing and pulling up to 20 
pounds, no climbing ladders, and no frequent bending or stooping.  (CE 3:10).  Dr. 
Gregory requested that the claimant return on November 2, 2020, for a re-evaluation.  
(CE 3:10).   
Mr. Lopez began therapy on October 23, 2020.  (CE 4:32-35).  Mr. Lopez told the 
therapist that he was “bent over lifting a half hog.”  (CE 4:33).  He indicated that he had 
pain in the back of his thigh and his back when he bent over.  (CE 4:33).  He also had 
pain when getting up.  (CE 4:33).  He rated his pain 8-9 out of 10 when bending over 
and 2 out of 10 when walking.  (CE 4:33).  The therapist observed that the claimant had 
pain when bending over and lifting.  (CE 4:33).  The therapist opined that the claimant 
needed therapy in order to reduce rotation, restore full function to the low back and 
pelvis, reduce pain and swelling, and restore his functional work activities.  (CE 4:34).   

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 6 
Mr. Lopez returned to Dr. Gregory’s office at CompChoice on November 2, 2020.  
(CE 3:14-17).  Mr. Lopez had been off work, using vacation time.  (CE 3:14).  He 
reported doing better; however, he complained of slow progress.  (CE 3:14).  He also 
complained of pain at night, pain with bending, and pain with rising from a seated 
position.  (CE 3:14).  He also noted pain with standing and walking for a long period of 
time.  (CE 3:14).  He continued physical therapy.  (CE 3:14).  Upon physical 
examination, Dr. Gregory found the claimant to have pain to palpation in the bilateral L5 
paraspinous areas.  (CE 3:14).  The claimant had normal straight leg raises and deep 
tendon reflexes.  (CE 3:14).  Mr. Lopez displayed decreased and painful bending and 
rotation to the right side.  (CE 3:14).  Dr. Gregory continued to diagnose the claimant 
with a left lumbar strain.  (CE 3:14).  He also continued to recommend that the claimant 
attend physical therapy.  (CE 3:14).  He prescribed tizanidine for pain.  (CE 3:14).  
Finally, the claimant provided changed restrictions, which included: lifting up to 15 
pounds and pushing or pulling up to 40 pounds, no climbing ladders, no frequent 
bending or stooping, no lifting from the floor, and no standing or walking for more than 
45 minutes per hour.  (CE 3:14).  Dr. Gregory asked the claimant to return on November 
16, 2020, for additional evaluations.  (CE 3:14).   
After he returned to work, Seaboard put him on the production line; however, Mr. 
Lopez told Seaboard that he “couldn’t do that because the pain was too intense.”  
(Testimony).  He was then put into a recordkeeping role, where he kept track of how 
many containers were thrown in the trash.  (Testimony).  There were also times where 
he visually inspected pigs coming out of the freezer to make sure they were not dirty.  
(Testimony).  In this role, he stood and sat when needed.  (Testimony).  He testified 
that, eventually, someone took his chair.  (Testimony).  He told his supervisor, but 
alleged that he was never provided a replacement chair.  (Testimony).  Mr. Lopez 
testified that he could likely have continued to work this position.  (Testimony).    
On November 16, 2020, Dean Wampler, M.D., examined the claimant at 
CompChoice for his continued low back issues.  (CE 3:18-21).  Mr. Lopez complained 
of a setback in his recovery.  (CE 3:18).  He previously reported to his therapist that he 
was “feeling great;” however, when he returned to work, “he was placed in a position 
where he was standing most all of the time,” which aggravated his issues.  (CE 3:18).  
Mr. Lopez indicated that he felt as bad as he did when he was injured.  (CE 3:18).  
Interestingly, his pain switched from his right lower back to his left lower back.  (CE 
3:18).  Dr. Wampler found marked tenderness to palpation of the left L4-5 and L5-S1 
joints.  (CE 3:18).  He also jumped when the left sciatic notch was palpated.  (CE 3:18).  
Dr. Wampler ordered x-rays of the lumbar spine, which showed some “modest 
degenerative change higher up” with advanced disk collapse at L5-S1 with bony spurs 
laterally and anteriorly.  (CE 3:18).  Dr. Wampler diagnosed Mr. Lopez with low back 
pain with pre-existing lumbar degenerative disc disease and recurrent radiculitis or 
radiculopathy.  (CE 3:18).  Dr. Wampler restricted the claimant to sedentary work only 
with the ability to stand and walk for 10 minutes every hour.  (CE 3:18).  Dr. Wampler 
prescribed naproxen and scheduled a lumbar MRI.  (CE 3:18).   

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 7 
The claimant reported to Tri-State Specialists, LLP, for an MRI of the lumbar 
spine.  (CE 5:40-41).  The radiologist provided impressions as follows for the claimant: 
1. L5-S1 significant degenerative disc space narrowing with low-grade 
central disc herniation with no current nerve root impingement or 
displacement noted. 
2. Disc space narrowing L1-2 with low-grade broad-based bulging annulus 
but no nerve root impingement or displacement.   
(CE 5:40-41).   
Mr. Lopez returned to CompChoice and visited with Dr. Wampler on November 
30, 2020. (CE 3:24-26).  Mr. Lopez told Dr. Wampler that he experienced “significant 
improvement,” which he attributed to his supervisors following the provided restrictions 
so that he could alternate between sitting and standing.  (CE 3:24).  Dr. Wampler 
reviewed physical therapy notes, which indicated that the claimant reported being 70 
percent improved.  (CE 3:24).  Dr. Wampler observed the claimant having improved 
lumbar mobility with tenderness over the left sacroiliac joint and the sciatic notch.  (CE 
3:24).  Dr. Wampler told Mr. Lopez through an interpreter that he had arthritis in his low 
spine, but that the MRI showed no nerve impingement.  (CE 3:24).  Dr. Wampler opined 
that this would continue to improve and not need surgery.  (CE 3:24).  Dr. Wampler 
prescribed additional muscle relaxers and continued therapy.  (CE 3:24).  Dr. Wampler 
kept his restrictions the same, and would begin a transitional return to work program as 
of the next visit.  (CE 3:24).   
On December 14, 2020, Dr. Gregory examined Mr. Lopez again at CompChoice 
for his lumbar strain.  (CE 3:27-28).  Mr. Lopez felt 75 percent improved.  (CE 3:27).  He 
described proceeding through an FCE, during which he could lift up to 30 pounds before 
he experienced pain.  (CE 3:27).  Mr. Lopez indicated that physical therapy helped him.  
(CE 3:27).  When Dr. Gregory examined Mr. Lopez, he found mildly decreased flexion, 
but normal rotation.  (CE 3:27).  Dr. Gregory also found left SI and sciatic notch pain 
upon palpation.  (CE 3:27).  Dr. Gregory recommended that the claimant continue 
physical therapy, and refilled a prescription for tizanidine.  (CE 3:27).  Dr. Gregory also 
provided work restrictions which included: lifting up to 25 pounds, no frequent bending 
or stooping, and being allowed to take a 10-minute break every hour as needed from 
standing and walking.  (CE 3:27).  Dr. Gregory asked the claimant to return on 
December 28, 2020, for “reevaluation and discharge” if he was doing well.  (CE 3:27).   
Dr. Gregory saw Mr. Lopez for a repeat visit on December 28, 2020.  (CE 3:29-
31).  Mr. Lopez continued to complaint of “a lot of pain.”  (CE 3:29).  Dr. Gregory noted 
that the pain may have been exacerbated by lifting done during physical therapy.  (CE 
3:29).  Upon physical examination, Dr. Gregory noted that Mr. Lopez displayed 
decreased right side bending and flexion with pain.  (CE 3:29).  Mr. Lopez also had pain 
with palpation of the left paraspinous lumbar area “down into his left mid buttocks area.”  
(CE 3:29).  Dr. Gregory recommended that the claimant had an “ortho spine 
consultation” since the pain persisted for two months with no progress over recent visits.  

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 8 
(CE 3:29).  Dr. Gregory provided restrictions including: lifting up to 30 pounds, and no 
frequent bending or stooping.  (CE 3:29).   
On January 4, 2021, Mr. Lopez had another therapy evaluation.  (CE 4:36-38).  
He had attended 17 physical therapy visits, and had not missed any sessions.  (CE 
4:36).  He felt about 50 percent improved; however, he felt worse since having to do a 
lifting exercise.  (CE 4:36).  He rated his pain 6 out of 10.  (CE 4:36).  Mr. Lopez felt that 
he was not ready to perform his job lifting pigs, as he was unable to lift “something that 
heavy.”  (CE 4:36).  Mr. Lopez was not using proper lifting techniques and required 
verbal cues for certain lifts.  (CE 4:37).   
Pedro Ricart-Hoffiz, M.D., examined the claimant at Miller Orthopedic Specialists 
on January 7, 2021, based upon a referral from Dr. Gregory.  (CE 6:42-43).  Mr. Lopez 
told the doctor that, two months ago, he was lifting a small hog when he experienced a 
sharp, dull ache in the left side of his lower back.  (CE 6:42).  Mr. Lopez noted he 
completed physical therapy, which helped him greatly.  (CE 6:42).  He reported pain of 
6 out of 10, and noted that a recent therapy visit exacerbated his symptoms.  (CE 6:42).  
He brought his MRI reports with him for review by Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz.  (CE 6:42).  Upon 
examination, Mr. Lopez had mild tenderness to palpation in the left paraspinal 
musculature, along with mild discomfort with lumbar range of motion.  (CE 6:42).  The 
doctor observed that Mr. Lopez ambulated with a normal gait.  (CE 6:42-43).  After 
reviewing the results of the previous MRI, Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz diagnosed Mr. Lopez with 
chronic back pain and a muscle strain, degenerative disc disease at L5-S1, and mild 
lumbar stenosis at L1-2.  (CE 6:43).  The doctor opined that the claimant had fairly 
benign symptoms that only worsened with lifting greater than 20 pounds.  (CE 6:43).  
Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz opined that the claimant should not lift more than 20 pounds until he 
could review the x-rays, and that the claimant’s pain was “likely associated to 
exacerbation of his pre-existing disease.”  (CE 6:43).   
Mr. Lopez was discharged from physical therapy on January 8, 2021, after his 
previous referral expired with no new referral issued.  (CE 4:39).   
Mr. Lopez provided the defendant-employer with a certificate to return to 
school/work on January 25, 2021.  (CE 10:63, 66).  Tonya Flaugh, A.R.N.P. from 
Siouxland Community Health Center signed off on the form and indicated that the 
claimant’s absence from work on January 25, 2021, and January 26, 2021, should be 
excused.  (CE 10:66).  Ms. Flaugh concluded that the claimant could return to work on 
January 27, 2021, with no restrictions.  (CE 10:66).   
Seaboard terminated Mr. Lopez effective February 2, 2021.  (CE 10:67).  His 
human resources file indicates that his last date worked was January 21, 2021.  (CE 
10:67).  Mr. Lopez testified that this was inaccurate, and that he worked several other 
days after January 21, 2021.  (Testimony).  Mr. Lopez indicated that he had an eye 
infection, returned to work to discuss his absence, and told the human resources team 
that he needed “a few days to be able to recuperate.”  (Testimony).  Human resources 
told him that they wanted him at work the next day, or he would be fired.  (Testimony).  

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 9 
Mr. Lopez did not return to work on January 27, 2021, as indicated by Ms. Flaugh’s 
letter.  (Testimony).  He testified that he needed more time to recover and that he could 
not see or drive due to an eye infection.  (Testimony).  Of note, Mr. Lopez did not have 
a driver’s license, so it is unclear how his alleged inability to drive was a hindrance to his 
reporting to work.  (Testimony).  He was terminated due to a two-day absence.  (CE 
10:68).  Mr. Lopez did not contact his union representative in order to seek 
reinstatement, as he felt “really bad.”  (Testimony).  
Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz responded to a letter from “Marlene Bieghler” on March 23, 
2021.  (DE B:10).  He opined that Mr. Lopez’s work injury correlated for an exacerbation 
of pre-existing disease “as a baseline” for his workers’ compensation injury.  (DE B:10).  
He continued by opining that the claimant responded to conservative care before re-
aggravating his injury in physical therapy.  (DE B:10).   
On April 15, 2021, Mr. Lopez continued his care with Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz.  (CE 6:44-
45).  He continued to perform his home exercises and use over the counter pain 
medications, but his back pain continued to be 6 out of 10.  (CE 6:44).  This included 
shooting pain mostly on the left.  (CE 6:44).  Mr. Lopez still had mild tenderness to 
palpation in his left paraspinal musculature and minimal discomfort with his lumbar 
range of motion.  (CE 6:44).  Mr. Lopez now had a mildly antalgic gait.  (CE 6:44).  Dr. 
Ricart-Hoffiz ordered x-rays of the lumbar spine, which showed mild-to-moderate 
multilevel degenerative changes and degenerative disc disease.  (CE 6:44).  The 
changes were most significant at L5-S1.  (CE 6:44).  Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz’s diagnoses 
remained the same.  (CE 6:44).  The doctor recommended an epidural injection at L5-
S1, and requested that Mr. Lopez return three weeks after the injection.  (CE 6:44).  Mr. 
Lopez could work as tolerated.  (CE 6:44).   
On May 4, 2021, Jery Inbarasu, M.D., examined Mr. Lopez at Momenta Pain 
Care.  (DE C:16-21).  Mr. Lopez presented for consideration of a L5-S1 lumbar epidural 
steroid injection.  (DE C:16).  Mr. Lopez told the provider that he was lifting a 300-pound 
pig off the floor at his work when he noticed a popping sensation and immediate pain in 
his left lower back.  (DE C:16).  Since then, he had pain in his lower back.  (DE C:16).  
Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz referred him for the injection.  (DE C:16).  He displayed tenderness to 
palpation over the lower back.  (DE C:19).  An L5-S1 lumbar epidural steroid injection 
was performed.  (DE C:21).   
Mr. Lopez returned to Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz’s office on May 27, 2021.  (CE 6:46-47).  
Since his last visit, he had an injection, which “provided little relief.”  (CE 6:46).  The 
pain was localized to the buttock area, and was worse with touch.  (CE 6:46).  Mr. 
Lopez had a normal gait.  (CE 6:46).  Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz’s diagnoses were:  
1. Chronic back pain, muscle strain. 
2. Degenerative disc disease at L5-S1. 
3. Lumbar stenosis, L1-L2, mild. 
4. Bilateral SI joint pain.   

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 10 
(CE 6:46).  Mr. Lopez did not have relief with the injections, and had pain mostly around 
his buttock area.  (CE 6:46).  Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz suspected that Mr. Lopez had residual 
symptoms of SI joint pain.  (CE 6:46).  Mr. Lopez indicated that he would like a trial of a 
diagnostic therapeutic injection of both of the SI joints.  (CE 6:46).  The doctor allowed 
him to continue to work as tolerated.  (CE 6:46).   
 
Mr. Lopez reported to Andrew Huff, M.D., at Bluffs Pain Management on August 
3, 2021, for evaluation of chronic low back pain.  (Defendants’ Exhibit A:1-2).  Mr. Lopez 
complained that his pain was worse when he bent forward and backwards.  (DE A:1).  
He noted that he tried physical therapy, but did not have any improvement.  (DE A:1).  
Mr. Lopez displayed tenderness to palpation of the lumbar spine.  (DE A:2).  Dr. Huff 
also observed that Mr. Lopez had decreased range of motion and pain with motion in 
his lower back.  (DE A:2).  Dr. Huff provided the claimant with a sacroiliac joint injection.  
(DE A:2).  He immediately had 85 percent to 90 percent improvement of his pain after 
the injection.  (DE A:2).   
 
On August 26, 2021, Mr. Lopez returned to Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz’s office for continued 
back and bilateral leg pain follow-up.  (CE 6:48-49).  He rated his pain 7 out of 10, and 
told the doctor that his SI joint injection provided little relief.  (CE 6:48).  Activity and 
ambulation worsened his pain.  (CE 6:48).  Mr. Lopez continued to have tenderness to 
palpation in his bilateral PSIS and mild discomfort with lumbar range of motion.  (CE 
6:48).  Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz opined that, since Mr. Lopez had no relief from his SI joint 
injections, it was not likely that sacroiliitis was contributing to his current complaints.  
(CE 6:48).  He thus recommended a repeat L5-S1 epidural injection.  (CE 6:48).  If that 
injection failed to provide relief, the doctor recommended two surgical options.  (CE 
6:48).  Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz allowed the claimant to work as tolerated.  (CE 6:48).   
 
Mr. Lopez also reported to Dr. Huff’s office on August 26, 2021.  (DE A:3-4).  Mr. 
Lopez complained that the previous SI joint injection did not help much.  (DE A:3).  Dr. 
Huff discussed treatment options for the claimant.  (DE A:4).  Dr. Huff observed that the 
claimant ambulated with a limp.  (DE A:4).  He also continued to have tenderness on 
palpation in the lumbar spine.  (DE A:4).  Dr. Huff wanted to see the claimant’s MRI 
studies before he opined on potential additional treatment options.  (DE A:4).   
 
On September 1, 2021, Dr. Huff added an item to the August 26, 2021, medical 
record.  (DE A:4).  He was able to obtain the MRI studies, and opined that they showed 
“Modic type II endplate changes at L5-S1 and a degenerative disc with a central disc 
bulge” at that level.  (DE A:4).  Based upon that, Dr. Huff recommended that the 
claimant have an epidural steroid injection to see if it provided any improvement.  (DE 
A:4).  Dr. Huff also considered whether the claimant may be a candidate for an intercept 
procedure.  (DE A:4).   
 
Dr. Huff saw Mr. Lopez again on September 21, 2021, for his continued low back 
complaints.  (DE A:5-6).  Dr. Huff performed an intralaminar epidural injection for the 
claimant at L5-S1.  (DE A:5-6).   

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 11 
 
Mr. Lopez continued his care with Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz on September 23, 2021.  (CE 
6:50).  An epidural injection provided two days prior helped his leg symptoms; however, 
he continued to complain of a sore back.  (CE 6:50).  The doctor recorded that this 
injection “relieved more symptoms than his SI joint injection previously.”  (CE 6:50).  Dr. 
Ricart-Hoffiz requested that Mr. Lopez return in three weeks in order to determine 
whether the injection was successful.  (CE 6:50).  Mr. Lopez expressed an interest in 
radiofrequency ablation if his pain returned.  (CE 6:50).  Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz continued to 
allow the claimant to work “[a]s tolerated.”  (CE 6:50).   
 
Mr. Lopez returned to Dr. Huff’s office on October 12, 2021, for continued pain 
management treatment.  (DE A:7-8).  Mr. Lopez told Dr. Huff that the injection helped 
“some,” but he was still having low back pain that radiated to the left leg.  (DE A:7).  He 
rated his improvement 30 percent to 40 percent.  (DE A:8).  Dr. Huff opined that the 
claimant failed conservative therapy and continued to have low back pain despite 
injections.  (DE A:8).  Based upon the failure of conservative care, Dr. Huff 
recommended a “basivertebral nerve ablation at L5 and at S1.”  (DE A:8).   
 
On October 25, 2021, Mr. Lopez returned to Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz’s office to follow-up 
his epidural injection.  (CE 6:51).  Mr. Lopez noted that he continued to work and that he 
was “doing fairly well.”  (CE 6:51).  The doctor opined that Mr. Lopez continued to 
respond to conservative treatment, and he recommended that they continue to observe 
the claimant.  (CE 6:51).  Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz deferred to the pain management physician 
for additional pain control measures, but noted that Mr. Lopez was to return to his office 
on an as needed basis.  (CE 6:51).  The doctor continued to allow the claimant to work, 
“[a]s tolerated.”  (CE 6:51).   
 
Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz responded to another letter from Jennifer Thompson on January 
28, 2022.  (DE B:15).  The doctor opined that the claimant’s referral to pain 
management on October 5, 2021, was causally related to his October 14, 2020, work 
injury.  (DE B:15).  Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz opined that the claimant suffered “an exacerbation 
of his pre-existing disease with findings of degenerative disc disease at L5-S1.”  (DE 
B:15).  The doctor recommended a follow-up letter with Dr. Huff regarding a plan of 
treatment, and noted that he could not provide any permanent impairment rating since 
Mr. Lopez had yet to achieve maximum medical improvement (“MMI”).  (DE B:15).   
 
On February 1, 2022, Dr. Huff wrote a letter to “Jennifer,” in which he outlined the 
treatment that he provided to Mr. Lopez.  (DE A:9).  Dr. Huff opined that there were two 
potential treatments available for Mr. Lopez’s axial low back pain.  (DE A:9).  The first is 
a single injection of VIA disc, which is a cadaver disc emulsion to replace disc height 
and provide improvement of function.  (DE A:9).  The alternative is a basivertebral nerve 
ablation of L5 and S1.  (DE A:9).  Dr. Huff concluded, “[o]therwise, from my standpoint 
the patient will have reached MMI.  He should continue on anti-inflammatory medication 
and nonopioid pain medication and possibly back bracing.”  (DE A:9).   
 
In response to a check-box letter signed May 10, 2022, Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz agreed 
that it was undetermined as to whether the claimant was a surgical candidate.  (CE 

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 12 
7:52).  In order to determine whether the claimant was a surgical candidate, the doctor 
agreed that he would need to re-examine Mr. Lopez.  (CE 7:52).  Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz 
agreed that Mr. Lopez suffered an on-the-job injury which consisted of an aggravation of 
a pre-existing condition.  (CE 7:52).  The doctor indicated a re-examination would be 
helpful, but also hand-wrote, “recommend an FCE [functional capacity evaluation].”  (CE 
7:52).  Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz also handwrote the following: 
Depending on main complaint or ongoing issue would determine candidacy 
for one procedure or the other, given he has shown both radicular and axial 
back pain as complaint in the past.   
If only radicular symptoms, repeat MRI for up-to-date assessment of lateral 
recess stenosis to discuss laminotomy.   
If axial back pain major component [sic], then ALIF would be an option.   
(CE 7:52).   
 
Anke Horacek, M.D., of Physician Legal Consultants of Nebraska LLC, drafted a 
records review and medical opinion, dated September 15, 2022.  (CE 8:53-58).  Dr. 
Horacek was retained by claimant’s counsel.  (CE 8:53).  She never examined Mr. 
Lopez, however, she did have a phone conversation with him.  (CE 8:53).  Dr. Horacek 
is board certified in emergency medicine.  (CE 9:60).  Dr. Horacek noted the claimant’s 
description of the alleged incident and his subsequent medical care.  (CE 8:54).  
According to her, Mr. Lopez continued to suffer from low back pain, “which has 
prevented him from working and participating in everyday activities.”  (CE 8:54).  Based 
upon a citation to some academic journals, Dr. Horacek opined that Mr. Lopez met “the 
injury symptom causation requirements for his low back pain,” and that even if he had 
“pre-existing degenerative disease of his lumbar spine, it was asymptomatic.”  (CE 
8:54).  Dr. Horacek cites to several factors which support her opinion.  (CE 8:54-55).   
 
Mr. Lopez told Dr. Horacek that he continued to have low back pain in his left 
lower back area, and that he recently noticed right back pain and numbness in his right 
leg.  (CE 8:55).  Staying in one place for too long aggravated Mr. Lopez’s pain.  (CE 
8:55).  He also had increased pain with lifting and bending.  (CE 8:55).  Mr. Lopez 
claimed to Dr. Horacek that he could no longer pick up his 40 pound two year old 
daughter.  (CE 8:55).  Dr. Horacek opined that Mr. Lopez required “ongoing treatment of 
his [Mr. Lopez’s] low back pain and will more likely than not require surgery on his 
lumbar spine in the future to maximize function and mobility.”  (CE 8:58).  Dr. Horacek 
concluded that Mr. Lopez would require another lumbar spine MRI, treatment with an 
orthopedic surgeon, an anterior lumbar interbody fusion, a laminectomy, treatment with 
a chronic pain specialist, physical therapy, additional injections, a radiofrequency 
ablation, and aquatherapy.  (CE 8:58).   
Since his termination by Seaboard, he has not worked anywhere.  (Testimony).  
Mr. Lopez testified that he had not contacted his union representative at Seaboard in 

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 13 
attempting to obtain reinstatement following his termination.  (Testimony).  He testified 
that he felt he could not do anything besides “walk a little bit.”  (Testimony).  Mr. Lopez 
felt that he could not bend down, squat down, or pick up any kind of weight.  
(Testimony).  He felt that he could not return and perform the same job he performed on 
October 14, 2020, because he had “a lot of pain.”  (Testimony).  He also felt that he 
could not perform the job that he previously held at Curly’s because he had to pull and 
carry heavy hoses.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Lopez testified that he never had back pain before October 14, 2020.  
(Testimony).  He also never missed work because of a back problem prior to the date of 
injury, nor did he operate under any restrictions.  (Testimony).  He never saw a doctor 
for his back prior to the October 14, 2020, incident.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Lopez described his typical day at the time of the hearing.  (Testimony).  He 
took 500 mg of Tylenol in order to relieve his pain, and he does not do “a whole lot.”  
(Testimony).  He walks a little, and takes his children to school.  (Testimony).  He was 
able to walk two-to-three blocks to where the school bus picks up his children.  
(Testimony).  Otherwise, he testified that he could not do “much of anything” because of 
his pain.  (Testimony).  He cannot lift anything more than 15 pounds.  (Testimony).  Mr. 
Lopez has applied for Social Security Disability Benefits, but his application has yet to 
be approved.  (Testimony).  He also does not possess a driver’s license.  (Testimony). 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.904(3).   
Temporary Disability 
 
The claimant seeks an award of temporary partial disability benefits from October 
19, 2020, through January 27, 2021.  This is based upon an argument that the claimant 
was working in a light duty capacity during this time, and was working “less than full 
hours.”  See Hearing Report, pg. 3.  The claimant further argues that he is entitled to 
temporary total disability benefits from January 28, 2021, through October 5, 2022, and 
ongoing as a running award.  This is based upon an argument that the claimant has not 
been “offered suitable work” pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.33.  The defendants 
argue that the claimant’s October 14, 2020, work injury was not a cause of temporary 
disability, and even if it was, the claimant is only entitled to temporary partial disability 
benefits for a short period of time.   
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is 
probable, rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 14 
148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); 
Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).   
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156.  When considering 
the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination 
occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the 
nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and 
practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  
Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985).  Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994).  Supportive lay testimony may be used 
to buttress expert testimony, and therefore is also relevant and material to the causation 
question.   
Iowa employers take an employee subject to any active or dormant health 
problems, and must exercise care to avoid injury to both the weak and infirm and the 
strong and healthy.  Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 176 N.W. 823 (1920).  While a 
claimant must show that the injury proximately caused the medical condition sought to 
be compensable, it is well established that a cause is “proximate” when it is a 
substantial factor, or even the primary or most substantial cause to be compensable 
under the Iowa workers’ compensation system.  Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 
N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 
1980).   
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  Rose v. 
John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956).  It is well 
established in workers’ compensation that “if a claimant had a preexisting condition or 
disability, aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or ‘lighted up’ by an injury which arose 
out of and in the course of employment resulting in a disability found to exist,” the 
claimant is entitled to compensation.  Iowa Dep’t of Transp. v. Van Cannon, 459 N.W.2d 
900, 904 (Iowa 1990).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held,  
a disease which under any rational work is likely to progress so as to finally 
disable an employee does not become a “personal injury” under our 
Workmen’s Compensation Act merely because it reaches a point of 
disablement while work for an employer is being pursued.  It is only when 
there is a direct causal connection between exertion of the employment and 
the injury that a compensation award can be made.  The question is whether 
the diseased condition was the cause, or whether the employment was a 
proximate contributing cause.   

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 15 
Musselman v. Cent. Tel. Co., 261 Iowa 352, 359-60, 154 N.W.2d 128, 132 (1967).   
 
The claimant testified that he suffered an injury to his lower back while working at 
Seaboard on October 14, 2020.  The claimant was asked to move a hog carcass.  
Based upon varying statements made by the claimant to medical providers and under 
oath, the type of hog carcass varies.  It was either a 130-pound, one-half hog or an 
entire 300-pound carcass.  It is unclear exactly how the injury occurred, as the claimant 
again testified to several different potential mechanisms of his injury.  These included 
him lifting the carcass, him sliding the carcass off of a platform, and him moving the 
carcass across a surface.  The claimant never settled on one possible mechanism, 
which damaged his credibility.  However, the parties previously stipulated that the 
claimant suffered an injury that arose out of, and in the course of, the claimant’s 
employment with Seaboard.  The question becomes whether the claimant’s injury on 
October 14, 2020, was a cause of temporary disability.   
 
Mr. Lopez interacted with a hog carcass and felt a “crack and pop” in his lower 
back.  He stopped what he was doing and sat still for a short time.  He testified that he 
felt a lump in his lower back, and alleged that he immediately developed a fever.  
However, there is no objective evidence in the record that the claimant developed a true 
fever.  Mr. Lopez testified that he was sent to the infirmary on-site, and then was taken 
to a doctor in Omaha.  There is no record of a medical appointment in Omaha on 
October 14, 2020.  This discrepancy is another factor that damaged the claimant’s 
credibility.   
 
The claimant then did not work for several days.  He did not seek medical care 
during this time.  He testified that he could not get out of bed, but he later contradicted 
this in noting that he could get out of bed with help from his family so that he could use 
the toilet.   
 
On October 19, 2020, the claimant reported to Dr. Gregory’s office at 
CompChoice.  He complained of left lower back pain.  He also noted that he initially had 
paresthesias and weakness along his entire left leg, but that these had dissipated.  Dr. 
Gregory diagnosed Mr. Lopez with a left lumbar strain, and recommended that he 
pursue physical therapy.  He also provided the claimant with restrictions.   
 
Mr. Lopez began therapy on October 23, 2020.  He then returned to Dr. 
Gregory’s office.  Mr. Lopez told Dr. Gregory on November 2, 2020, that he had been 
off work, using vacation time in order to rest.  He complained of slow progress in 
healing.  He also complained of pain at night, pain with bending, and pain with rising 
from a seated position.  Dr. Gregory found the claimant to have pain at the bilateral L5 
paraspinous areas, and noted that the Mr. Lopez displayed normal straight leg raises.  
Dr. Gregory recommended that the claimant continue attending physical therapy.  He 
also provided reduced restrictions of: lifting up to 15 pounds and pushing or pulling up to 
40 pounds, no climbing ladders, no frequent bending or stooping, no lifting from the 
floor, and no standing or walking for more than 45 minutes per hour.   

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 16 
 
Dr. Wampler next examined Mr. Lopez on November 16, 2020, at which time, Mr. 
Lopez complained of a setback in his recovery.  He claimed that he was previously 
“doing great,” but when he returned to work, he was placed in a position in which he 
stood for most of the time.  He claimed that this aggravated his condition.  Dr. Wampler 
ordered x-rays and noted that the claimant had low back pain with pre-existing lumbar 
degenerative disc disease and recurrent radiculitis or radiculopathy.  Dr. Wampler 
restricted the claimant to sedentary work with the ability to stand and walk for 10 
minutes every hour.   
 
An MRI ordered by Dr. Wampler revealed significant degenerative disc space 
narrowing with low grade disc herniation at L5-S1, and disc space narrowing at L1-2 
with low-grade broad based bulging annulus.  No nerve root impingement or 
displacement was noted on the MRI.   
 
When Mr. Lopez next saw Dr. Wampler, he noted “significant improvement,” 
thanks to Seaboard abiding by Dr. Wampler’s previously provided restrictions.  Dr. 
Wampler noted that the claimant had improved lumbar mobility.  Dr. Wampler told Mr. 
Lopez that he had arthritis in his lower back, but that he would continue to improve and 
not require surgery.  Dr. Wampler did not change the restrictions and discussed 
beginning a return-to-work program at his next visit.   
 
Mr. Lopez returned to see Dr. Gregory in mid-December of 2020, at which time, 
he felt 75 percent improved.  Dr. Gregory tweaked the restrictions, and asked the 
claimant to return in two weeks.  When Mr. Lopez returned in two weeks, Mr. Lopez 
claimed that he had “a lot of pain,” and that he had been doing lifting during physical 
therapy prior to his pain worsening.  Dr. Gregory provided additional restrictions, and 
referred the claimant to an “ortho spine consultation.”   
 
Considering Dr. Gregory’s referral, Mr. Lopez visited with Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz.  Dr. 
Ricart-Hoffiz opined that Mr. Lopez had fairly benign symptoms, and that Mr. Lopez’s 
symptoms were worsened by lifting more than 20 pounds.  As such, Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz 
provided additional restrictions to Mr. Lopez of no lifting more than 20 pounds until Dr. 
Ricart-Hoffiz could review certain imaging.  Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz further opined that the 
claimant’s pain was “likely associated to exacerbation of his pre-existing disease.”   
 
Mr. Lopez was eventually referred for pain management, which included 
injections.  He had several injections in an attempt to relieve his lower back pain.  By 
April 15, 2021, Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz allowed Mr. Lopez to work “as tolerated.”  He continued 
this allowance through October of 2021, which was Mr. Lopez’s last appointment with 
Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz.   
 
One of the pain management doctors was Dr. Huff.  He wrote a letter to an 
individual in which he opined that Mr. Lopez had two potential treatment options from a 
pain management perspective.  He also opined that the claimant achieved MMI, and 
that he should continue on anti-inflammatories and nonopioid pain medications.  On 
May 10, 2022, Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz opined that Mr. Lopez suffered an on-the-job injury 

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 17 
which consisted of an aggravation of a pre-existing condition.  He also recommended a 
re-examination and an FCE.  Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz also briefly discussed a possible surgery, 
but noted that a re-examination would be needed.   
 
Dr. Horacek then did a records review, and a brief phone interview with Mr. 
Lopez.  She never examined him.  She opined that the claimant would require surgical 
intervention, and that he also needed additional substantial care.  Dr. Horacek practices 
in emergency medicine, and does not appear to have experience or a background in 
orthopedics.   
 
Based upon the information in the record, Mr. Lopez had degenerative issues 
with his spine.  When he lifted, moved, or generally interacted with a hog carcass on 
October 14, 2020, he aggravated or “lighted up” his degenerative spine issues.  This 
resulted in temporary disability, the extent of which will be discussed further below.   
An employee has a temporary partial disability when, because of the employee’s 
medical condition, “it is medically indicated that the employee is not capable of returning 
to employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of the injury, but is able to perform other work consistent with the 
employee’s disability.”  Iowa Code 85.33(2).  Temporary partial disability benefits are 
payable in lieu of temporary total disability and healing period benefits, due to the 
reduction in earning ability as a result of the employee’s temporary partial disability, and 
“shall not be considered benefits payable to an employee, upon termination of 
temporary partial or temporary total disability, the healing period, or permanent partial 
disability, because the employee is not able to secure work paying weekly earnings 
equal to the employee’s weekly earnings at the time of the injury.”  Id. 
 
Additionally, Iowa Code 85.33(3) provides in pertinent part: 
If an employee is temporarily, partially disabled and the employer for whom 
the employee was working at the time of the injury offers to the employee 
suitable work consistent with the employee’s disability the employee shall 
accept the suitable work, and be compensated with temporary partial 
benefits.  If the employer offers the employee suitable work and the 
employee refuses to accept the suitable work offered by the employer, the 
employee shall not be compensated with temporary partial, temporary total, 
or healing period benefits during the period of the refusal.   
Iowa Code 85.33(3).     
 
The Iowa Supreme Court held that there is a two-part test to determine eligibility 
under Iowa Code 85.33(3): “(1) whether the employee was offered suitable work, (2) 
which the employee refused.  If so, benefits cannot be awarded, as provided in section 
85.33(3).”  Schutler v. Algona Manor Care Center, 780 N.W.2d 549, 559 (Iowa 2010).  
“If the employer fails to offer suitable work, the employee will not be disqualified from 
receiving benefits regardless of the employee’s motive for refusing the unsuitable work.”  

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 18 
Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 519 (Iowa 2012).  If an employee 
refuses an offer of temporary work by claiming that the work is not suitable, the 
employee must communicate the refusal, and reasons for refusal, to the employer in 
writing when the offer of work is refused.  Iowa Code section 85.33(3)(b).  If an 
employee does not communicate the reason for a refusal in writing, the employee is 
precluded from raising suitability of the work as the reason for refusal until the reason 
for the refusal is communicated in writing to the employer.  Id.   
 
The claimant returned to work around November 2, 2020, after using personal 
leave time to take himself off work from October 14, 2020.  He worked for about 15 days 
on the line until he returned to Dr. Wampler’s office on November 16, 2020.  During the 
November 16, 2020, visit with Dr. Wampler, Mr. Lopez complained that he had a 
setback in his recovery, as he was not placed in a position accommodating his 
restrictions.  Dr. Wampler provided the claimant with increased restrictions of sedentary 
work only, with the ability stand and walk for 10 minutes every hour.  Upon presenting 
these restrictions to Seaboard, they placed him in a recordkeeping position.  He also 
visually inspected hog carcasses as they left a freezer.  He was given a stool for a short 
period of time.  At some time this was removed, and he was never provided with a 
replacement stool.  However, it is not clear whether Mr. Lopez requested a replacement 
stool, and his inconsistent testimony on a number of issues made it difficult to trust his 
testimony as to whether or not he requested a replacement.   
 
The claimant suffered a personal health issue with his eyes, and was off work on 
January 25, 2021, and January 26, 2021.  He was asked by Seaboard to return from his 
personal issue on January 27, 2021, but he refused to do so.  He then failed to return to 
his job, and was terminated by Seaboard on February 1, 2021.   
 
The claimant’s argument in their post hearing brief is difficult to follow, as it 
seems to confound temporary partial disability benefits and temporary total disability 
benefits.  Temporary partial disability benefits are available when an employee is able to 
work a position that is consistent with the employee’s disability.  The claimant worked 
light duty from about November 2, 2022, to his last day of work on about January 21, 
2021, and would have continued working but for his termination on February 1, 2021.  
The claimant testified that he would have continued to work in the offered position had 
he not been terminated.  Seaboard clearly offered suitable work, based upon the 
testimony of the claimant and the restrictions provided by Dr. Wampler.  By refusing to 
return to work on January 27, 2021, the claimant refused suitable work.  Therefore, his 
temporary partial disability benefits would cease on this date.   
 
The parties provided pre-injury and post-injury wage records.  See DE F:36-48; 
CE 12:78-89.  Prior to his injury, the claimant worked an average of 47.16 hours per 
week.  After his injury, outside of one week in which he worked 23.7 hours, Mr. Lopez 
worked similar hours.  He also earned the same, or more, per hour, as he did prior to 
his injury.  The week in which Mr. Lopez worked 23.7 hours, was November 22, 2020, 
through November 28, 2020.  There is no indication that the claimant was off work, or 

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 19 
worked less during this time due to his back injury.  The claimant testified at his hearing 
that he periodically took time off due to feeling ill from his pre-existing diabetes.   
 
The claimant bears the burden of proving entitlement to temporary partial 
disability benefits.  Based upon the foregoing, the claimant did not prove, by a 
preponderance of the evidence, that he is entitled to temporary partial disability benefits.   
As a general rule, “temporary total disability compensation benefits and healing-
period compensation benefits refer to the same condition.”  Clark v. Vicorp Rest., Inc., 
696 N.W.2d 596 604 (Iowa 2005).  The purpose of temporary total disability benefits 
and healing period benefits is to “partially reimburse the employee for the loss of 
earnings” during a period of recovery from the condition.  Id.  The appropriate type of 
benefits depends on whether or not the employee has a permanent disability.  Dunlap v. 
Action Warehouse, 824 N.W.2d 545, 556 (Iowa Ct. App. 2012).   
When an injured worker has been unable to work during a period of recuperation 
from an injury that did not produce permanent disability, the worker is entitled to 
temporary total disability benefits during the time the worker is disabled by the injury.   
Iowa Code 85.33(1) provides 
...the employer shall pay to an employee for injury producing temporary total 
disability weekly compensation benefits, as provided in section 85.32, until 
the employee has returned to work or is medically capable of returning to 
employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee 
was engaged at the time of injury, whichever occurs first.   
Temporary total disability benefits cease when the employee returns to work, or is 
medically capable of returning to substantially similar employment. 
 
Iowa Code 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an 
injured worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until: (1) the worker has 
returned to work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or, (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The first of 
the three items to occur ends a healing period.  See Waldinger Corp. v. Mettler, 817 
N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2012); Evenson v. Winnebago Indus., 881 N.W.2d 360 (Iowa 2012); 
Crabtree v. Tri-City Elec. Co., File No. 5059572 (App., Mar. 20, 2020).  The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or intermittent.  
Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986).  Compensation for permanent partial 
disability shall begin at the termination of the healing period.  Id.   
 
The claimant contends that he is entitled to temporary total disability benefits 
from the time of his firing on February 1, 2021, to the time of the hearing, and ongoing 
as a running award.  The problem is that the claimant proved that he was medically 

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 20 
capable of returning to employment and worked in an accommodated position with 
Seaboard until his termination.  The claimant was terminated due to an unexcused 
absence that was the result of an unrelated personal condition.  Namely, Mr. Lopez had 
an eye infection, and was excused from work for two days due to this personal issue.  
He was allowed to return by a medical professional on January 27, 2021.  He failed to 
do so, and was terminated by Seaboard effective February 2, 2021. 
The claimant never sought additional employment after his termination from 
Seaboard.  He did not contact his union representative to attempt to get his job back, as 
he did in 2019.  He did not attempt to return to work on January 27, 2021, nor did he 
attempt to get an additional medical excuse.  He simply abandoned his job at which he 
was earning the same wages and working in suitable work during similar hours.    
Based upon the information in the record, the claimant has not proven an 
entitlement to temporary total disability and/or healing period benefits.   
Permanent Disability 
 
The claimant argues that he is entitled to a running award of temporary disability 
and/or healing period benefits.  I previously ruled that the claimant was not entitled to 
the same.  The parties indicated that there is a dispute as to whether or not the 
claimant’s October 14, 2020, work injury was a cause of permanent disability benefits.   
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is 
probable, rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 
148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); 
Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).   
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156.  When considering 
the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination 
occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the 
nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and 
practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  
Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985).  Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994).  Supportive lay testimony may be used 
to buttress expert testimony, and therefore is also relevant and material to the causation 
question.   

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 21 
Iowa employers take an employee subject to any active or dormant health 
problems, and must exercise care to avoid injury to both the weak and infirm and the 
strong and healthy.  Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 176 N.W. 823 (1920).  While a 
claimant must show that the injury proximately caused the medical condition sought to 
be compensable, it is well established that a cause is “proximate” when it is a 
substantial factor, or even the primary or most substantial cause to be compensable 
under the Iowa workers’ compensation system.  Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 
N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 
1980).   
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  Rose v. 
John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956).  It is well 
established in workers’ compensation that “if a claimant had a preexisting condition or 
disability, aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or ‘lighted up’ by an injury which arose 
out of and in the course of employment resulting in a disability found to exist,” the 
claimant is entitled to compensation.  Iowa Dep’t of Transp. v. Van Cannon, 459 N.W.2d 
900, 904 (Iowa 1990).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held,  
a disease which under any rational work is likely to progress so as to finally 
disable an employee does not become a “personal injury” under our 
Workmen’s Compensation Act merely because it reaches a point of 
disablement while work for an employer is being pursued.  It is only when 
there is a direct causal connection between exertion of the employment and 
the injury that a compensation award can be made.  The question is whether 
the diseased condition was the cause, or whether the employment was a 
proximate contributing cause.   
Musselman v. Cent. Tel. Co., 261 Iowa 352, 359-60, 154 N.W.2d 128, 132 (1967).   
 
In reviewing the evidence, there is no medical provider who has opined as to 
whether or not the claimant’s October 14, 2020, work injury was a cause of permanent 
disability.  Therefore, the claimant has failed to carry his burden of proof, and I conclude 
that the October 14, 2020, work injury was not a cause of permanent disability.  Based 
upon this finding, the claimant would not be entitled to recover industrial disability 
benefits, and therefore an analysis regarding the same is not necessary.   
Alternate Care Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27 
 
The claimant argues that he is entitled to additional care via an examination with 
previously authorized providers, such as Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz.   
Iowa Code 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish reasonable 
services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the right to 

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 22 
choose the care….  The treatment must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction 
to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the employer and 
the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited to treat the 
injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such alternate care, 
the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care.   
Iowa Code 85.27(4).  
 
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the 
employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend 
Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 
(Review-Reopening, October 16, 1975).  An employer’s right to select the provider of 
medical treatment to an injured worker does not include the right to determine how an 
injured worker should be diagnosed, evaluated, treated, or other matters of professional 
medical judgment.  Assmann v. Blue Star Foods, File No. 866389 (Declaratory Ruling, 
May 18, 1988).  Reasonable care includes care necessary to diagnose the condition 
and defendants are not entitled to interfere with the medical judgment of its own treating 
physician.  Pote v. Mickow Corp., File No. 694639 (Review-Reopening, June 17, 1986).   
 
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment - and seeking alternate care – 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable.  See e.g. 
Iowa R. App. P. 14(f)(5); Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 
193, 209 (Iowa 2010); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995).  
Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.  Long v. 
Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). 
 
An application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because 
claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving.  Mere dissatisfaction with 
the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical 
care.  Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not 
reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that care was unduly inconvenient for the 
claimant.  Id.  Because “the employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the 
question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” and injured employee’s 
dissatisfaction with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough to find such 
care unreasonable.  Id.  Reasonable care includes care necessary to diagnose the 
condition, and defendants are not entitled to interfere with the medical judgement of its 
own treating physician.  Pote v. Mickow Corp., File No. 694639 (Review-Reopening, 
June 17, 1986). 
 
By April of 2021, Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz allowed the claimant to work as tolerated.  He 
continued to attempt injections and additional treatment with pain management doctors.  
Dr. Huff opined in February of 2022, that there were additional treatment options 

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 23 
available to the claimant, but then noted, “[o]therwise, from my standpoint the patient 
will have reached MMI.  He should continue on anti-inflammatory medication and 
nonopioid pain medication and possibly back bracing.”  (DE A:9).  Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz 
agreed in May of 2022, that it was unclear as to whether the claimant was a surgical 
candidate.  Dr. Ricart-Hoffiz recommended a re-examination and/or a FCE.  Dr. 
Horacek, despite never examining the claimant opined that he required a litany of 
continuing care.  I find little value in the opinions of Dr. Horacek in this matter. 
 
The claimant had significant credibility concerns when testifying.  He was quite 
animated during the hearing, and stood on several occasions.  He also motioned quite a 
bit with his hands and arms.  This stood in contrast to someone who complained of 
debilitating pain and an inability to continue working.  As noted above, there were also 
issues with certain parts of the claimant’s testimony.   
 
Based upon the information in the record, the claimant has not proven, by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the care offered is unreasonable.  Additionally, the 
claimant has not proven that the continued care sought is a result of his work injury on 
October 14, 2020.   
Costs 
 
Claimant seeks the award of costs as outlined in Claimant’s Exhibit 1.  Costs are 
to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner hearing the case.  See 876 
Iowa Administrative Code 4.33; Iowa Code 86.40.  876 Iowa Administrative Code 
4.33(6) provides:  
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes.   
 
Pursuant to the holding in Des Moines Area Regional Transit v. Young, 867 
N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015), only the report of an IME physician, and not the examination 
itself, can be taxed as a cost according to 876 IAC 4.33(6).  The Iowa Supreme Court 
reasoned, “a physician’s report becomes a cost incurred in a hearing because it is used 
as evidence in lieu of the doctor’s testimony,” while “[t]he underlying medical expenses 
associated with the examination do not become costs of a report needed for a hearing, 
just as they do not become costs of the testimony or deposition.”  Id.  (noting 

MONSALVO LOPEZ V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS 
Page 24 
additionally that “[i]n the context of the assessment of costs, the expenses of the 
underlying medical treatment and examination are not part of the costs of the report or 
deposition”).  The commissioner has found this rationale applicable to expenses 
incurred by vocational experts.  See  Kirkendall v. Cargill Meat Solutions Corp., File No. 
5055494 (App., December 17, 2018); Voshell v. Compass Group, USA, Inc., File No. 
5056587 (App., September 27, 2019).   
 
The claimant seeks reimbursement for the filing fee of one hundred three and 
00/100 dollars ($103.00).  At my discretion, I decline to award costs to the claimant in 
this matter. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
That the claimant shall take nothing further. 
That the defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by 
this agency pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 3.1(2) and 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 11.7.   
Signed and filed this __5th __ day of January, 2023. 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Steven Howard (via WCES) 
Meredith Ashley (via WCES) 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following addres s:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
   ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
