Case Number: 1655383.01
Case Title:  RUFF, RODNEY V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Ruff Rodney-1655383.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
RODNEY RUFF, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
    File No. 1655383.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE,  
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
INC.,    
  : 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
WEST BEND MUTUAL INS. CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
        Headnotes:  1800; 1803; 2200 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
The claimant, Rodney Ruff, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from employer Senior Housing Health Care, Inc. (“Senior 
Housing”), and their insurer, West Bend Mutual Insurance Company.  Jason Neifert 
appeared on behalf of the claimant.  Charles Blades appeared on behalf of the 
defendants.   
 
The matter came on for hearing on June 29, 2022, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips.  Pursuant to an order of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner related to the COVID-19 pandemic, the hearing 
occurred electronically.  The hearing proceeded without significant difficulty.  
 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-7, Claimant’s Exhibit 1-6, and 
Defendants’ Exhibits A-K.  The exhibits were received into the record without objection.   
 
The claimant testified on his own behalf.  Also present was employer 
representative Tanner Irwin.  Jane Weingart was appointed the official reporter and 
custodian of the notes of the proceeding.  The evidentiary record closed at the end of 
the hearing, and the matter was fully submitted on September 2, 2022, after briefing by 
the parties.     
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Oct-19  10:48:38     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 2 
 
STIPULATIONS 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged 
injury.   
 
2. That the claimant sustained an injury which arose out of, and in the course of 
employment on October 19, 2018.   
 
3. That the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery.   
 
4. That the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability.   
 
5. That the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any 
are awarded, is August 12, 2019.   
 
6. That the claimant had gross weekly earnings of one thousand forty-one and 
00/100 dollars ($1,041.00) per week, was married, and was entitled to two 
exemptions at the time of the alleged injury.  This provided a weekly 
compensation rate of six hundred seventy and 82/100 dollars ($670.82).   
 
7. That prior to the hearing, the claimant was paid 40 weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits at the agreed upon weekly rate.   
 
8. That the costs listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 6 were paid.   
 
Entitlement to temporary disability and/or healing period benefits is no longer in 
dispute.  Medical benefits are no longer in dispute.  There is no dispute as to credits.  
The defendants waived their affirmative defenses.     
 
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. The extent of permanent disability, if any is awarded.   
  
2. Whether the permanent disability should be evaluated as an industrial 
disability or a scheduled member disability to the left shoulder and left arm.   
  
3. Whether an assessment of costs is appropriate.   
 
 

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 3 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Rodney Ruff, the claimant, was 51 years old at the time of the hearing.  
(Testimony).  He is married, and has two adult children.  (Testimony).  He has lived in 
Iowa for his entire life.  (Testimony).  He currently resides in Marion, Iowa.  (Testimony).   
 
Mr. Ruff graduated from South Tama High School.  (Defendants’ Exhibit B:15-
16).  He attended Wartburg College from 1989 to 1990.  (DE C:52).  He then attended 
Mount Mercy College and graduated with a degree in criminal justice administration in 
1995.  (DE B:16; C:52).   
 
Mr. Ruff worked for Four Oaks from 1990 to 2008.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 3:36).  He 
worked as a residential counselor with delinquent youth.  (Testimony).  He provided the 
youths with structure and discipline.  (CE 3:36).  He also helped train new staff, kept a 
budget, and completed paperwork.  (CE 3:36).  The job was not physically demanding 
unless a youth became aggressive.  (Testimony).  However, this happened on a rare 
basis.  (Testimony).  Mr. Ruff left this job after 18 years due to a change in philosophy 
by the management of Four Oaks.  (Testimony).   
 
From 2008 to 2010, Mr. Ruff was self-employed.  (CE 3:36).  He performed 
construction of things like decks, basements, and flooring.  (Testimony).  He also 
painted and assisted with home remodeling.  (Testimony).  This was physically 
demanding work.  (Testimony).  He was not injured while on the job and had no issues 
performing the work.  (Testimony).  He ended his self-employment because he wanted 
a steady paycheck.  (CE 3:36).   
 
Mr. Ruff returned to Four Oaks from 2010 to 2013.  (CE 3:36).  He worked in the 
warehouse and kitchen.  (CE 3:36; Testimony).  He unloaded food truck deliveries twice 
per week.  (Testimony).  Food weighed between 50 and 100 pounds.  (Testimony).  On 
days where he was not unloading the food truck, he would divide the food into smaller 
portions and deliver it in a van to Four Oaks facilities.  (Testimony).  He used a modified 
laundry basket to lift food from the van to the facility.  (Testimony).  He had no issues 
with the physical requirements of the job and had no injuries on the job.  (Testimony).   
 
In 2013, Mr. Ruff left Four Oaks and began working for Garnett Place, which is 
another name for the defendant-employer in this matter.  (CE 3:36; Testimony).  Garnett 
Place is a retirement community.  (Testimony).  There are 76 units and four 
condominiums in the community.  (Testimony).    He was hired to remodel the 
apartments.  (Testimony).  He would “gut” an apartment by removing the flooring, 
cabinets, bathtub, toilet, vanity, and trim.  (Testimony).  Then he would put new items in.  
(Testimony).  He was in charge of remodeling, maintenance, and landscaping.  (CE 
3:36; Testimony).  He now does a great deal of “upkeep” to the units.  (Testimony).  
This consists of replacing carpets or repainting the units.  (Testimony).  He also trims 
bushes, plants flowers, and tends to landscaping.  (Testimony).  Mr. Ruff also was 
responsible for compliance with garbage control and assisting in emergencies.  (DE 
E:59).  He also needed the ability to work on a ladder and lift between 40 and 50 

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 4 
 
pounds up to 40 inches.  (DE E:60).  At the time of his injury, Mr. Ruff earned twenty-
four and 50/100 dollars ($24.50) per hour.  (DE I:88).  He currently earns thirty and 
81/100 dollars ($30.81) per hour.  (DE I:86).  He had no on-the-job injuries or problems 
doing his work prior to October of 2018.  (Testimony).   
 
On October 19, 2018, the claimant was lifting a toilet as part of a remodeling 
project.  (Testimony).  He estimated that the toilet weighed 70 pounds.  (Testimony).  
He lifted the toilet into a pickup truck. (Testimony).  As he did this, his biceps and rotator 
cuff tore in his left arm.  (Testimony).  He felt his biceps tear, heard a pop, and saw his 
biceps immediately swell.  (Testimony; Joint Exhibit 1:1).  An ambulance arrived, and 
the crew observed that the claimant had a deformity to his left biceps with a step-off at 
the superior aspect.  (JE 1:1).  The claimant also reported pain in his left shoulder.  (JE 
1:1).  He refused pain medication, as he did not like to take narcotics.  (JE 1:1).  He was 
taken to St. Luke’s Hospital via ambulance.  (Testimony; JE 1:1).  
 
Upon arrival at St. Luke’s Hospital, Julie Beard, D.O., examined Mr. Ruff.  (JE 
2:2).  He complained of left biceps pain and a pop in his left shoulder after attempting to 
load a toilet into his pickup truck.  (JE 2:2).  Like the ambulance crew, Dr. Beard 
observed a deformity in the claimant’s left bicep.  (JE 2:2).  Mr. Ruff rated his pain 9 out 
of 10.  (JE 2:2).   
 
On October 22, 2018, Mr. Ruff followed-up his emergency room visit with an 
examination with Gregory Hill, M.D.  (JE 3:3-5).  Upon examination, Dr. Hill observed a 
Popeye deformity to the left biceps.  (JE 3:3).  He also had mild tenderness over the 
biceps.  (JE 3:3).  Dr. Hill found the claimant to have full range of motion in the shoulder 
and elbow.  (JE 3:3).  He had soreness and weakness with elbow flexion.  (JE 3:3).    
Dr. Hill diagnosed the claimant with a left shoulder proximal biceps tendon rupture.  (JE 
3:3).  Dr. Hill noted that these are not typically surgically repaired, and that he may have 
some residual biceps fatigue and weakness.  (JE 3:3).  Dr. Hill recommended that the 
claimant have therapy to regain some strength.  (JE 3:3).  If the claimant had continued 
shoulder difficulties, then Dr. Hill would order a shoulder MRI to evaluate the status of 
the rotator cuff.  (JE 3:3).  Mr. Ruff could continue to work, but could not use his right 
arm.  (JE 3:3).  His right arm also needed to be kept in a sling.  (JE 3:3).  If these 
restrictions could not be accommodated, then Mr. Ruff was to be off work.  (JE 3:5).   
 
Dr. Hill examined Mr. Ruff again on December 3, 2018.  (JE 3:6-7).  Mr. Ruff 
continued to have pain in his left arm, and difficulties with his activities of daily living.  
(JE 3:6).  Dr. Hill observed that Mr. Ruff had increased pain with testing of his rotator 
cuff.  (JE 3:6).  Dr. Hill diagnosed the claimant with a left shoulder biceps tendon tear, 
suspected residual instability with a labral tear, and a possible partial rotator cuff tear on 
the left.  (JE 3:6).  Dr. Hill ordered an MRI arthrogram of the left shoulder.  (JE 3:6).  He 
continued to restrict the claimant to not using his left arm.  (JE 3:6).   
 
Mr. Ruff had an MRI of his left shoulder on December 10, 2018, as ordered by 
Dr. Hill.  (JE 5:27-28).  Scott Truhlar, M.D., interpreted the examination.  (JE 5:27-28).  
Dr. Truhlar opined that the AC joint was unremarkable.  (JE 5:27).  The tendon of the 
left long head of the biceps tendon was completely torn and retracted to the superior 
margin of the bicipital groove.  (JE 5:27).  There was also a mild abnormal signal in the 

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 5 
 
superior rotator cuff tendons along with moderate thinning.  (JE 5:27).  Dr. Truhlar 
opined that this indicated a partial thickness articular sided tear of the anterior 12 mm of 
the tendon; however, Dr. Truhlar saw no full-thickness superior rotator cuff tear.  (JE 
5:27).  Dr. Truhlar listed his impression as follows: 
1. Proximal complete tear of the tendon of the long head of biceps brachii.  The 
torn end is retracted to the superior aspect of the bicipital groove.   
2. Full-thickness tear of the posteroinferior glenoid labrum.   
3. Blunting of the entire superior labrum consistent with tearing at the time of the 
bicipital tendon tear.   
(JE 5:27-28).   
 
On December 17, 2018, Mr. Ruff continued his follow-up with Dr. Hill.  (JE 3:8-9).  
Dr. Hill reported the findings of the MRI and radiology report.  (JE 3:8).  He noted that 
Mr. Ruff sustained a complete biceps tendon tear off the glenoid attachment site with 
retraction to the groove.  (JE 3:8).  He also had anterior superior and anterior inferior 
labral tears that were likely secondary to the biceps injury.  (JE 3:8).  The report also 
noted a moderate partial articular surface rotator cuff tear.  (JE 3:8).  Dr. Hill reviewed 
the imaging and opined that the claimant had a large partial thickness undersurface 
rotator cuff tear.  (JE 3:8).  Dr. Hill recommended that the claimant have an arthroscopic 
surgical treatment to his left shoulder.  (JE 3:8).  The procedure would be a rotator cuff 
repair, debridement, labral repair, and possible biceps tenodesis.  (JE 3:9).   
 
Mr. Ruff reported to UnityPoint Health in Cedar Rapids on January 15, 2019, for 
a left shoulder arthroscopy.  (JE 6:29-30).  Dr. Hill performed the surgery.  (JE 6:29-30).  
As part of the arthroscopic surgery, Dr. Hill performed extensive debridement of the 
superior labrum, inferior labrum, subscapularis, and rotator cuff.  (JE 6:29).  He also 
performed lysis of adhesions of the rotator interval and subscapularis, SA space, 
subcoracoid space, supraglenoid space, and rotator cuff.  (JE 6:29).  He also performed 
“SAD” with acromioplasty and an extensive synovectomy.  (JE 6:29).  Dr. Hill’s 
postoperative diagnoses were: left shoulder proximal biceps tendon rupture; 
undersurface rotator cuff tear; adhesive capsulitis; extensive significant capsular 
synovitis; and, extensive thick fibrous adhesions of the RI and subscapularis, 
subcoracoid space, supraglenoid space and “RTC” and “SA” space.  (JE 6:29).  Dr. Hill 
noted that the biceps tendon was not present in the shoulder area, which was 
consistent with the prior biceps tendon rupture.  (JE 6:30).   
 
Dr. Hill examined Mr. Ruff again on January 28, 2019. (JE 3:10-12).  This was a 
post-surgical examination.  (JE 3:10).  Mr. Ruff had no acute complaints, was wearing a 
sling, and was “doing good.”  (JE 3:10).  Dr. Hill removed the staples from the incisions, 
and found minimal swelling.  (JE 3:10).  Dr. Hill recommended that Mr. Ruff continue 
physical therapy to progress range of motion, strengthening, and rehabilitation.  (JE 
3:10).  Mr. Ruff had shown good progress early in therapy, but Dr. Hill noted that he had 
a risk of stiffness developing due to adhesions.  (JE 3:10).  Dr. Hill continued to restrict 
Mr. Ruff from working with his left arm.  (JE 3:12).  If the restrictions could not be 
accommodated, then Mr. Ruff was to be kept off work.  (JE 3:12).   

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
On March 29, 2019, Mr. Ruff returned to Dr. Hill’s office.  (JE 3:13-15).  Mr. Ruff 
continued to not use his left arm.  (JE 3:13).  He continued to make progress with 
physical therapy.  (JE 3:13).  He had no radicular pain, numbness, or adjacent joint pain 
or swelling.  (JE 3:13).  Dr. Hill continued to restrict the claimant’s work. (JE 3:15).  
Specifically, Mr. Ruff was to avoid overhead activity with his left arm.  (JE 3:15).  He 
also could only lift, push, or pull 0 to 20 pounds with his left arm.  (JE 3:15).   
 
Gregory O’Brien, P.T., provided a shoulder re-evaluation for Mr. Ruff on May 28, 
2019.  (JE 7:31-33).  Mr. Ruff told the therapist that he struggled with comfort when he 
attempted to fish in the last month.  (JE 7:31).  He also had issues with playing 
basketball with his son.  (JE 7:31).  He rated his pain at the time of the appointment at 2 
out of 10.  (JE 7:31).  Mr. Ruff told the therapist that his overall strength and comfort had 
improved, but that he struggled to perform a whole day’s work due to limited stamina.  
(JE 7:32).  The therapist noted prevalent weakness in the left shoulder, and opined that 
Mr. Ruff may benefit from work hardening or conditioning.  (JE 7:32).   
 
Mr. Ruff continued his follow-up care with Dr. Hill on May 29, 2019.  (JE 3:16-18).  
Mr. Ruff was working light duty.  (JE 3:16).  He was making further progress with 
physical therapy when physical therapy was stopped.  (JE 3:16).  Upon examination, he 
displayed weakness.  (JE 3:16).  However, his range of motion was improved.  (JE 
3:16).  Dr. Hill added physical therapy for work hardening.  (JE 3:16).  Dr. Hill allowed 
the claimant to work with overhead lifting up to 10 to 15 pounds with his left arm.  (JE 
3:18).  He could also push, pull, and lift 0 to 30 pounds up to his chest level.  (JE 3:18).   
 
Mr. Ruff had another shoulder re-evaluation with Mr. O’Brien on July 10, 2019.  
(JE 7:34-36).  He complained of a general ache in his left shoulder after working out, but 
was otherwise doing well.  (JE 7:34).  He rated his pain 0-1 out of 10 and told the 
therapist that he did not feel as though his left shoulder had returned to baseline 
strength or activity tolerance.  (JE 7:34).  The therapist opined that Mr. Ruff would be a 
good candidate to have a functional capacity evaluation (“FCE”) with kinetic testing.  (JE 
7:35).   
 
On July 12, 2019, Dr. Hill examined Mr. Ruff again.  (JE 3:19-21).  Mr. Ruff 
continued with a home exercise plan.  (JE 3:19).  He was “doing ok.”  (JE 3:19).  He had 
no true radicular pain and no adjacent joint pain or swelling.  (JE 3:19).  Dr. Hill opined 
that Mr. Ruff had an unremarkable examination, and that he should possibly reach 
maximum medical improvement (“MMI”) in one month.  (JE 3:19).  Dr. Hill allowed Mr. 
Ruff to return to work without restrictions on July 12, 2019.  (JE 3:21).   
 
Mr. Ruff returned to Dr. Hill’s office on August 12, 2019, for continued follow-up 
care.  (JE 3:22-23).  Mr. Ruff was working regular duty and “doing ok.”  (JE 3:22).  Upon 
examination, Mr. Ruff had no focal tenderness.  (JE 3:22).  He had some generalized 
residual weakness, but displayed “good strength” that was improving.  (JE 3:22).  
Provocative strength and stability testing were unremarkable.  (JE 3:22).  Dr. Hill placed 
Mr. Ruff at MMI effective August 12, 2019, with no permanent restrictions.  (JE 3:22).   
 
On December 4, 2019, Mr. Ruff had another follow-up with Dr. Hill.  (JE 3:24-25).  
He presented for an impairment exam.  (JE 3:24).  He was working regular duty, and 
“doing ok.”  (JE 3:24).  Mr. Ruff complained of biceps spasm and shoulder fatigue.  (JE 

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 7 
 
3:24).  Upon examination, Dr. Hill observed that Mr. Ruff had good strength with some 
generalized residual weakness.  (JE 3:24).  Dr. Hill opined that his shoulder fatigue 
“may or may not” further improve.  (JE 3:24).  Mr. Ruff remained at MMI with no 
permanent restrictions.  (JE 3:24).  Following his appointment, Dr. Hill wrote a letter to 
Brenna Bass of Paradigm.  (JE 4:26).  Dr. Hill opined that Mr. Ruff had a “[v]ery [g]ood 
[o]utcome” following his surgery.  (JE 4:26).  During his evaluation, Dr. Hill found the 
claimant to have flexion of 160 degrees, abduction of 110 degrees, external rotation of 
80 degrees, and internal rotation of 10 degrees.  (JE 4:26).  Based upon the 
measurements, and the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition, Dr. Hill provided a 9 percent upper extremity impairment.  (JE 4:26).  This 
converted to a 5 percent whole person impairment.  (JE 4:26).   
 
David Segal, M.D., J.D., completed an independent medical evaluation (“IME”) 
on February 19, 2021.  (CE 1:1-30).  Dr. Segal is a board certified neurosurgeon who 
now performs IMEs.  (CE 1:1-30).  He issued an IME report on April 15, 2021, outlining 
the results of his examination of Mr. Ruff.  (CE 1:1-30).  Dr. Segal performed an 
overview of Mr. Ruff’s relevant medical history.  (CE 1:1-3, 16-19). 
 
Mr. Ruff rated his pain 0 out of 10 at the time of the examination.  (CE 1:2).  His 
highest pain was 8 out of 10, and his average pain was 6 out of 10.  (CE 1:2).  Mr. Ruff 
noted that his pain was “[m]ild to [m]oderately [s]evere,” depending on the activity or 
position of his arm.  (CE 1:3).  He indicated that his pain was on the anterior left upper 
arm, in the area of the top of the biceps and anterior shoulder, along with the bicipital 
tendon insertion.  (CE 1:3).  Lifting, any movement of his left arm above his shoulder 
height, and quick movement with his left arm aggravated his pain.  (CE 1:3).  Mr. Ruff 
also complained of weakness in his left shoulder.  (CE 1:3).  Mr. Ruff told Dr. Segal that 
the prior surgery helped; however, his left shoulder was “better” after he finished 
physical therapy in July of 2019, than at the time of the examination.  (CE 1:3).  His 
main weakness was in the left biceps.  (CE 1:3).   
 
Mr. Ruff described an inability to complete much overhead work.  (CE 1:4).  He 
also told Dr. Segal that he could not perform any activity that required a biceps-curl 
movement.  (CE 1:4).  It also took him longer to complete jobs than before his injury.  
(CE 1:4).  He further described that quick movements of his arm can cause pain that 
can “bring him to his knees.”  (CE 1:4).  He outlined the things that he can no longer do 
or are much more difficult to do.  (CE 1:4).  This includes exercising, weightlifting, and 
riding his bicycle.  (CE 1:4).  He can no longer do push-ups or planks.  (CE 1:4).  Mr. 
Ruff self-reported that he could only lift 40 to 50 pounds from the floor to his waist with 
his bilateral arms.  (CE 1:4).  He could only lift 15 pounds maximum with his left arm.  
(CE 1:4).  He reported that he could never do any overhead lifting.  (CE 1:4).  He felt 
that he needed no restrictions for walking, sitting, or standing, and occasional 
restrictions for using ladders.  (CE 1:5).   
 
Upon physical examination, Dr. Segal noted the visible Popeye deformity in Mr. 
Ruff’s left arm.  (CE 1:5).  He also found tenderness to palpation at the location of the 
biceps tendon insertion in the left arm.  (CE 1:5).  Dr. Segal found reduced motor 
measurements in the left upper extremity.  (CE 1:5).  Dr. Segal documented his 
observed range of motion for Mr. Ruff’s left shoulder.  (CE 1:5).  He found that the 

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 8 
 
claimant had 110 degrees of abduction, 30 degrees of adduction, 150 degrees of 
forward flexion, 20 degrees of extension, 10 degrees of internal rotation, and 40 
degrees of external rotation.  (CE 1:5).   
 
Dr. Segal continued by opining that Mr. Ruff’s injury was “more extensive than a 
routine shoulder injury.”  (CE 1:6).  He noted that the biceps tendon rupture and 
permanent Popeye deformity involve his arm more than his shoulder.  (CE 1:6).  He 
continued by opining that the synovitis and adhesions seen during the surgery 
“extended proximally to the shoulder,” and involved the upper thorax.  (CE 1:6-7).  He 
concluded that the acromial decompression also involved part of the scapular bone, 
which “is part of the thorax.”  (CE 1:7).  Dr. Segal provided the following diagnoses for 
Mr. Ruff: 
1. Rupture and retraction of Tendon [sic] of the long head of the biceps (LHBT) 
2. Popeye deformity 
3. Rotator cuff tear with partial articular supraspinatus tendon avulsion (PASTA) 
injury and subscapularis tear 
4. Full-thickness tear of the superior and posteroinferior labrum 
5. Adhesive capsulitis 
6. Extensive significant capsular synovitis 
7. Extensive thick fibrous adhesions of RI [rotator interval] and subscapularis, 
Subcoracoid space, Supraglenoid space and RTC, SA [subacromial] space 
8. Status post repair rotator cuff and Subacromial decompression with 
acromioplasty 
(CE 1:7).  Dr. Segal opined that these diagnoses were related to the work injury.  (CE 
1:7).  Dr. Segal continued his report by providing his own definition of the shoulder, 
which appears unrelated to those adopted by the Iowa Supreme Court or the 
Commissioner.  (CE 1:8).  He noted that the retraction of the biceps tendon and Popeye 
deformity cause Mr. Ruff’s injury to be considered the upper extremity and not the 
shoulder.  (CE 1:8).  He continued by opining that the inflammatory synovitis with 
adhesions spread through the upper torso were “proximal to the glenohumeral joint.”  
(CE 1:8).   
 
Dr. Segal opined that Mr. Ruff’s diagnoses were causally related to the work 
injury of October 19, 2018.  (CE 1:19-20).  He opined that Mr. Ruff achieved MMI on 
January 15, 2020.  (CE 1:21).  Dr. Segal then began his opinion as to Mr. Ruff’s 
permanent impairment based upon the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition.  (CE 1:21).  Based upon the above noted ranges of motions in 
the left shoulder, Dr. Segal opined that the claimant had a 14 percent left upper 
extremity impairment.  (CE 1:22).  This converted to an 8 percent whole person 
impairment.  (CE 1:22).  Dr. Segal then noted that the claimant had motor weakness in 
his left shoulder and arm examination.  (CE 1:22).  This resulted in a 21 percent left 
upper extremity impairment, or a 13 percent whole person impairment.  (CE 1:22).  Dr. 
Segal continued by opining that Mr. Ruff had a permanent impairment based upon his 
shoulder pain.  (CE 1:23).  This pain was noted by Dr. Segal to be “severe” with lifting.  
(CE 1:23).  Dr. Segal opined that the “increased burden” of the pain was not accounted 

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 9 
 
for in range of motion or strength measurements, and therefore, opined that Mr. Ruff 
should be awarded an additional 3 percent whole person impairment.  (CE 1:23).  Dr. 
Segal combined the impairment ratings discussed above to arrive at a 22 percent whole 
person impairment.  (CE 1:23).  He did not provide an alternative impairment rating to 
only the left upper extremity.   
 
If Mr. Ruff developed more symptoms in his left shoulder, Dr. Segal opined that 
“he will need more aggressive workup and treatment; otherwise, his treatment will be 
more maintenance, as he is now at maximum recovery.”  (CE 1:23).  Dr. Segal indicated 
that the claimant may need more x-rays or MRIs.  (CE 1:24).  He also may require 
additional pain medication, a TENS unit, physical therapy, and cortisone/PRP injections.  
(CE 1:24).  He also may need a repeat shoulder arthroscopy, repeat subacromial 
decompression, and a total shoulder replacement; however, Dr. Segal tempers his 
opinion on the total shoulder replacement by stating, “[t]his is likely not a consideration 
at this time.”  (CE 1:24).   
 
Dr. Segal continued his report by opining that the claimant “does not have a 
realistic ability to sustain unrestricted full-time employment.”  (CE 1:25).  This would not 
change even with any type of additional medical care.  (CE 1:25).  Dr. Segal 
recommended that the claimant have the following permanent restrictions: 
 Lifting floor-to-waist: 0-40 pounds: Occasionally 
 Lifting floor-to-waist: 41-50 pounds: Rarely 
 Lifting floor-to-waist greater than 50 pounds: Never 
 Lifting waist-to-shoulder: 0-30 pounds: Occasionally 
 Lifting waist to shoulder: 31-40 pounds: Rarely 
 Lifting waist to shoulder greater than 40 pounds: Never 
 Lifting waist-to-overhead both arms: Never 
 Overhead lifting with left arm alone: Never 
 Bilateral carrying, 40 pounds, 25 feet: Occasionally 
 Pushing with 50 pounds of force, on wheels: Occasionally 
 Fine motor left hand: Occasionally 
 Ladders: Never 
(CE 1:25).  Dr. Segal concluded his report by noting that he did not observe Mr. Ruff 
displaying any symptom magnification.  (CE 1:26).   
 
Mr. Ruff was scheduled to attend an IME with Mark Gorsche, M.D. on May 18, 
2022.  (Defendants’ Exhibit A:1-4).  Dr. Gorsche is board certified by the American 
Board of Orthopaedic Surgery and the American Board of Independent Medical 
Examiners.  (DE A:9-10).  Dr. Gorsche was also the chief resident of the orthopedic 
department at the Mayo Clinic.  (DE A:9).  He also has practiced in general orthopedics 
since 1986.  (DE A:10).  Unfortunately, Mr. Ruff chose not to attend the appointment at 
the urging of his counsel.  (CE 5:46).  Since Mr. Ruff chose not to attend the IME 
appointment, Dr. Gorsche issued opinions based upon a records review.  (DE A:1-4).  
Dr. Gorsche diagnosed Mr. Ruff with a partial tear of the left rotator cuff, adhesive 
capsulitis, extensive significant capsular synovitis, extensive thick fibrous adhesions of 

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 10 
 
the rotator interval and subscapularis subcoracoid space, the supraglenoid space, and 
the rotator cuff.  (DE A:2).  Dr. Gorsche opined that the claimant’s injury was to his 
shoulder.  (DE A:2).  Dr. Gorsche agreed that the claimant’s work injury resulted in an 
injury to the claimant’s left shoulder.  (DE A:2).  He noted that the shoulder injury 
referenced in an Iowa Supreme Court decision also involved a tear of the biceps 
tendon.  (DE A:2).  Dr. Gorsche continued by noting that the operative report only 
referenced the glenohumeral joint and/or shoulder.  (DE A:2).  Dr. Gorsche opined that 
any permanent impairment would be directly related to the shoulder injury.  (DE A:2).  
Dr. Gorsche continued his report by noting that the Popeye defect in the left biceps 
does not result in permanent impairment to the arm apart from a shoulder injury.  (DE 
A:2).  Dr. Gorsche noted that “[o]ne can base impairment either on loss of motion or 
strength,” and that these are typically not combined.  (DE A:2).  Dr. Gorsche placed Mr. 
Ruff at MMI on August 12, 2019, the same date provided by Dr. Hill.  (DE A:2).   
 
Dr. Gorsche then endeavored to provide a permanent impairment rating.  (DE 
A:3).  Based upon the Guides, Dr. Gorsche felt that Dr. Hill correctly assigned a 9 
percent impairment rating based upon loss of range of motion in the left upper 
extremity.  (DE A:3).  He also felt that Dr. Segal’s 14 percent impairment to the left 
upper extremity based upon range of motion measurements was accurate.  (DE A:3).  
Dr. Gorsche noted that Dr. Segal’s use of motor deficit is an incorrect way to assign an 
impairment rating in this matter.  (DE A:3).  He notes that the Guides provide, “in a rare 
case if the examiner believes individual loss of strength represents an impairing factor 
that has not been considered adequately by other methods in the Guides [sic], the loss 
of strength may be rated separately.”  (DE A:3).  He continued by noting that the Guides 
state, “otherwise the impairment ratings based on objective anatomical findings take 
precedence.  Decreased strength cannot be rated in the presence of decreased motion, 
painful conditions, deformities or absence of parts that prevent effective application of 
maximal force in the region being evaluated.”  (DE A:3).  Even if motor deficit is used, 
Dr. Gorsche opined that it should not be combined with impairment based upon range 
of motion.  (DE A:3).  Dr. Gorsche indicated that testing motor deficit, like providing an 
impairment based upon pain, is “very subjective and difficult to rate.”  (DE A:3).  Dr. 
Gorsche agreed with Dr. Hill that the claimant required no permanent restrictions for his 
work activities.  (DE A:3).  He also anticipated that the claimant would not require further 
medical care for his October 19, 2018, work injury.  (DE A:3).   
 
In a report dated June 1, 2022, Dr. Segal responded to Dr. Gorsche’s IME report.  
(CE 2:31-34).  Dr. Segal noted that, after reviewing Dr. Gorsche’s report, he affirmed all 
of his opinions and conclusions from the April 15, 2021, IME report.  (CE 2:31).  Dr. 
Segal opined that two issues required further discussion: 
1. Mr. Ruff’s biceps injury causes arm impairment is appropriately considered an 
arm injury.   
2. Mr. Ruff’s shoulder weakness is an independent impairing factor, and Mr. 
Ruff’s impairment analysis requires the consideration of his motor weakness 
for an accurate rating.   

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 11 
 
(CE 2:31).  Dr. Segal continued, noting that the biceps tendon is “not essential to 
shoulder function.”  (CE 2:31).  Further, Dr. Segal indicated that “the impairment that the 
biceps tendon injury causes is primarily related to elbow flexion and pain in the biceps 
muscle.”  (CE 2:31).  Additionally, Dr. Segal opined that a Popeye deformity is an 
indicator of biceps dysfunction in the arm and is “anatomically removed from the 
shoulder and functionally unrelated to the shoulder.  (CE 2:31).  Dr. Segal attempted to 
differentiate Mr. Ruff’s injury from “other shoulder injury” cases, as “[i]n those cases, the 
repair and the pathology are more related to shoulder range of motion and pain.  Here 
with Mr. Ruff, there was a complete rupture of the biceps tendon with the main 
dysfunction in Mr. Ruff’s arm.”  (CE 2:31).  Dr. Segal continued by indicating that Mr. 
Ruff’s injury “caused two separate and distinct areas of anatomical and functional 
impairment: the shoulder and the arm.”  (CE 2:32).   
 
Dr. Segal indicated that Mr. Ruff’s shoulder weakness is “one of the cases that 
would be considered an exception for allowing the rating of motor weakness” pursuant 
to the Guides.  (CE 2:33).  Dr. Segal opined that this was the case because for the 
claimant, “loss of strength in his left shoulder is one of his primary impairing symptoms.”  
(CE 2:33).  Dr. Segal cited to the Guides, page 508, which he noted states, “[if] the 
individual’s loss of strength represents an impairing factor that has not been considered 
adequately by other methods in the Guides, the loss of strength may be rated 
separately.”  (CE 2:33).  Dr. Segal continued, “Mr. Ruff’s motor weakness is as 
impairing as his range of motion loss, and on my exam, it was measured without 
restriction from pain.”  (CE 2:33).   
 
On June 2, 2022, Dr. Gorsche issued a missive in response to Dr. Segal’s June 
1, 2022, letter.  (DE A:8).  Dr. Gorsche noted that the biceps tendon is an interarticular 
structure in the glenohumeral joint.  (DE A:8).  The rupture of the biceps tendon 
“actually occurred inside the joint and then retracted distally to the level of the bicipital 
groove.  Therefore the injury that took place is a shoulder injury.”  (DE A:8).  Dr. 
Gorsche continued, “[r]upture of the long head of the biceps tendon always occurs 
interarticular and is the result of shoulder pathology.”  (DE A:8).  Dr. Gorsche 
expounded on his interpretation of the Guides as it relates to combining impairment 
ratings for a loss of strength with a loss of motion.  (DE A:8).  He noted that this is 
included in the Guides in section 16.8A principles.  (DE A:8).  He continued, “[i]n my 
experience, I do not combine the ratings for loss of strength and loss of motion, but 
instead take the higher of the two.  It would be a very rare case in which one would 
combine these ratings.”  (DE A:8).   
 
Mr. Ruff eventually returned to work with the defendant in July of 2019.  
(Testimony).  He returned at the same or similar wages.  (Testimony).  He works without 
restrictions.  (Testimony).   
 
Mr. Ruff has pain in his left arm and shoulder that “comes and goes” two to three 
times per month.  (Testimony).  During his deposition, he testified that he had throbbing 
pain once per week.  (DE B:22).  He rated his pain 3 out of 10.  (Testimony).  He takes 
Aleve, which relieves the pain in 10 to 15 minutes.  (Testimony).  He also has weakness 
in his left arm.  (Testimony).  In the last two to three months before the hearing, he 
explained that he had a sharp pain in his shoulder that ran all the way to his knuckle.  

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 12 
 
(Testimony).  He further clarified that his shooting pain only occurred two to three times 
when he over-extended his shoulder or rotated it into an “awkward” position.  
(Testimony).  He had no difficulty with dexterity in his fingers on his left side.  (DE B:23).   
 
Mr. Ruff has a Popeye deformity in his left arm.  (Testimony).  His biceps is not 
attached, so it has rolled down to his elbow.  (Testimony).  He demonstrated this 
phenomenon during the arbitration hearing.  (Testimony).  When he bends his arm for 
too long, his biceps begins to cramp.  (Testimony).  He described his pain as occurring 
where the biceps attached to the shoulder.  (Testimony).   
 
He had no pain or issues into his neck.  (Testimony).  He also had no issues with 
dexterity of his left hand or left fingers.  (Testimony).  He testified that he had no issues 
with rotating his left elbow.  (Testimony).   
 
Prior to October of 2018, Mr. Ruff enjoyed riding his bike, working out, playing 
pickleball, and jogging.  (Testimony).  He now lifts lighter weights, and does not lift 
weights in certain positions.  (Testimony).  He rides his bike for shorter distances.  
(Testimony).  He limits certain activities at work, and rarely uses his left arm.  
(Testimony).  Rather than lifting toilets to move them, he breaks them into pieces and 
then carries the pieces out.  (Testimony).  When he installs new toilets, he installs them 
one piece at a time.  (Testimony).  He can no longer hang sheet rock above his head, 
and cannot get on a ladder.  (Testimony).  However, these changes have not caused 
any issues or difficulties between him and his employer.  (DE B:26).  When he has 
issues with a task, he requests help from a maintenance coordinator.  (DE B:26-27).   
 
Mr. Ruff testified that he enjoys fishing and has had to change how he fishes.  
(Testimony).  He no longer mows his lawn or shovels his snow because they cause pain 
to his arm and shoulder.  (Testimony).   
 
Mr. Ruff opined that he could still do his first job with Four Oaks.  (Testimony).  
He also could still work in construction, but he would “have to pick and choose” his jobs.  
(Testimony).  He felt that he could no longer do his second job with Four Oaks because 
the weights would be too much for him to carry.  (Testimony).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.904(3).   
 
The parties stipulated that the claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of, 
and in the course of his employment on October 19, 2018.  At that time, the claimant 
lifted a toilet, felt a pop, and had pain in his left shoulder.  The claimant suffered an 
injury to his shoulder, and also a ruptured biceps tendon.  His ruptured biceps tendon 
resulted in a Popeye deformity in his left arm.  The parties stipulated further that the 
claimant’s injury is a cause of permanent disability.  The parties agree that the claimant 
suffered permanent disability to the left shoulder.  They dispute whether that disability 
extends to the remainder of the left upper extremity, and to what extent the claimant 
was disabled.   

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 13 
 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is 
probable, rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 
148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); 
Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).    
 
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156.  When considering 
the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination 
occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the 
nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and 
practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  
Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985).  Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994).  Supportive lay testimony may be used 
to buttress expert testimony, and therefore is also relevant and material to the causation 
question.    
 
Under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
85.34(2)(a)-(u) or for loss of earning capacity under Iowa Code 85.34(2)(v).  The extent 
of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is 
determined by using the functional method.  Functional disability is “limited to the loss of 
the physiological capacity of the body or body part.”  Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 
N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998).   
 
An injury to a scheduled member may, because of after effects or compensatory 
change, result in permanent impairment of the body as a whole.  Such impairment may 
in turn be the basis for a rating of industrial disability.  It is the anatomical situs of the 
permanent injury or impairment which determines whether the schedules in Iowa Code 
85.34(a) – (u) are applied.  Lauhoff Grain v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834 (Iowa 1986); 
Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Dailey v. Pooley Lumber 
Co., 233 Iowa 758, 10 N.W.2d 569 (1943); Soukup v. Shores Co., 222 Iowa 272, 268 
N.W. 598 (1936).   
 
Generally, permanent partial disability falls into two categories.  A scheduled 
member, as defined by Iowa Code section 85.34(a) – (u), or a loss of earning capacity, 
also known as industrial disability, as defined by Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v).  
Lauhoff Grain v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834 (Iowa 1986); Blacksmith v. All-American, 
Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Dailey v. Pooley Lumber Co., 233 Iowa 758, 10 
N.W.2d 569 (1943); Soukup v. Shores Co., 222 Iowa 272, 268 N.W. 598 (1936); 
Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935).  Iowa Code 

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 14 
 
section 85.34(2)(v) provides an alternative to the scheduled member and/or industrial 
disability compensation methods.   
 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) states, in relevant part:  
If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or would 
receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the employee 
received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be compensated based 
only upon the employee’s functional impairment resulting from the injury, 
and not in relation to the employee’s earning capacity.   
In determining whether the above provision of Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) applies, 
there is a comparison between the pre- and post-injury wages and earnings.  McCoy v. 
Menard, Inc., File No. 1651840.01 (App. April 9, 2021).  A claimant’s hourly wage must 
be considered in tandem with the actual hours worked by that claimant or offered by the 
employer.  Id.  The parties previously stipulated that the claimant has returned to work 
for the defendant at the same, or greater wages than he received at the time of the 
injury.  There is no information in the record to indicate that the claimant is working less 
hours than prior to the injury.  Therefore, should it be determined that the claimant 
sustained an injury to both the left shoulder and the left upper extremity, the claimant 
would be compensated for his functional impairment only.   
 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) states: 
In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs ‘a’ 
through ‘u’, or paragraph ‘v’ when determining functional disability and not 
loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the workers’ compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A.  Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
pursuant to paragraphs ‘a’ through ‘u’, or paragraph ‘v’ when determining 
functional disability and not loss of earning capacity.   
I am bound by statute to only consider the functional disability ratings issued by the 
various medical providers.   
 
The claimant was lifting a toilet on October 19, 2018, when he felt his biceps 
tendon rupture, and immediately heard a pop.  At that time, he also had pain in his left 
shoulder, and a deformity formed in his left arm.  Eventually, Mr. Ruff was diagnosed 
with a proximal complete tear of the tendon of the long head of the biceps brachii with 
the torn end retracted to the superior aspect of the bicipital groove.  He was also 
diagnosed with a full thickness tear of the posteroinferior glenoid labrum, and blunting of 
the entire superior labrum, which a radiologist opined was consistent with tearing at the 
time of the bicipital tendon tear.  Dr. Hill also noted that the claimant had a large, partial 
thickness undersurface rotator cuff tear.   

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 15 
 
 
On January 15, 2019, Mr. Ruff had an arthroscopic surgery, which included 
debridement of the superior labrum, inferior labrum, subscapularis, and rotator cuff.  
The surgeon also performed lysis of adhesions of the rotator interval and subscapularis, 
SA space, subcoracoid space, supraglenoid space, and rotator cuff.  Finally, the 
surgeon performed “SAD” which appears to mean subacromial decompression with 
acromioplasty and synovectomy.  Dr. Hill noted the absence of the biceps tendon in the 
shoulder area, which he opined was consistent with the prior biceps tendon rupture.  Dr. 
Hill’s postoperative diagnoses were listed as: left shoulder proximal biceps tendon 
rupture; undersurface rotator cuff tear; adhesive capsulitis; extensive significant 
capsular synovitis; and, extensive thick fibrous adhesions of the RI and subscapularis, 
subcoracoid space, supraglenoid space and “RTC” and “SA” space.   
 
Mr. Ruff then had various conservative treatments.  During subsequent follow-up 
visits, Mr. Ruff was found to have no focal tenderness, and only residual weakness.  Dr. 
Hill placed Mr. Ruff at MMI effective August 12, 2019, with no permanent restrictions.  
During a December 4, 2019, visit, Mr. Ruff complained to Dr. Hill of biceps spasm and 
shoulder fatigue.  Dr. Hill performed strength testing, and found Mr. Ruff to have good 
strength in his shoulder with generalized residual weakness.  During his evaluation, Dr. 
Hill found the claimant to have flexion of 160 degrees, abduction of 110 degrees, 
external rotation of 80 degrees, and internal rotation of 10 degrees.  Based upon the 
range of motion measurements, Dr. Hill used the Guides to provide the claimant with a 
9 percent upper extremity impairment.   
 
Dr. Segal then completed an IME of the claimant.  It is important to note that Dr. 
Segal is a board certified neurosurgeon.  He previously treated patients for spinal and 
brain issues.  Dr. Segal’s report indicated that the claimant had “[m]ild to [m]oderately 
[s]evere” pain in his left arm depending on the position.  Mr. Ruff told Dr. Segal that the 
pain was on the anterior left upper arm, in the area of the top of the biceps and anterior 
shoulder, and the bicipital tendon insertion.  Mr. Ruff described things that aggravated 
his pain, such as lifting, any movement of his left arm above shoulder height, and quick 
movement with his left arm.  Mr. Ruff also complained of weakness in his left shoulder.   
 
Upon examination, Mr. Ruff complained of tenderness to palpation at the location 
of the biceps tendon insertion in the left arm.  Dr. Segal tested the claimant’s range of 
motion of his left shoulder.  He found that the claimant had 110 degrees of abduction, 
30 degrees of adduction, 150 degrees of forward flexion, 20 degrees of extension, 10 
degrees of internal rotation, and 40 degrees of external rotation.  Dr. Segal opined that 
Mr. Ruff’s biceps tendon rupture and permanent Popeye deformity involved his arm 
more than his shoulder, and that some of the synovitis and adhesions in the left 
shoulder “extended proximally to the shoulder” and involved the upper thorax.  Dr. 
Segal, despite his experience as a neurosurgeon and not an orthopedic doctor, 
provided his own diagnoses for the claimant.   
 
Dr. Segal opined that the claimant achieved MMI on January 15, 2020.  He then 
provided an impairment rating based upon the Guides.  Based upon the above noted 
ranges of motions in the left shoulder, Dr. Segal opined that the claimant had a 14 
percent left upper extremity impairment.  He converted this to an 8 percent whole 
person impairment.  Dr. Segal also opined that the claimant had motor weakness in his 

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 16 
 
left shoulder and arm examination, which resulted in a 21 percent left upper extremity 
impairment.  He further opined that Mr. Ruff had “severe” pain with lifting, which caused 
an increased burden of pain not accounted for in range of motion or strength 
measurements.  This resulted in an addition 3 percent permanent impairment to the left 
upper extremity and/or shoulder.  The combined rating was 22 percent of the whole 
person.  Dr. Segal concluded his report by providing restrictions for the claimant.   
 
Interestingly, Dr. Segal notes in his report that the upper end of the biceps 
muscle has two tendons which attach it to bones in the shoulder.  The long head 
attaches to the top of the shoulder socket, which is the glenoid.  The short head 
attaches to the coracoid process in the shoulder blade.  Dr. Segal continued by 
explaining that the long head is involved with the subscapularis muscle and tendon.  
The Supreme Court has previously held that these are parts of the rotator cuff and thus, 
the shoulder.   
 
Mr. Ruff was scheduled to attend an IME with Dr. Gorsche on May 18, 2022.  Dr. 
Gorsche is board certified in orthopedic surgery and is a certified independent medical 
examiner.  Dr. Gorsche has substantial qualifications in orthopedic surgery, including as 
the chief resident of the orthopedic department at the Mayo Clinic, and has specialized 
in general orthopedics since 1986.  Unfortunately, at the advice of his counsel, Mr. Ruff 
chose not to attend this IME.  This is concerning behavior on the part of the claimant.  
Dr. Gorsche was unable to complete an IME on behalf of the defendants, thus allowing 
the claimant to be the only one to present an IME as evidence.   
 
Even though he could not complete an examination of the claimant, Dr. Gorsche, 
completed a records review.  While this would normally be less reliable than an actual 
examination, it was the claimant’s choice to not attend the IME.  Therefore, Dr. Gorsche 
and the defendants’ only option was to have a records review.  Dr. Gorsche noted the 
results of the surgery and diagnosed the claimant with a partial tear of the left rotator 
cuff, adhesive capsulitis, extensive significant capsular synovitis, extensive thick fibrous 
adhesions of the rotator interval and subscapularis subcoracoid space, the supraglenoid 
space, and the rotator cuff.  Dr. Gorsche opined that the claimant’s injury was to his 
shoulder.   
 
Dr. Gorsche noted that the Popeye defect in the claimant’s left biceps does not 
result in a permanent impairment to the arm apart from the shoulder injury.  Dr. Gorsche 
was critical of Dr. Segal’s combined impairment rating in which he included impairment 
for both a loss of range of motion and a loss of strength.  Dr. Gorsche noted that these 
impairment measurements are not typically combined, and that the Guides provide that 
only in a rare case should a loss of strength be included if it represents an impairing 
factor not adequately considered by other methods in the Guides.  Dr. Gorsche also 
noted that, due to its subjective nature and difficulty in rating, pain should not be 
included as a measurement for permanent impairment.  Dr. Gorsche felt that both Dr. 
Segal’s and Dr. Hill’s impairment ratings based upon a range of motion deficit were 
appropriate.   
 
Dr. Segal was afforded the opportunity to respond to Dr. Gorsche’s report via 
letter.  Dr. Segal affirmed his previous opinions, and expounded on his opinions further.  

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 17 
 
Dr. Segal opined that the biceps tendon is “not essential to shoulder function.”  He also 
indicated that the impairment of the biceps tendon injury is “primarily related to elbow 
flexion and pain in the biceps muscle.”  Interestingly, Mr. Ruff complained of pain in the 
area where his biceps attached to the shoulder during the hearing.  He noted that he 
would have cramping in his left arm near his shoulder if he bent his left arm for too long, 
but he had no issues with using his left elbow, left hand or left fingers.  His pain occurs 
when he overextends his shoulder, based upon his testimony.  Dr. Segal opines that the 
Popeye deformity indicates biceps dysfunction in the arm and is both anatomically and 
functionally unrelated to the shoulder itself.  Dr. Segal opined that Mr. Ruff’s injury 
“caused two separate and distinct areas of anatomical and functional impairment; the 
shoulder and the arm.”   
 
 
Dr. Segal proceeded to explain that Mr. Ruff’s shoulder weakness is “one of the 
cases that would be considered an exception for allowing the rating of motor weakness” 
pursuant to the Guides.  Dr. Segal indicated that the loss of strength in the claimant’s 
left shoulder was one of the primary impairing symptoms, and that this was not 
adequately considered by other methods in the Guides.  Dr. Segal also explained that 
pain did not impede his measurements of impairment during his examination.   
 
Dr. Gorsche replied to Dr. Segal’s opinions.  Dr. Gorsche explained that the 
biceps tendon rupture occurred inside of the glenohumeral joint and then retracted to 
the level of the bicipital groove.  He opined that, based on this, the injury that occurred 
was a shoulder injury.  Dr. Gorsche continued, “[r]upture of the long head of the biceps 
tendon always occurs interarticular and is the result of shoulder pathology.”  Dr. 
Gorsche cited to the principles of section 16.8A of the Guides.   
 
The principles of section 16.8A of the Guides allow for the loss of strength to be 
rated separately, “if the examiner believes the individual’s loss of strength represents an 
impairing factor that has not been considered adequately by other methods in the 
Guides.”  The Guides note, [i]f the examiner judges that loss of strength should be rated 
separately in an extremity that presents other impairments, the impairment due to loss 
of strength could be combined with other impairments, only if based on unrelated 
etiologic or pathomechanical causes.”  Guides, Section 16.8a, page 508.  The Guides 
emphasize, “[o]therwise, the impairment ratings based on objective anatomic findings 
take precedence.”  Id.  The Guides do not allow for rating based upon decreased 
strength in the presence of decreased motion, painful conditions, deformities, or 
absence of parts that prevent effective application of maximal force in the evaluated 
area.  Id.  Manual muscle testing of major groups is to be used for testing shoulder 
strength.  Id.   
 
The Guides define normal ranges of motion for the shoulder.  Specifically, normal 
range of motion is from 180 degrees flexion to 50 degrees extension.  Guides, page 
475.  Dr. Segal found Mr. Ruff to have forward flexion of 150 degrees and extension of 
20 degrees.  The Guides define normal abduction to be 180 degrees and normal 
adduction to be 50 degrees.  Id. at 476.  Dr. Segal found Mr. Ruff to have abduction of 
110 degrees and adduction of 30 degrees.  The Guides define normal internal and 
external rotation to be 90 degrees.  Id. at 478.  Dr. Segal found Mr. Ruff to have internal 
rotation of 10 degrees and external rotation of 40 degrees.  Dr. Segal also found Mr. 

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 18 
 
Ruff to have tenderness to palpation at the biceps tendon insertion.  While Mr. Ruff 
complained of pain of 0/10 at the time of the examination, it is still questionable whether 
Mr. Ruff should be rated based upon a loss of strength when the Guides do not allow for 
rating based upon decreased strength in the presence of a loss of range of motion 
which prevents the effective application of maximal force in the evaluated area.   
 
Dr. Gorsche opined that, “[i]n my experience, I do not combine the ratings for 
loss of strength and loss of motion, but instead take the higher of the two.  It would be a 
very rare case in which one would combine these ratings.”   
 
Recently, our Supreme Court affirmed a ruling of the Commissioner regarding 
the definition of a shoulder pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) as amended in 
2017.  The court provided the most analysis of this issue in Chavez v. MS Technology 
LLC, 972 N.W.2d 662 (Iowa 2020).  The claimant in that case injured her right shoulder 
while working.  Id. at 665.  She felt a pop in her right shoulder, and suffered a full 
thickness rotator cuff tear, which retracted to the glenoid.  Id. at 668.  She also was 
diagnosed with severe AC arthrosis, tendonitis, and tearing of her biceps tendon.  Id.  
The Commissioner and court ruled that the shoulder includes the shoulder structure, 
including injuries to the tendons, ligaments, muscles, and articular surfaces connected 
to the glenohumeral joint.  Id.  The court ruled that the legislature did not intend to limit 
the definition of the shoulder solely to the glenohumeral joint.  Id.  The Commissioner 
and court also noted that the claimant suffered biceps tendonitis and tearing, and that 
she underwent a biceps tenotomy along with her shoulder surgery.  Id. at 671.  The 
Court continued by noting that Ms. Chavez did not suffer a permanent impairment to her 
right arm due to her biceps injury.  Id. at 671.   
 
This case bears similarities to Chavez.  The claimant in this case injured his left 
shoulder with a proximal biceps tendon rupture; undersurface rotator cuff tear; adhesive 
capsulitis; extensive significant capsular synovitis; and, extensive thick fibrous 
adhesions of the RI and subscapularis, subcoracoid space, supraglenoid space and 
“RTC” and “SA” space.  Namely, the case involves injuries to the labrum and rotator cuff 
in the claimant’s left shoulder.  These have previously been determined to be part of the 
“shoulder” pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n).   
 
The question is whether the injury to the claimant’s left biceps, including a 
Popeye deformity, caused the claimant to suffer permanent impairment to his left upper 
extremity.  The claimant suffered a rupture or tear to the long head of his left biceps.  
According to Dr. Segal, the long head of the biceps attaches to the glenoid in the 
shoulder.  The glenoid is the shallow socket in the shoulder blade in which the humeral 
head rests.  Shoulder Joint Labral Tear, Online orthoinfo.aaos.org/en/diseases—
conditions/shoulder-joint-tear-glenoid-labrum-tear/ (last visited September 9, 2022).  
While the biceps itself is not vital to the functioning of the shoulder, the biceps tendon 
itself originates in the shoulder as defined by Iowa law.  The injury in this case is to the 
biceps tendon, not the biceps.  Furthermore, the claimant testified that his pain occurred 
in close proximity to his shoulder.  He demonstrated the same by pointing to that area 
during his arbitration hearing.  He also only appears to get pain in his left upper 
extremity when he over-extends his shoulder.   

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 19 
 
 
I also find the opinions of Dr. Gorsche more persuasive on this issue.  Dr. 
Gorsche is an orthopedic doctor with lengthy experience.  He has practiced in general 
orthopedics since 1986, and was the chief resident of the orthopedic department at the 
Mayo Clinic.  Dr. Gorsche explained that the biceps tendon rupture occurred inside of 
the glenohumeral joint and then retracted to the level of the bicipital groove.  He opined 
that, based on this, the injury that occurred was a shoulder injury.  Dr. Gorsche also 
noted that the Popeye defect in the claimant’s left biceps does not result in a permanent 
impairment to the arm apart from the shoulder injury.  I would note that the claimant did 
not have a separate impairment rating from any doctor for his left upper extremity due to 
his biceps issues.  Therefore, the claimant did not sustain an impairment to his left 
upper extremity.  His only permanent impairment is due to his left shoulder injuries.   
 
The question then becomes the proper impairment rating for Mr. Ruff’s left 
shoulder injury.  As I noted above, I find the opinions of Dr. Gorsche to be more 
persuasive.  Dr. Gorsche, as well as the Guides provide that an impairment rating 
based upon reduced strength, and pain should not be used to generate a permanent 
impairment rating except in rare instances.  According to Dr. Gorsche this is not one of 
those cases.  However, Dr. Gorsche also opined that both Dr. Hill and Dr. Segal 
provided valid impairment ratings as they relate to range of motion measurements.  
While I did not find much of Dr. Segal’s impairment rating valid as it related to providing 
for impairment based upon muscle weakness and pain, he did provide the most up to 
date measurements and impairment based upon the Guides.  Dr. Gorsche also noted 
that Dr. Segal’s impairment rating was valuable as it related to the range of motion.  
Therefore, I find that the claimant had a 14 percent permanent impairment based upon 
the range of motion issues in his left shoulder.   
 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) provides for compensation based upon 400 
weeks for an impairment to the shoulder.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(w) provides that 
compensation shall be paid during the lesser number of weeks of disability determined, 
“as will not exceed a total amount equal to the same percentage proportion of said 
scheduled maximum compensation.”  Accordingly, the claimant is entitled to 56 weeks 
of compensation.  (0.14 x 400 weeks = 56 weeks).   
Costs 
 
Claimant seeks the award of costs as outlined in Claimant’s Exhibit 6.  Costs are 
to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner hearing the case.  See 876 
Iowa Administrative Code 4.33; Iowa Code section 86.40.  876 Iowa Administrative 
Code 4.33(86) provides:  
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 20 
 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes.   
 
Pursuant to the holding in Des Moines Area Regional Transit v. Young, 867 
N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015), only the report of an IME physician, and not the examination 
itself, can be taxed as a cost according to 876 IAC 4.33(6).  The Iowa Supreme Court 
reasoned, “a physician’s report becomes a cost incurred in a hearing because it is used 
as evidence in lieu of the doctor’s testimony,” while “[t]he underlying medical expenses 
associated with the examination do not become costs of a report needed for a hearing, 
just as they do not become costs of the testimony or deposition.”  Id.  (noting 
additionally that “[i]n the context of the assessment of costs, the expenses of the 
underlying medical treatment and examination are not part of the costs of the report or 
deposition”).  The commissioner has found this rationale applicable to expenses 
incurred by vocational experts.  See  Kirkendall v. Cargill Meat Solutions Corp., File No. 
5055494 (App. Dec., December 17, 2018); Voshell v. Compass Group, USA, Inc., File 
No. 5056857 (App. Dec., September 27, 2019).   
 
The claimant requests reimbursement of costs as follows: 
 Dr. David Segal IME of 2021  
 
 
$4,000.00 
 Filing Fee 
 
 
 
 
 
$   100.30 
 Service Costs 
 
 
 
 
 
$     13.92 
 Huney-Vaughn Court Reporters –                                                                  
cost of claimant’s deposition transcript 
 
$     94.30 
 Dr. David Segal Rebuttal Report of June 22, 2022 $   250.00 
Total:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
$4,458.52 
 
Dr. Segal’s IME invoice for the 2021 IME indicates $250.00 was charged for a 
records review, $750.00 was charged for the IME itself, and $3,000.00 was charged for 
“[c]omponents of the report (includes images).”  I am unsure as to what “components of 
the report (includes images)” means.  It may be for drafting the report, but the invoice is 
not sufficiently detailed to indicate that this portion of the invoice pertains to the drafting 
of the report.  Therefore, I decline to award these costs.    
 
Dr. Segal’s rebuttal report invoice does not break down Dr. Segal’s time between 
reviewing Dr. Gorsche’s report and drafting the rebuttal report.  It simply bills for 20 
minutes of Dr. Segal’s time at $250.00.  However, this is not an expense of an 
examination.  Therefore, it is appropriate to award these costs.    
 
The costs of the filing fee and service costs are awarded per my discretion.  
Therefore, the defendant shall reimburse the claimant one hundred fourteen and 22/100 
dollars ($114.22) for costs.  Any remaining costs listed are not awarded. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 

RUFF V. SENIOR HOUSING HEALTH CARE, INC. 
Page 21 
 
 
That the defendants shall pay the claimant fifty-six (56) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits at the stipulated rate of six hundred seventy and 82/100 dollars 
($670.82) per week commencing on the stipulated date of August 12, 2019.   
 
That the defendants shall reimburse the claimant one hundred fourteen and 
22/100 dollars ($114.22) for costs incurred.   
 
That the defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together 
with interest.  All interest on past due weekly compensation benefits shall be payable at 
an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal 
reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  
See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018).   
 
That the defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by 
this agency pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 3.1(2) and 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 11.7.   
Signed and filed this ____19TH ___ day of October, 2022. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Jason Neifert (via WCES) 
Charles Blades (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
