Case Number: 1641986.01
Case Title:  FAIRHURST, ZACH V. JENDRO SANITATION SERVICE/2ND INJ-FUND
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Fairhurst Zach-1641986.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ZACH FAIRHURST, 
  : 
 
 
  :                    File No. 1641986.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
JENDRO, INC., 
  :  
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ACCIDENT FUND GENERAL 
  : 
INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  :  
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
  :         Head Note Nos.:   1108.50, 1402.40, 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  :  
 
 
 
1803, 2907, 3203 
 
 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Zach Fairhurst, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Jendro, Inc., employer and Accident Fund General 
Insurance Company, insurance carrier and the Second Injury Fund of Iowa as 
defendants.  Hearing was held on November 6, 2020.  This case was scheduled to be 
an in-person hearing occurring in Des Moines.  However, due to the outbreak of a 
pandemic in Iowa, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner ordered all hearings 
to occur via video means, using CourtCall.  Accordingly, this case proceeded to a live 
video hearing via CourtCall with all parties and the court reporter appearing remotely.     
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Zach Fairhurst and Allen Powell were the only witnesses to testify live at trial.  
The evidentiary record also includes joint exhibits JE1-JE6, claimant’s exhibits 1-3, and 
defendant’s exhibits A-E.  All exhibits were received without objection.  The evidentiary 
record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.       
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-May-21  13:07:14     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

FAIRHURST V. JENDRO, INC. 
Page 2 
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on December 11, 2020, at which time 
the case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. The amount of permanent impairment claimant sustained as the result of the 
March 31, 2017 injury. 
2. The proper commencement date for any permanent partial disability benefits 
owed by the defendant-employer. 
3. The amount of permanent impairment claimant sustained as the result of the 
October 19, 2017 injury. 
4. The proper commencement date for any permanent partial disability benefits 
owed by the defendant-employer. 
5. Whether claimant has demonstrated entitlement to benefits from the Second 
Injury Fund of Iowa.  If so, the extent of benefits owed. 
6. The proper commencement date for any permanent partial disability benefits 
owed by the Second Injury Fund of Iowa 
7. Whether penalty benefits should be assessed against the defendant-
employer. 
8. Whether claimant is entitled to full reimbursement of the expenses he 
incurred in connection with an examination under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
9. Assessment of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant, Zach Fairhurst, lives in Greene, Iowa.  At the time of the injuries in 
question, he was employed at Jendro where he drove a garbage truck.  His duties 
included driving from house-to-house or business-to-business.  Once at each location, 
he got out of the truck, grabbed the garbage can or dumpster, hooked it up to the truck, 
emptied it, put the container back, and moved on to the next location.  (Testimony)  
On March 31, 2017, Mr. Fairhurst was emptying a dumpster at a lumberyard.  
Typically, he hooks the dumpster to the back of the truck, and it flips up.  On this date, 
the dumpster got stuck and the only way to fix the problem was for Mr. Fairhurst to 
climb up on the truck and try to force it out.  However, as he was trying to release the 
dumpster, the compactor started compacting.  Unfortunately, the compactor grabbed his 
right hand and crushed his hand from his wrist to his fingers.  (Testimony) 
 
Mr. Fairhust went to the emergency room at Floyd County Medical Center.  He 
had a laceration on the palm of his right hand, crush injury, swelling and was only able 
to move his little finger.  There was concerns about tendon injury or compartment 

FAIRHURST V. JENDRO, INC. 
Page 3 
syndrome.  He was referred to Mason City Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery, Rene F. 
Recinos, M.D., who recommended conservative care.  (JE1, pp. 1-2; JE2, pp. 4-6) 
 
Mr. Fairhurst continued to treat with Dr. Recinos.  He also attended physical 
therapy for his right hand.  Dr. Recinos prescribed an anti-edema glove for Mr. 
Fairhurst’s hand.  By June 28, 2017, Mr. Fairhurst had improved, but he continued to 
have pain in his hand.  He was using his anti-edema glove at all times.  Dr. Recinos 
noted that he was making slow, but steady progress.  Dr. Recinos felt it was normal to 
experience aches and pains from the crush injury.  He recommended that Mr. Fairhurst 
continue using the anti-edema glove.  Dr. Recinos also recommended some home 
therapy exercises.  Dr. Recinos returned Mr. Fairhurst to unrestricted activities.  He was 
to return in two months.  (JE2, pp. 7-16)  
 
On August 30, 2017, Mr. Fairhurst returned to see Dr. Recinos.  He reported that 
his hand pain had diminished.  He has resumed all of his activities.  Dr. Recinos felt Mr. 
Fairhurst was doing very well.  It was normal for him to still have aches and pains after 
this type of injury and the fact that the symptoms were slowly improving was reassuring.  
Mr. Fairhurst had full-finger range of motion and very strong grip strength.  Dr. Recinos 
advised Mr. Fairhurst that he may discontinue his anti-edema glove use as he wishes.  
Mr. Fairhurst was to follow-up as needed.  (JE2, pp. 16-18) 
 
On April 19, 2018, Dr. Recinos authored a missive to defendants.  He noted Mr. 
Fairhurst reached MMI for his right hand crushing injury on April 4, 2018.  Dr. Recinos 
noted that Mr. Fairhurst had been under his care for the crush injury on March 31, 2017.  
He acknowledged that the issue of permanency was complicated by the fact that Mr. 
Fairhurst had sustained other injuries, including a radial head fracture and a right thumb 
fracture.  Dr. Recinos made his best attempt to exclude any contributions from the other 
injuries in the impairment rating he assigned on April 19, 2018.  Dr. Recinos utilized the 
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, chapter 16.  He 
assigned 4 percent impairment rating of the right hand due to the crush injury.  Under 
the Guides, 4 percent of the hand is the equivalent of 4 percent of the upper extremity.  
(JE2, pp. 47-48) 
At the request of his attorney, Mr. Fairhust saw F. Manshadi, M.D., for an 
independent medical evaluation (IME) on August 13, 2019.  Dr. Manshadi felt Mr. 
Fairhurst reached MMI as of August 13, 2019, the date of the IME examination.  With 
regard to the right hand, Dr. Manshadi also cited Chapter 16 of the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  He calculated the impairment of 
each digit, including the right thumb, and arrived at a total of 8 percent impairment of the 
right hand.  In his report Dr. Manshadi discusses all of Mr. Fairhurst’s injuries.  Although 
he assigned permanent impairment and opined the impairment was related to the work 
injuries, he did not clarify how much impairment was attributable to each date of injury.  
(Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 3-4)  
 
 
 
 

FAIRHURST V. JENDRO, INC. 
Page 4 
I find Dr. Recinos’ functional rating related to the March 31, 2017 injury carries 
greater weight.  When calculating permanent impairment Dr. Recinos specifically noted 
that he made his best attempt to exclude any contributions from the other injuries.  
Thus, I conclude that as the result of the March 31, 2017 crush injury, Mr. Fairhurst 
sustained 4 percent impairment to his right hand.  I further conclude that Mr. Fairhurst 
was released to return to work without restrictions on June 28, 2017 by Dr. Recinos.  I 
find permanent partial disability benefits should commence on June 29, 2017. 
 
Mr. Fairhurst sustained a second injury on October 19, 2017.  Mr. Fairhurst was 
on the back of his truck performing a pre-trip inspection when he fell from the truck and 
landed on his left elbow, chin, and right thumb.  (Testimony) 
 
On the same day as the fall, Mr. Fairhurst went to Charles City Family Health 
Center, P.C.  The assessment was fall 4 feet, contusion with abrasions right thenar 
region and fracture left proximal radial head.  His left arm was placed in a sling.  He was 
to follow-up with Timothy A. Gibbons, M.D., the following week.  (JE4, pp. 69-72) 
 
On October 24, 2017, Mr. Fairhurst saw Dr. Gibbons for his left elbow.  Dr. 
Gibbons’ impression was left radial head fracture.  He recommended conservative 
treatment.  Mr. Fairhurst was to follow-up in three weeks.  (JE2, pp. 19-21)  
 
On November 16, 2017, Mr. Fairhurst saw Eric J. Potthoff, D.O., for evaluation of 
right hand and left elbow pain since falling off a garbage truck.  Dr. Potthoff noted the 
history of his right hand crush injury.  Dr. Potthoff’s impression was nondisplaced radial 
head and neck fracture, left elbow and right thumb pain.  Dr. Potthoff recommended 
physical therapy for the left elbow and occupational therapy for the hand.  He was to 
return to light duty work.  (JE2, pp. 23-25) 
 
On January 4, 2018, Mr. Fairhurst had an MRI of his hand which revealed a 
Bennett fracture at the base of the thumb.  Dr. Potthoff did not think he had any tears, 
but if he was still having pain he should see a hand specialist.  (JE2, p. 26)   
 
On January 18, 2018, Mr. Fairhurst saw Richard E. Rattay, M.D., for evaluation 
of his right thumb.  Dr. Rattay’s impression was closed Bennett’s fracture of right thumb.  
There was no indication for surgery.  Dr. Rattay recommended continued therapy and 
conservative management.  In February of 2018, Dr. Rattay also recommended 
occasional corticosteroid injections at the thumb CMC Joint.  Additionally, Dr. Rattay felt 
that a future thumb surgery was likely, due to progressive post-traumatic arthritis; 
however, the surgery could be several years down the road.  Mr. Fairhurst was to 
follow-up as needed.  (JE2, pp. 27-31) 
 
Mr. Fairhurst saw Michael Lindstrom, D.O., on February 21, 2018.  Dr. Lindstrom 
felt Mr. Fairhurst’s right thumb was healed.  Dr. Lindstrom opined that Mr. Fairhurst had 
reached maximum medical improvement (MMI) for his right thumb fracture.  He 
released Mr. Fairhurst with no restrictions.  (JE2, pp. 34-37) 

FAIRHURST V. JENDRO, INC. 
Page 5 
 
On April 4, 2018, Mr. Fairhurst saw Dr. Lindstrom.  He was one year post soft 
tissue crush injury of the right hand.  He advised that Mr. Fairhurst may continue to work 
unrestricted.  He was to follow-up as needed.  (JE2, pp. 40-42) 
 
On July 5, 2018, Dr. Rattey authored a missive to the defendants.  Utilizing the 
AMA Guides of Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, to assign permanent 
functional impairment.  He set forth the specific methodology he used to reach his 
numbers.  Dr. Rattey assigned 13 percent to the right thumb, which is the equivalent of 
5 percent to the right hand.  He did not assign any permanent restrictions.  (JE2, pp. 50-
51) 
 
For the right thumb injury, Dr. Manshadi assigned 11 percent impairment of the 
right thumb which is the equivalent of 4 percent of the right hand or upper extremity.  
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4) Unfortunately, Dr. Manshadi does not indicate how much impairment to 
the thumb is due to the March 31, 2017 crush injury versus the October 19, 2017 fall 
injury.   
 
I find that both Dr. Manshadi and Dr. Rattey utilized the AMA Guides of 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, to assign permanent functional 
impairment.  For the October 18, 2017 thumb injury, I find Dr. Rattey’s functional rating 
related to the thumb injury to carry greater weight.  Dr. Rattey specifically saw Mr. 
Fairhurst for the October 19, 2017 work injury.  However, Dr. Manshadi saw Mr. 
Fairhurst for the March 31, 2017 and the October 19, 2017 injuries which both involved 
the right thumb.  As noted above, although Dr. Manshadi assigned permanent 
impairment and felt the impairment was related to the work injuries, he did not clarify 
how much impairment was attributable to each date of injury.  Thus, I give greater 
weight to the rating of Dr. Rattey.  I find Mr. Fairhurst has demonstrated that he 
sustained 5 percent permanent functional impairment to his right hand as the result of 
the October 19, 2017 work injury.  I further find that Mr. Fairhurst reached MMI for his 
thumb fracture on February 21, 2018 as opined by Dr. Lindstrom.   
 
We now turn to the left elbow.  On October 12, 2018, Dr. Potthoff assigned 
permanent impairment according to the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides.  Dr. Potthoff 
cited the specific sections, pages, and figures and found there was no ratable 
impairment for the left elbow injury due to the work injury.  (JE2, p. 55)   
Dr. Manshadi also evaluated Mr. Fairhurst’s left elbow for permanent impairment.  
He stated, that he used pages 471-474 of The Guides and assigned 2 percent 
impairment of the left upper extremity.  He did not provide any additional analysis or 
explanation.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4)   
A review of pages 471-474 of The Guides reveals that these pages address 
elbow motion impairment.  Unfortunately, Dr. Manshadi does not explain how he was 
able to assign any impairment to Mr. Fairhurst’s left elbow based on the measurements 
he set forth on page 3 of his report.  With regard to the left elbow, I find Dr. Potthoff 
assigned permanent impairment according to the Guides to the Evaluation of 

FAIRHURST V. JENDRO, INC. 
Page 6 
Permanent Impairment, published by the American Medical Association.  While both 
physician reference the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, Dr. Potthoff provides a more in-
depth explanation as to how he used The Guides to reach his impairment rating.  
Therefore, I give Dr. Potthoff’s rating greater weight and accept the impairment rating 
offered by Dr. Potthoff.  I find claimant proved zero percent permanent functional 
impairment of the left upper extremity as a result of the October 19, 2017 work injury.   
As such, I find that he has demonstrated that he sustained permanent disability 
to his right hand as the result of the October 19, 2017 injury.  I further find that Mr. 
Fairhurst reached MMI for his thumb fracture on February 21, 2018 as opined by Dr. 
Lindstrom.  I further conclude that Mr. Fairhurst failed to demonstrate that he sustained 
any permanent disability that extends beyond his right hand as the result of the October 
19, 2017 work injury.   
We now turn to the issue of penalty.  Claimant seeks 50 percent penalty on the 
7.857 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits paid by the defendant employer for 
Mr. Fairhurst’s right hand impairment.  Claimant asserts there was an unreasonable 
delay in the payment of these benefits.  Specifically, claimant argues that on February 
21, 2018, Dr. Rattay placed claimant at MMI.  The doctor stated that if a rating is 
requested, the rating could be based on these notes.  (JE2, p. 37) Claimant argues that 
based on this clinical note, it was obvious that Mr. Fairhurst had sustained permanent 
disability.  Defendants did not make any inquiry regarding permanent impairment until 
April 25, 2018; claimant argues this resulted in an unreasonable delay.  (JE2, p. 50) 
Although Dr. Rattay saw Mr. Fairhurst on February 21, 2018, it is not known when the 
clinical notes were ready and made available to the parties.  There is an inherent 
administrative delay from the time a physician dictates his notes until the time those 
notes are available to the parties.  I find that any delay in requesting the impairment 
rating in this case is not unreasonable. 
Additionally, claimant argues that even once defendants received the impairment 
rating from Dr. Rattay’s office, there was an unreasonable delay in issuing the payment 
of the permanent impairment rating.  Dr. Rattay authored his impairment rating on July 
5, 2018.  It appears the impairment rating was faxed on July 10, 2018.  The defendants 
issued the first check for permanent partial disability benefits the next day, on July 11, 
2018.  I find that there was no unreasonable delay by the defendants in issuing the 
check for permanent disability benefits.       
Claimant also seeks penalty on the basis that defendants “failed to conduct an 
ongoing investigation after receipt of Dr. Manshadi’s IME report, which indicated that 
additional PPD was owed for the 10/19/17 work injury.”  (Claimant’s brief, p. 7) At that 
point, defendants had already obtained an impairment rating from at least one other 
physician.  Thus, I find penalty benefits are not appropriate in this matter. 
Claimant is seeking reimbursement for the IME of Dr. Manshadi in the amount of 
$1,800.00.  Defendants do not argue that the prerequisites of section 85.39 were not 
met. Rather, defendants argue that the amount charged by Dr. Manshadi is not 

FAIRHURST V. JENDRO, INC. 
Page 7 
reasonable.  Defendants point out that they only paid $500.00 to obtain an impairment 
rating.  However, the impairment rating they obtained was from a treating physician who 
was already familiar with the patient and his treatment history.  Additionally, Dr. 
Manshadi’s IME was for both dates of injury.  I find that the fees charged by Dr. 
Manshadi are reasonable.  Defendants shall reimburse claimant in the amount of 
$1,800.00 for the IME of Dr. Manshadi.          
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke's Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 
2001); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or as an unscheduled injury pursuant to the provisions 
of section 85.34(2)(v). The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an 
injured worker is entitled is determined by using the functional method. Functional 
disability is “limited to the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body 
part.” Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella 
Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998). 
Iowa Code section 85.34(x) permanent disabilities states: 
 
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 

FAIRHURST V. JENDRO, INC. 
Page 8 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the workers' compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining 
functional disability and not loss of earning capacity. 
 
Iowa Code section 85.34 (x). 
This agency has adopted the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 
Fifth Edition, published by the American Medical Association for determining the extent 
of loss or percentage of impairment for permanent partial disabilities.  See 876 IAC 2.4. 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude Mr. Fairhurst has demonstrated 
by a preponderance of the evidence that he sustained 4 percent impairment to his right 
hand as the result of the March 31, 2017 work injury.  Permanent partial disability to a 
hand is to be based on 190 weeks of compensation.  See Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(l).  Thus, I conclude Mr. Fairhurst has demonstrated entitlement to 7.6 weeks 
of permanent partial disability benefits as the result of the March 31, 2017 crush injury.  
These benefits shall commence on June 29, 2017.   
We now turn to the October 19, 2017 work injury.  Based on the above findings 
of fact, I conclude Mr. Fairhurst has demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence 
that he sustained 5 percent impairment to his right hand as the result of the October 19, 
2017 work injury.  I further conclude that Mr. Fairhurst has failed to demonstrate by a 
preponderance of the evidence that he sustained any permanent disability that extends 
beyond his right hand as the result of the October 19, 2017 work injury.  Permanent 
partial disability to a hand is to be based on 190 weeks of compensation.  See Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(l).  Thus, I conclude Mr. Fairhurst has demonstrated entitlement 
to 9.5 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits as the result of the October 19, 
2017 work injury.  These benefits shall commence on February 21, 2018.   
Next, we turn to Mr. Fairhurst’s claim against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  
Section 85.64 governs Second Injury Fund liability.  Before liability of the Fund is 
triggered, three requirements must be met.  First, the employee must have lost or lost 
the use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye.  Second, the employee must sustain a loss or 
loss of use of another specified member or organ through a compensable injury.  Third, 
permanent disability must exist as to both the initial injury and the second injury.   
The Second Injury Fund Act exists to encourage the hiring of handicapped 
persons by making a current employer responsible only for the amount of disability 
related to an injury occurring while that employer employed the handicapped individual 
as if the individual had had no preexisting disability.  See Anderson v. Second Injury 
Fund, 262 N.W.2d 789 (Iowa 1978); 15 Iowa Practice, Workers’ Compensation, Lawyer, 
Section 17:1, p. 211 (2014-2015). 

FAIRHURST V. JENDRO, INC. 
Page 9 
The Fund is responsible for the industrial disability present after the second injury 
that exceeds the disability attributable to the first and second injuries.  Section 85.64.  
Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467 (Iowa 1990); Second Injury 
Fund v. Neelans, 436 N.W.2d 355 (Iowa 1989); Second Injury Fund v. Mich. Coal Co., 
274 N.W.2d 300 (Iowa 1970). 
In the present case, I conclude that Mr. Fairhurst demonstrated by a 
preponderance of the evidence that he sustained permanent partial disability to his right 
hand as the result of the March 31, 2017 work injury.  Additionally, I found he sustained 
permanent partial disability to his right hand as the result of the October 19, 2017 work 
injury.  Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that Mr. Fairhurst failed to 
demonstrate that he sustained any permanent partial disability to his left elbow.  I 
conclude that he failed to demonstrate that he sustained any permanent loss to any 
member beyond his right hand.  Therefore, I conclude that Mr. Fairhurst has failed to 
prove that he sustained impairment to more than one scheduled member.  Mr. Fairhust 
has failed to meet the statutory requirements necessary to prove entitlement to any 
benefits from the Fund.  Because Mr. Fairhurst has failed to show entitlement to any 
benefits from the Fund, all other issues regarding his claim for benefits from the Fund 
are rendered moot.        
We now turn to the issue of penalty benefits.  If weekly compensation benefits 
are not fully paid when due, section 86.13 requires that additional benefits be awarded 
unless the employer shows reasonable cause or excuse for the delay or denial.  
Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996).  Delay attributable to 
the time required to perform a reasonable investigation is not unreasonable.  Kiesecker 
v. Webster City Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d 109 (Iowa 1995).  
Claimant seeks penalty for unreasonable delay in permanent partial disability 
benefits.  Claimant also seeks penalty benefits for failure to conduct an ongoing 
investigation.  Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that any delay in 
requesting the impairment rating in this case is not unreasonable.  I further conclude 
there was no unreasonable delay by the defendants in issuing the check for permanent 
disability benefits.  I find there was not an unreasonable delay or denial of benefits.  
Thus, I conclude penalty benefits are not appropriate in this case. 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that the fees charged by Dr. 
Manshadi are reasonable.  Defendants shall reimburse claimant in the amount of 
eighteen hundred and no/100 dollars ($1,800.00) for the IME of Dr. Manshadi.   

FAIRHURST V. JENDRO, INC. 
Page 10 
Finally, claimant is seeking an assessment of costs in the amount of $100.00 for 
the filing fee.  Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner or the deputy hearing the case.  876 IAC 4.33.  I find that 
claimant was somewhat successful in his case.  Thus I exercise my discretion and 
assess costs against the defendant employer.  I find that the $100.00 filing fee is an 
appropriate cost under 876 IAC 4.33(7).  Defendants are assessed costs in the amount 
of $100.00.    
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant shall take nothing from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa as the result of 
these proceedings.   
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of five hundred fourteen 
and 42/100 dollars ($514.42).   
With regard to the March 31, 2017 work injury, defendant-employer shall pay 
seven point six (7.6) weeks of permanent partial disability benefits commencing on June 
29, 2017.   
Defendant-employer shall be entitled to credit for all weekly benefits paid to 
date.   
With regard to the October 19, 2017 work injury, defendant-employer shall pay 
nine point five (9.5) weeks of permanent partial disability benefits commencing on 
February 21, 2018. 
Defendant-employer shall be entitled to credit for all weekly benefits paid to 
date.   
Defendant-employer shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together 
with interest at the rate of ten percent for all weekly benefits payable and not paid when 
due which accrued before July 1, 2017, and all interest on past due weekly 
compensation benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, shall be payable at an annual 
rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal reserve in 
the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  See 
Deciga Sanchez v. Tyson Fresh Meats, Inc., File No. 5052008 (App. Apr. 23, 2018) 
(Ruling on Defendants’ Motion to Enlarge, Reconsider or Amend Appeal Decision re: 
Interest Rate Issue). 
Defendant-employer shall reimburse claimant for the full amount of the IME. 
Defendant-employer shall reimburse claimant costs as set forth above. 

FAIRHURST V. JENDRO, INC. 
Page 11 
Defendant-employer shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by 
this agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this _21st _ day of May, 2021. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Charles Showalter (via WCES) 
Benjamin Roth (via WCES) 
Laura Ostrander (via WCES) 
Tonya Oetken (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal pe riod 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
       ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
