Case Number: 1616685.01
Case Title:  WORKMAN, SCOTT V. MENARD, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Workman Scott-1616685.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
SCOTT WORKMAN, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
File Nos. 19006854.01 
 
 
  : 
 
 
     1616685.01 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
MENARD, INC., 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
XL INSURANCE COMPANY OF 
  : 
AMERICA, INC., 
  : 
 
 
 
  : 
        Head Note: 1803, 4000.1 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Scott Workman, filed two petitions for arbitration and seeks 
workers’ compensation benefits from Menard, Inc., employer, and XL Insurance 
Company of America, Inc., insurance carrier.  The claimant was represented by Rick 
Crowl.  The defendants were represented by Kathryn Hartnett. 
The matter came on for hearing on September 23, 2021, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via CourtCall 
videoconferencing system.  The hearing was completed on September 28, 2021.  The 
record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 14; Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 
15; and Defense Exhibits A through J.  Claimant’s counsel objected to Defendants’ 
Exhibit J.  The objection was overruled.  The claimant testified at hearing, as did 
witnesses, Barbara Workman and Ryan Holford.  Kristi Miller was appointed and served 
as the official court reporter for the proceeding.  The matter was fully submitted on 
November 8, 2021, after written arguments by the parties. 
The parties submitted a combined hearing report which contained the disputed 
issues, as well as a number of stipulations.  The claimant indicated he is seeking no 
further benefits in relation to File No. 19006854.01.  He did not ask to dismiss, however, 
he presented no evidence for this file.  The hearing report was accepted, and the 
stipulations contained therein are binding upon the parties. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-May-03  14:10:18     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

WORKMAN V. MENARD, INC. 
Page 2 
 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1. The parties had an employer-employee relationship at the time of the injuries. 
2. Claimant sustained two injuries which arose out of and in the course of 
employment, the first on May 10, 2016, and the second on December 2, 
2019.  The injuries caused both temporary and permanent disability. 
3. Temporary disability/healing period and medical benefits are no longer in 
dispute. 
4. The parties have stipulated to all of the elements comprising the rate of 
compensation and assert the correct weekly rate of compensation is $312.82. 
5. Defendants have paid and are entitled to a credit as set forth in the Hearing 
Report. 
6. Affirmative defenses have been waived. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. The extent of claimant’s permanent disability.  Claimant alleges he is 
permanently and totally disabled and has asserted odd-lot. 
 
2. The commencement date for permanency benefits is disputed. 
 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to medical expenses under Iowa Code Section 
85.27.  At hearing, defendants took the position that all of the medical 
expenses in Claimant’s Exhibit 2 have been or will be paid.  Defendants do 
not dispute the medical expenses set forth therein.  (Transcript, pages 6-7) 
 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to penalty. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Scott Workman was 29 years old as of the date of hearing.  He works 
as a sales associate for the defendant employer.  He testified live and under oath during 
the video hearing.  I find Mr. Workman to be a credible witness.  He was a relatively 
good historian under the circumstances.  His testimony generally matches with the other 
evidence in the record, including contemporaneous medical reports, as well as his 
deposition testimony.  His testimony was lengthy.  He spoke slowly and deliberately, 
and he paused often.  There was nothing about his demeanor which caused me 
concern for his truthfulness. 

WORKMAN V. MENARD, INC. 
Page 3 
 
Mr. Workman suffered a work injury on May 10, 2016, wherein he alleges he 
sustained a serious traumatic brain injury.  The injury itself, is stipulated between the 
parties.  The parties also agree that this injury resulted in some permanent disability. 
As a child, Mr. Workman suffered from arteriovenous malformation (AVM), which 
caused his blood to clot, resulting in internal bleeding.  (Tr., pp. 24-25)  This caused him 
to suffer from seizures and resulted in a total of six craniotomy surgeries as a minor.  
These conditions were significantly disabling for a period of time as he had to relearn to 
walk and talk.  His last craniotomy surgery was in 2005.  (Tr., p. 25)  Thereafter, Mr. 
Workman contends – and the records support – his condition had been stable.  His 
medical records from University of Nebraska Medical Center are in evidence.  (Def. Ex. 
A, pp. 1-16)  Other preexisting condition records are in evidence as well, including 
evidence that claimant suffered from depression prior to the work injury.  (Def. Ex. B, 
pp. 17-29)  In regard to his preexisting condition of AVM, I find that, in fact, the 
claimant’s condition was stable and controlled following his 2005 surgery.  The primary 
fighting issue in this case is the nature and extent of permanent disability Mr. Workman 
sustained from this fall. 
In spite of his significant brain condition, Mr. Workman was a very good student 
in high school.  He graduated in 2011, earning As and Bs.  He also graduated with an 
associate’s degree from Iowa Western Community College in 2012 in construction 
technology.  He began working for Menard, Inc., (hereafter, “Menard’s”) in the garden 
department in 2012 earning $8.25 per hour.  The position was full-time.  He eventually 
moved to the electrical department.  At the time of hearing, he was still employed by 
Menard’s, earning $14.00 per hour.  He was not working under any medical restrictions 
when he began. 
At hearing, Mr. Workman’s mother, Barbara Workman, testified live and under 
oath.  I find her testimony to be highly credible.  She managed his medical treatment for 
his AVM condition when he was a child.  As an adult, Mr. Workman has remained very 
close to his mother, having regular contact.  She testified that before his work injury, Mr. 
Workman was active and healthy.  (Tr., pp. 109-110)  She essentially confirmed that his 
preexisting condition of AVM was stable, manageable and was not impairing his ability 
to live and work. 
On May 10, 2016, Mr. Workman was working with some stock at Menard’s on a 
12-foot ladder.  While reaching to straighten a box, he lost his balance and fell, striking 
his head and right arm.  He testified he tried to catch himself, but he ended up falling to 
the ground and striking the left side of his head (in the front).  (Tr., p. 31)  He testified 
that the left side of his skull was “caved in.”  (Tr., p. 31)  He was dazed and has a foggy 
memory of the incident.  He was assisted by co-workers and emergency response was 
called.  During the ambulance ride, Mr. Workman testified he vomited. 
Mr. Workman’s relevant treatment records are in evidence.  (Jt. Exs. 1-14)  He 
was first treated at Nebraska Medical Center in Omaha on the same day as the 
incident.  The following is documented. 

WORKMAN V. MENARD, INC. 
Page 4 
 
HPI: 
Scott Workman is a [] y.o. male who sustained a fall from a 12 foot ladder 
today.  He states he did not lose consciousness but did strike his head.  
He is also complaining of left shoulder and neck pain.  He denies 
numbness or paresthesias. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 1)  A substantial workup of his condition was undertaken, and he was 
admitted for several days, ultimately being diagnosed with a fracture of his skull/eye 
orbit, a concussion and traumatic brain injury (TBI).  Various diagnostic scans were 
taken.  (Jt. Ex. 3)  Surgery was performed to correct the left frontal and orbital fractures.  
(Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 13-14)  When he was released on May 14, 2016, numerous referrals were 
made, including occupational therapy, physical therapy, speech therapy, orthopedics 
and ophthalmology. 
Mr. Workman continued medical care thereafter with several different physicians, 
including Nicholas Bruggeman, M.D. (Jt. Ex. 4), Jason Miller, M.D. (Jt. Exs. 5-8), 
William Thorell, M.D. (Jt. Ex. 10), Angie Rakes, M.D. (Jt. Ex. 11) and Morgan LaHolt, 
M.D. (Jt. Ex. 14).  On May 26, 2016, Dr. Bruggeman treated Mr. Workman for a right 
wrist “triquetral fracture.”  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 1)  He was primarily treated with a cast for this 
condition.  In September 2016, Dr. Miller performed surgery described as “Removal of 
deep buried cranial hardware.”  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 1)  Mr. Workman continued to follow up 
with Dr. Miller throughout 2016.  He was off work for approximately 23 weeks following 
the injury, finally returning to work with restrictions around October 17, 2016.  (Def. Ex. 
E)  He continued, however, to be highly symptomatic.  In fact, it appears some of his 
symptoms worsened after he returned to work. 
In March 2017, Dr. Thorell examined Mr. Workman.  Dr. Thorell was Mr. 
Workman’s surgeon in 2005 for the AVM condition.  The following is documented at 
their March 2017 visit. 
Scott A Workman is a [] y.o. Caucasion right handed male referred 
by Teresa Dowling APRN for discussion of ongoing issues that he has had 
related to a work comp injury sustained back in May 2016.  Patient was 
admitted at our facility with a left frontal skull fracture after a fall from 12 
feet.  We were never consulted during the patient’s hospitalization and 
were not aware of his injury.  He does have a remote history of 
arteriovenous malformation and history of hemorrhage in the right parietal 
region.  He required surgical resection of this and then developed a 
recurrence of the AVM requiring a redo resection in September 2005.  He 
has not had any surgery for the AVM since that time.  He had a diagnostic 
angiogram in 2011 that showed no evidence of recurrence we have not 
seen him since that time.  Patient states since his fall in May 2016, he has 
had ongoing daily headaches which have been worse over the last 2-3 
months.  Describes these as a sharp pain in the bilateral temporal region 
as well as the left frontal region over his prior skull fracture site.  Describes 
this as throbbing as well.  Most days, pain ranges from 5 to an 8/10.  He 
has been working on a part-time basis at Minard’s [sic] but when he 

WORKMAN V. MENARD, INC. 
Page 5 
 
returned to work, his symptoms were exacerbated from when he was at 
home and he has difficulty doing sustained activity longer than 4 hours at 
a time.  He feels that he has had short-term memory troubles as well and 
this affects his duties at work.  He loses concentration easily and has also 
had difficulty sleeping at night, averaging 4-6 hours per night.  He 
frequently feels fatigued.  He has been managing the headaches with 
exercise and Tylenol but this does not really help the headache.  He was 
seen by a neurologist over in Council Bluffs who did an EEG that showed 
no evidence of seizure activity.  His work comp case manager relates that 
they have been trying to get him in with trauma as well as other services, 
but have not been successful thus far and requested to return to see us in 
clinic. 
(Jt. Ex. 10, p. 1) 
Dr. Thorell noted that Mr. Workman had not undergone extensive therapy since 
his injury and referred him for neuropsychological evaluation.  “We feel that this prior 
insult was exacerbated during his traumatic brain injury and is likely contributing to the 
left-sided difficulties that he is currently having.  He is also having postconcussive 
sequela including headaches, instability, mild visual difficulties and feel he would benefit 
from evaluation by our concussion clinic.”  (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 3)  He also recommended 
physical medicine examination and a referral to Dr. Rakes for treatment of the 
headaches.  Dr. Thorell kept Mr. Workman on significant medical restrictions of only 
working 4 hours a day for no more than 5 days per week.  Dr. Thorell and Brandon 
Reicks, P.A., thereafter continued to treat Mr. Workman through 2018.  Mr. Workman 
was released at maximum medical improvement (MMI) for his physical symptoms on 
November 1, 2018.  His treating physician documented the following: 
Physically, feel that [sic] patient is near her [sic] at MMI as he has long-
standing left-sided weakness and footdrop that he manages with a brace, 
but has been able to work 40+ hours a week and feels that his physical 
function is 85% of what it was before his fall.  He feels stable with regard 
to this.  With regard to his mental status and emotional condition, this was 
exacerbated after his fall in 2016 and traumatic brain injury and he is 
currently undergoing medical management for this as well as evaluation 
by psychology at outside institution.  I encouraged him to continue with 
this.  I cannot reasonably anticipate how much longer he will need 
continued care for this, but shared with his work comp case manager that 
he will need continued care for the foreseeable future from this standpoint 
and this is related to his fall.  He may need referral back to 
neuropsychology and may need to potentially see neurology in the future 
based on their evaluation.  We will leave further follow-up to their 
discretion, will not follow up further with neurosurgery in clinic.  Thoughts 
were shared with the patient and mom and they are in agreement with the 
plan. 
(Jt. Ex. 10, p. 7)  The only formal restriction provided was no work from elevated heights 

WORKMAN V. MENARD, INC. 
Page 6 
 
or work on ladders.  (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 7) 
Thereafter, Mr. Workman continued to treat with Dr. Rakes for headaches.  She 
attempted to manage his headaches with medications and periodic injections.  (Jt. Ex. 
11, pp. 5-7)  As of December 23, 2019, Dr. Rakes documented relatively good control of 
the headaches.  “Patient reports patient is more functional and is able to perform all 
activities with minimal to no hindrance.  Patient reports the migraines are not as intense, 
prior to treatment were a 8/10 and now a 2-3/10.”  (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 5)  This is the last 
record from Dr. Rakes in evidence. 
Mr. Workman underwent a neuropsychological evaluation in August 2017, by 
Matthew Garlinghouse, Ph.D.  (Cl. Ex. 3)  The evaluation was quite thorough.  The 
following is documented in the Recommendations section of the report: 
At present Scott’s performances show primary weaknesses on 
tests of visual perception, left-handed motor / sensory function, visual 
problem solving and the independent retrieval of visual material from 
memory.  He also showed some slowing with respect to information 
processing speed, as well as variable working memory ability which 
tended to impact his scores on timed tests with a visual component.  He 
also demonstrated mild difficulty with aspects of expressive language.  
However, his performance on other tests of his core verbal function, 
receptive language and verbal memory were largely average or better. 
These findings are suggestive of primary parietofrontal systems 
dysfunction within the non-dominant (presumably right) hemisphere.  
However, the patient also shows some expressive language weaknesses 
that suggest some disruption of frontotemporal pathways in the language 
dominant (presumably left) hemisphere. 
The etiology of these findings is likely multifactorial.  The initial 
onset of the bulk of these symptoms appears to be primarily to do with the 
rupture and surgical treatment of his AVM as a child.  However the patient 
did report substantial improvement cognitively over time, despite the need 
for special education services.  Then, after falling in 2016, the patient 
reported the re-emergence of many of his prior symptoms as well as 
perhaps some new language-based disturbances.  As a result, in many 
ways the patient is experiencing the effects of multiple traumatic brain 
injuries, with the initial injury being hemorrhagic as a child and the second 
being traumatic as an adult in 2016. 
(Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 9-10)  Dr. Garlinghouse recommended a series of behavioral strategies to 
help Mr. Workman adjust to his cognitive challenges.  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 10) 
Dr. Garlinghouse re-evaluated Mr. Workman in August 2020.  (Cl. Ex. 4)  He 
documented the following: 

WORKMAN V. MENARD, INC. 
Page 7 
 
At the time of his previous evaluation, Scott reported problems with 
slowed processing speed, decreased complex attention, word finding and 
decreased memory function.  Specific concerns include forgetting if he has 
completed certain tasks, if he has taken his medications, slowed thinking 
when it comes to task completion and some inattentiveness.  Scott 
mentioned that post-surgically, with respect to his treatment for his AVM 
some of these symptoms were transiently present but remitted until his 
fall.  He does have some persistent left-sided weakness.  Since his fall 
these symptoms re-emerged, worse, and have persisted to the present.  
Scott reported these concerns were improving over time.  Prior to the 
onset of these symptoms the patient was able to independently complete 
instrumental activities of daily living. 
(Cl. Ex. 4, p. 2)  Again, he recommended a number of strategies for dealing with his 
challenges:  These do not appear to be formal medical restrictions. 
 
1. Write notes to yourself, use a memory book to keep things organized. 
2. Develop patterns and routines. 
 
3. When you need to remember something, try to make a picture in your 
mind, of the objects together (not as separate things).  Remembering 
one thing or a picture of three things takes the same mental “space”.  
Therefore, group objects to be remembered. 
 
4. Actively listen in conversations, restate (in a different way) what you 
thought you heard in the conversation. 
 
5. Talk yourself through difficult tasks. 
 
6. Reduce sensory overload, (i.e. reduced lighting, noise or commotion). 
 
7. Avoid having to perform cognitively challenging tasks in a noisy 
environment. 
 
8. When needing to speak in public, say what you want to say “in your 
head” first, as a practice before saying it out-loud. 
 
9. Learn relaxation skills.  Biofeedback may be helpful.  Use relaxation 
skills when feeling overwhelmed. 
 
10. Take a short “nap” in the early afternoon to help “charge up your 
battery.” 
 
11. When feeling anger, do some exercises. 

WORKMAN V. MENARD, INC. 
Page 8 
 
 
12. At night, take some quiet time to “process” the day, to settle things in 
your mind before trying to sleep.  Try a little daydreaming to help calm 
your thoughts. 
(Cl. Ex. 4, p. 5) 
Dr. Bruggeman prepared an expert report dated November 16, 2020, assigning a 
3 percent impairment rating for his right upper extremity as a result of the May 2016, 
work injury.  (Cl. Ex. 5) 
Mr. Workman also underwent an independent medical evaluation at the direction 
of his attorney on June 24, 2021.  (Cl. Ex. 6)  The evaluation was performed by David 
Segal, M.D., J.D., a board certified neurosurgeon.  Dr. Segal reviewed and summarized 
relevant records, took a thorough patient history, and evaluated Mr. Workman.  His 
report is 53 pages.  Dr. Segal engaged in a detailed, almost tedious, assessment of 
permanent impairment pursuant to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition.  He assigned the following ratings: 
Cognitive Impairment 18% 
Emotional and behavioral 9% 
Post-traumatic migrainous 10% 
Visual dysfunction 5% 
Vestibular dysfunction 13% 
Arousal and Sleep dysfunction 5% 
(Cl. Ex. 6, p. 47)  Combining all of these impairments, he concluded that Mr. Workman 
had sustained a 48 percent whole body impairment resulting from the TBI and post-
concussive symptoms.  He also assigned ratings for Mr. Workman’s cervical and right 
shoulder complaints.  In total, he assigned a 52 percent whole body rating.  (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 
49)  He assigned maximum medical improvement as of August 12, 2020, the date of his 
second neuropsychological evaluation.  (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 42)  For permanent restrictions, he 
suggested that Mr. Workman “does not have a realistic ability to participate in full-time 
employment in his occupation at the level prior to his work injury.”  (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 51)  He 
did recommend lengthy, specific and detailed medical restrictions as well.  (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 
52) 
 
Prior to hearing, the defendants obtained a medical report from Dr. LaHolt, who 
had examined Mr. Workman in February 2021.  (Jt. Ex. 14; Def. Ex. J)  At the February 
2021, examination, Dr. LaHolt had concluded that Mr. Workman’s headaches were 
under control.  He did not recommend further medical intervention for this.  (Jt. Ex. 14, 
p. 5)  He opined that the “majority of his symptoms do appear to be related to his prior 

WORKMAN V. MENARD, INC. 
Page 9 
 
neurological dysfunction.”  (Jt. Ex. 14, p. 5)  He opined that his condition was stable but 
recommended a multidisciplinary examination at the TBI clinic.  (Jt. Ex. 14, p. 5)  In July 
2021, Dr. LaHolt prepared an expert opinion report for defense counsel based upon his 
February 2021 examination.  He opined claimant needed further treatment and was not 
at maximum medical improvement.  (Def. Ex. D, p. 32)  At the request of defense 
counsel, he prepared another report in September 2021, after the case completion 
deadline had passed.  (Def. Ex. J)  Claimant’s counsel objected to the admission of this 
exhibit which was overruled.  In this report, Dr. LaHolt assigned an 8 percent whole 
body rating based upon Mr. Workman’s TBI and wrist fracture.  (Def. Ex. J, pp. 64-66)  
He assigned the following permanent restrictions: 
I was also asked to provide opinion as to what, if any, permanent work 
restrictions that Mr. Workman may require as a result of his fall.  Mr. 
Workman will not require any restrictions as it relates to his right wrist 
fracture.  As it relates to his traumatic brain injury, I would recommend that 
he be precluded from working at unprotected height.  Mr. Workman 
already has strategies in place to cope with his pre-morbid cognitive 
dysfunction which should remain in place, such as requesting clarification 
and/or repetition of longer verbal instructions and note taking during 
important conversations.  Mr. Workman would otherwise not have any 
additional restrictions as it relates to his traumatic brain injury. 
(Def. Ex. J, p. 66) 
Having reviewed the record, I do not find any documentation that Mr. Workman 
was provided any strategies by medical providers to “cope with his pre-morbid cognitive 
dysfunction” as suggested by Dr. LaHolt.  Rather, the only documented strategies were 
suggested by his neuropsychologist following the injury.  Otherwise, I find Dr. LaHolt’s 
report generally credible. 
Mr. Workman testified at hearing that he continues to suffer from severe 
depression (including some suicidal ideation), blurred vision of the left eye, migraine 
headaches, bilateral loss of hearing, left side weakness and fatigue, drop foot, loss of 
memory and migraine headaches.  He testified he gets lightheaded and dizzy.  He 
sometimes has difficulty or feels overwhelmed in pressure or noisy situations.  He 
testified he has memory difficulties.  (Tr., pp. 39-57)  He also obtained an expert 
vocational evaluation which suggests that he is unable to work in the competitive job 
market.  (Cl. Ex. 7)  Mrs. Workman testified that since his work injury, Mr. Workman is 
generally not as capable of managing his day-to-day life as he was before.  (Tr., pp. 
119-131)  This testimony is believable. 
In spite of all this, Mr. Workman has continued to work successfully for Menard’s 
with minimal accommodations.  Mr. Workman’s direct supervisor at Menard’s is Ryan 
Holford, who also served as the employer representative at hearing.  Mr. Holford 
testified live and under oath at hearing and his testimony is found to be credible.  Mr. 
Holford has known Mr. Workman for several years and worked with him both before and 
after the accident.  (Tr., p. 153)  Mr. Holford’ sister also happens to be Mr. Workman’s 

WORKMAN V. MENARD, INC. 
Page 10 
 
fiancée.  Mr. Holford testified that Menard’s is a busy, retail environment.  He testified 
that Mr. Workman is his best employee in the electrical department.  (Tr., p. 155)  “I 
mean, he stays busy.  I don’t have to baby-sit him.  He knows what he is doing.  When 
other team members have other questions, they’ll go to him if I’m not around.”  (Tr., p. 
154)  He generally testified that he has not noticed much difference between Mr. 
Workman before or after the accident.  He testified that he was unaware that Mr. 
Workman had any work restrictions.  (Tr., p. 168)  Since the claimant’s direct supervisor 
is not even aware of his medical restrictions, I understand this to mean that he is not 
really provided with any type of work accommodations. 
Prior to hearing, the defendants had paid no permanency benefits to Mr. 
Workman, other than the 3 percent rating for the right wrist fracture.  (Def. Ex. E)  The 
employer offered no explanation or evidence for its failure to assess claimant’s 
permanent disability or pay any permanent disability benefits.  In their brief, defendants 
argued that the issue of permanency did not become ripe until Dr. LaHolt assigned 
permanent impairment (and assigned MMI) just prior to hearing in September 2021. 
Claimant submitted a medical expenses exhibit which included all of his medical 
bills, some alleged to be unpaid.  At hearing, defendants submitted that all of these 
expenses were either paid or would be paid. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first question submitted is the extent of claimant’s disability.  The injury 
occurred in May 2016, prior to the 2017 legislative changes.  Therefore, claimant’s 
disability is evaluated with respect to his loss of earning capacity under Iowa Code 
Section 85.34(2)(u) (2015). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 

WORKMAN V. MENARD, INC. 
Page 11 
 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956).  If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961). 
It is well-settled in Iowa that when physical trauma causes or aggravates a 
mental condition which increases or prolongs disability, all disability, including the 
effects of the nervous disorder, is compensable.  Gosek v. Garmer & Stiles Co., 158 
N.W. 2d 731,733 (Iowa 1968).  No special legal causation test showing unusual stress 
is required in such cases.  See generally, Lawyer and Higgs, Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Law and Practice (2nd (Ed.), sections 4-6, p. 31).  Also, a psychological 
condition caused or aggravated by a scheduled injury is to be compensated as an 
unscheduled injury even if the mental condition does not result in permanent impairment 
or work restrictions.   Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W. 2d 12 (Iowa 1993); Smith v. 
Aramark, File No. 1199677 (App. Dec. April 30, 2001). 
When an injury occurs in the course of employment, the employer is liable for all 
of the consequences that “naturally and proximately flow from the accident.”  Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Law and Practice, Lawyer and Higgs, section 4-4.  The 
Supreme Court has stated the following.  “If the employee suffers a compensable injury 
and thereafter suffers further disability which is the proximate result of the original injury, 
such further disability is compensable.”  Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 
767, 266 N.W. 480, 481 (1936).  The Oldham Court opined that a claimant must present 
sufficient evidence that the disability was naturally and proximately related to the 
original work injury. 
It has long been the law of Iowa that Iowa employers take an employee subject 
to any active or dormant health problems and must exercise care to avoid injury to both 
the weak and infirm and the strong and healthy. Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 
176 N.W. 823 (1920). A material aggravation, worsening, lighting up or acceleration of 
any prior condition has been viewed as a compensable event ever since initial 
enactment of our workers’ compensation statutes. Ziegler v. United States Gypsum Co., 
252 Iowa 613; 106 N.W.2d 591 (1960). While a claimant must show that the injury 
proximately caused the medical condition sought to be compensable, it is well 
established in Iowa that a cause is “proximate” when it is a substantial factor in bringing 
about that condition. It need not be the only causative factor, or even the primary or the 
most substantial cause to be compensable under the Iowa workers’ compensation 
system. Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-
American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980). 

WORKMAN V. MENARD, INC. 
Page 12 
 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the 
Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of 
the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34. 
In Guyton v. Irving Jensen Co., 373 N.W.2d 101 (Iowa 1985), the Iowa court 
formally adopted the “odd-lot doctrine.”  Under that doctrine a worker becomes an 
odd-lot employee when an injury makes the worker incapable of obtaining employment 
in any well-known branch of the labor market.  An odd-lot worker is thus totally disabled 
if the only services the worker can perform are “so limited in quality, dependability, or 
quantity that a reasonably stable market for them does not exist.”  Id., at 105. 
Under the odd-lot doctrine, the burden of persuasion on the issue of industrial 
disability always remains with the worker.  Nevertheless, when a worker makes a prima 
facie case of total disability by producing substantial evidence that the worker is not 
employable in the competitive labor market, the burden to produce evidence showing 
availability of suitable employment shifts to the employer.  If the employer fails to 
produce such evidence and the trier of facts finds the worker does fall in the odd-lot 
category, the worker is entitled to a finding of total disability.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 
106.  Factors to be considered in determining whether a worker is an odd-lot employee 
include the worker’s reasonable but unsuccessful effort to find steady employment, 
vocational or other expert evidence demonstrating suitable work is not available for the 
worker, the extent of the worker’s physical impairment, intelligence, education, age, 
training, and potential for retraining.  No factor is necessarily dispositive on the issue.  
Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258 (Iowa 1995).  Even under the 
odd-lot doctrine, the trier of fact is free to determine the weight and credibility of 
evidence in determining whether the worker’s burden of persuasion has been carried, 
and only in an exceptional case would evidence be sufficiently strong as to compel a 
finding of total disability as a matter of law.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 106. 
Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness.  Permanent total 
disability occurs where the injury wholly disables the employee from performing work 

WORKMAN V. MENARD, INC. 
Page 13 
 
that the employee's experience, training, education, intelligence, and physical capacities 
would otherwise permit the employee to perform.  See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 
288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 
N.W. 899 (1935). 
Industrial disability is evaluated without respect to accommodations which are (or 
are not) made by an employer.  The Iowa Supreme Court views “loss of earning 
capacity in terms of the injured worker's present ability to earn in the competitive job 
market without regard to the accommodation furnished by one's present employer.”  
Thilges v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 528 N.W.2d 614, 617 (Iowa 1995). 
The claimant argues that he is permanently and totally disabled and has asserted 
“odd-lot.”  Under “odd-lot” once the claimant produces prima facia evidence of total 
disability, the burden shifts to the defendants to prove that there is work in the 
competitive job market he could perform. 
In this case, there is a disconnect between the claimant’s expert opinions and the 
underlying facts of the case.  Claimant’s expert, Dr. Segal, opined that he is essentially 
unemployable in his condition.  This is verified by claimant’s vocational expert.  The 
facts, however, suggest that Mr. Workman has continued to work since 2018, with, in 
reality, minimal accommodations in his job at Menard’s.  Mr. Workman has proven to be 
a valuable, reliable employee in a busy, retail environment without any real 
accommodations.  In fact, the employer has failed to even recognize or enforce his work 
restrictions.  On the one hand, this looks bad for the employer because it has poorly 
managed the situation.  On the other hand, it is fairly convincing evidence that Mr. 
Workman is not totally disabled. 
It is noted that this is a great credit to Mr. Workman himself, who has used the 
strategies recommended by his neuropsychologist to remain employed, rather than 
opting for unemployment and disability.  He has done this with little actual help from his 
employer who failed to even acknowledge the limited permanent medical restrictions he 
has been assigned by his physician.  It is a testament to his strong motivation, work 
skills and work ethic.  Nevertheless, this is, in fact, strong evidence that, as of the time 
of hearing, Mr. Workman is not permanently and totally disabled. 
I have found Mr. Workman to be a credible witness.  He has testified that he is 
able to work, even sometimes ignoring his clear medical restriction from his treating 
physician that he should not use ladders or work at heights.  At the time of hearing, Mr. 
Workman is appropriately employed and appears to even have the possibility of 
advancement.  He is a valued and valuable employee who brings substantial skills and 
benefits to his employer. 
In reaching these findings, I am not at all finding that Mr. Workman has not 
sustained a significant industrial disability.  On the contrary, he has sustained a severe 
permanent disability as a result of his work injury, essentially aggravating his childhood 
condition of AVM to the point that it is significantly disabling as of the time of hearing.  
Other individuals, who are less skilled and motivated, likely would have become 

WORKMAN V. MENARD, INC. 
Page 14 
 
permanently and totally disabled.  Mr. Workman himself would be substantially impaired 
from obtaining employment in the competitive job market in light of the evidence 
presented at hearing.  He has substantial, ongoing symptoms related to his work injury 
which make him a less attractive candidate in the competitive labor market.  Starting 
with a new employer in the competitive job market would likely create substantial 
barriers for him.  While he has managed to overcome these limitations and remained 
highly productive, his functional disability is real and substantial.  He is required to 
remain disciplined with his strategies for managing his disability on a daily basis or he 
runs the risk of being unable to function effectively.  Having reviewed all of the relevant 
evidence of industrial disability, I find that Mr. Workman has sustained a 60 percent loss 
of earning capacity in the competitive job market as a result of his work injury.  This 
finding is an objective finding based upon Mr. Workman’s ability to find work in the 
competitive job market.  I conclude this entitles him to 300 weeks of compensation at 
his stipulated weekly rate of compensation. 
The parties dispute the appropriate commencement date for permanency 
benefits. 
Permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits commence upon the termination of 
the healing period.  Iowa Code section 85.34(1).  As the Iowa Supreme Court explained, 
the healing period terminates and permanent partial disability benefits commence at the 
earliest of claimant’s return to work, medical ability to return to substantially similar 
employment, or the point at which the claimant achieves maximum medical 
improvement.  Evenson v. Winnebago Industries, Inc., 881 N.W.2d 360, 374 (Iowa 
2016). 
Both parties focused almost exclusively upon the date Mr. Workman achieved 
MMI.  Under Evenson, this is not the standard.  The issue is when he returned to work.  
By a preponderance of the evidence, I find that Mr. Workman returned to work on or 
about October 16, 2016.  Therefore, permanent partial disability benefits shall 
commence on October 17, 2016. 
The next issue is medical expenses. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Claimant is entitled to an order of reimbursement only if he has paid treatment 
costs; otherwise, to an order directing the responsible defendants to make payments 
directly to the provider.  See, Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988).  Defendants 

WORKMAN V. MENARD, INC. 
Page 15 
 
should also pay any lawful late payment fees imposed by providers.  Laughlin v. IBP, 
Inc., File No. 1020226 (App., February 27, 1995). 
Defendants shall pay or reimburse the medical expenses as set forth in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 2. 
The final issue is penalty. 
Claimant also seeks an award of penalty benefits pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 86.13.  Iowa Code section 86.13(4) provides: 
a. If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs 
without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or 
insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits, the workers’ compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or chapter 85, 
85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, 
delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 
b. The workers’ compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
under this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following facts: 
(1) The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in 
payment, or termination in benefits. 
(2) The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or 
probable cause or excuse for the denial, delay in 
payment, or termination of benefits. 
c.  In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or 
excuse under paragraph “b,” an excuse shall satisfy all of the following 
criteria: 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable 
investigation and evaluation by the employer or 
insurance carrier into whether benefits were owed 
to the employee. 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and 
evaluation were the actual basis upon which the 
employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously 
relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits. 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously conveyed the basis for the 
denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits 

WORKMAN V. MENARD, INC. 
Page 16 
 
to the employee at the time of the denial, delay, or 
termination of benefits. 
Claimant seeks a penalty for the employer’s failure to pay PPD benefits prior to 
hearing.  Mr. Workman returned to work in October 2016.  At that time, Mr. Workman’s 
physical symptoms were stable per Dr. Thorell.  The symptoms from his traumatic brain 
injury did not really stabilize until he was released by his neuropsychologist in 2020.  It 
is unclear why the defendants did not attempt to assess claimant’s permanency at that 
time.  The employer argues that the issue of permanency was not “ripe” until it received 
a permanent impairment rating from Dr. LaHolt just prior to hearing.  The evidence, 
however, suggests that Dr. LaHolt could have issued this report any time after August 
2020. 
I find that defendants had a reasonable excuse for not paying permanency up 
through the date they received Dr. LaHolt’s September 2021, report.  Previously, in July 
2021, Dr. LaHolt had opined that claimant was not at maximum medical improvement.  
On or about September 10, 2021, however, Dr. LaHolt assigned an impairment rating.  
At that point in time, no reasonable excuse exists for failing to pay weekly benefits after 
Mr. Workman’s condition stabilized in August 2020.  The benefits actually should have 
commenced back to the date he returned to work in October 2016.  Since their own 
physician assigned an impairment rating of 8 percent, defendants were on notice at that 
time that claimant was owed at least 40 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits or 
$12,512.80.  It is evident that the report in question was received just prior to hearing.  
Defendants had even attempted to obtain an MMI opinion and rating from Dr. LaHolt in 
July 2021, and he declined to perform such a rating.  In any event, after receiving Dr. 
LaHolt’s late report on September 10, 2021, defendants were required to pay benefits 
accordingly and undertook no effort to make such payment prior to hearing.  In essence, 
defendants needed to take a position on payment of permanency benefits even though 
the hearing was upon them.  Therefore a penalty is mandatory.  Utilizing the appropriate 
factors, I find that a penalty of should be assessed in the amount of $3,000.00 in order 
to deter defendants from this type of claims handling practice in the future.  I did not 
assess a full 50 percent penalty because of the foregoing extenuating circumstances. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED 
File No. 1616685.01: 
Defendants shall pay the claimant three hundred (300) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits at the rate of three hundred twelve and 82/100 dollars 
($312.82) per week commencing October 17, 2016, the date he returned to work. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at the rate of ten percent for all weekly benefits payable and not paid when due 

WORKMAN V. MENARD, INC. 
Page 17 
 
which accrued before July 1, 2017, and all interest on past due weekly compensation 
benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, shall be payable at an annual rate equal to 
the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most 
recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent. See Gamble v. AG 
Leader Technology File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018). 
Defendants shall be given credit for the 7.5 weeks previously paid as stipulated. 
Defendants shall pay or reimburse medical expenses as set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 2 consistent with this decision. 
Defendants shall pay a penalty of three thousand and 00/100 dollars ($3,000.00). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants. 
With regard to File No. 19006854.01, claimant shall take nothing further. 
Signed and filed this __3rd ___ day of May, 2022. 
 
 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
 Rick Crowl (via WCES) 
 
Paul Prentiss (via WCES) 
 
Kathryn Hartnett (via WCES) 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
