Case Number: 5050594
Case Title:  SULLIVAN, BRETT V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Sullivan, Brett-5050594.District Court Decision.pdf
========================================================================

IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR POLK COUNTY 
 
WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE and 
FARMLAND MUTUAL INSURANCE 
COMPANY, 
 
         Petitioners/Defendants, 
v. 
 
BRETT SULLIVAN, 
 
         Respondent/Claimant. 
 
      
Case No. CVCV061689 
 
 
 
RULING ON 
 PETITION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Petition for Judicial Review came before the Court from a final decision of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commission. The Court held a hearing on this matter on August 13, 2021.  
Petitioners West Central Cooperative and Farmland Mutual Insurance Company were represented 
by attorney Jeffrey Lanz. Thomas Wertz appeared for Respondent Brett Sullivan (Claimant or 
Sullivan). Having heard the arguments of counsel and reviewed the court file, including the briefs 
provided by the parties, the certified administrative record, and being otherwise fully advised in 
the premises, the Court now enters the following ruling.    
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A. Factual Background 
Respondent Brett Sullivan was 40 years of age at the time of the Arbitration Hearing. 
Arbitration Decision (Arb. Dec.) at 2. Sullivan sustained a work injury on October 2, 2011, to his 
low back, upper back, ribs, right hip, right shoulder, and head when a wheel loader he was 
operating was struck by a train. Defense Exhibit (DE) A at 1. He reportedly spent 30-days in the 
hospital and had to undergo surgery and other significant medical intervention as a result of the 
injury. Arb. Dec. at 2; Transcript (Tr.) at 16-17. Defendants admitted liability for the injury, paid 
claimant’s medical bills, paid claimant’s lost time, and paid partial permanent disability (PPD) 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 1 of 28

 
 
2 
 
benefits. Petitioners’ Brief (Pet. Brief) at 1; Tr. at 5-6. There have been many different disputes in 
this case that have led to numerous decisions by the Workers’ Compensation Commission and the 
Iowa Court of Appeals. See generally Arb. Dec. at 13. The only issue being appealed in this judicial 
review to the district court is the spinal cord stimulator (SCS) trial.  Pet. Brief at 1-2. Sullivan’s 
medical history is extensive and the Court will try to note the relevant facts that get us to his request 
to do a SCS trial. 
Sullivan complains of chronic back pain as a result of his work-related injury. Sullivan had 
a CT scan done on his back on October 2, 2011, which showed fractures to the transverse process 
at L3 and L4. Joint Exhibit (JE) 2 at 8. On September 17, 2012, he was examined by Dr. Hatfield 
at the request of Dr. Goetz. JE 3 at 9. Sullivan reported pain in his back and also noted swelling in 
his lower back that included dull and burning pain that was worse when standing. Id. Dr. Hatfield 
ordered an MRI to investigate further. Id. at 10. On October 24, 2012, an MRI of the lumbar spine 
was performed on Sullivan.  JE 2 at 8. The fractures in the L3 and L4 from the CT scan from 
October 2, 2011, were difficult to see on the MRI but the lumbar discs were noted to be healthy 
with no significant degeneration. Id. There was minimal bulging of the annulus at L4-5, but it was 
not compressing the neural elements. Id. On October 31, 2012, Dr. Hatfield reviewed the MRI 
results with Sullivan and concluded his symptoms were unchanged and that he believed there was 
nothing to be offered surgically. JE 3 at 11. Dr. Hatfield opined Sullivan has reached maximum 
medical improvement (MMI) from a back standpoint and had no restrictions for him from a spine 
standpoint. Id.  
On September 13, 2013, Sullivan presented to Dr. Charles Mooney for an independent 
medical evaluation (IME) and rating. DE A at 1. Dr. Mooney notes that the accident caused various 
injuries including right comminuted fracture involving the acetabulum and L3-L4 fractures of the 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 2 of 28

 
 
3 
 
transverse processes, wedge fracture T8-9 vertebral bodies, fracture of the T8 spinous process, left 
9th posterior rib fracture, S5 fracture, distal right clavicle fracture, biparetial scalp laceration, and 
head trauma with loss of consciousness and amnesia of the event. Id. Sullivan complained to Dr. 
Mooney of constant hip and back pain. Id. at 2. Sullivan placed his pain between four and five 
with increasing pain up to a level nine with increased activity. Id. at 3. Based on the Quebec Pain 
Disability Scale completed by Sullivan, his perceived disability had a result of 43% as it relates to 
his chronic back pain. Id. Dr. Mooney’s assessment concluded Sullivan sustained “multiple 
traumas with evidence of thoracic and lumbar fractures, right hip fracture with subsequent total 
hip arthroplasty, distal right clavicle fracture with essentially normal motion and strength of his 
shoulder.” Id. at 4. Dr. Mooney issued an 8% impairment rating of the whole person applicable to 
DRE lumbar category 2, due to his L3-L4 fractures of the transverse process. Id. at. 4-5. Dr. 
Mooney also concluded Sullivan demonstrated an 8% impairment rating of the whole person based 
on DRE thoracic category 2 from the wedge fracture T9 vertebral body and fracture of the T8 
spinous process. Id. at 5.     
On April 3, 2014, Sullivan had a repeat lumbar MRI performed at the University of 
Missouri Health System. JE 4 at 32. Dr. Michael Aro reviewed the MRI and no significant issues 
were noted beyond a minimal to mild lumbar spondylosis with facet arthrosis and mild disc bulging 
at L4-5. Id. at 33. However, a right-sided S1 superior articular facet subchondral cyst formation 
was noted. Id. A second opinion was provided upon the examination of Sullivan by Dr. Eden 
Wheeler on September 3, 2014. JE 5 at 35. Sullivan went to Dr. Wheeler for a second opinion after 
Dr. Goetz told him there was nothing more to do from a surgical perspective. Id. During his visit 
with Dr. Wheeler, Sullivan complained of pain in his left shoulder, low back, left medial thigh, 
and bilateral lower extremities. Id. at 36. In regards to the low back pain, Dr. Wheeler concluded 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 3 of 28

 
 
4 
 
after reviewing the medical records and examining Sullivan that he has right central low back pain 
with differential diagnosis of right SI joint dysfunction and/or facet mediated pain. Id. at 40-41. 
For the back pain, Dr. Wheeler recommended formal therapy specifically for the lumbar spine and 
TENS unit trial for lumbar complaints with the therapy. Id. at 41.   
Dr. Wheeler reexamined Sullivan for back pain on November 6, 2014, where no changes 
in his symptoms were reported. JE 5 at 42. Sullivan continued to report lumbar discomfort but Dr. 
Wheeler’s opinion and diagnosis remained unchanged from the previous visit. Id. at 42-43. She 
opined that Sullivan could continue to benefit from physical therapy. Id. at 43. On December 10, 
2014, Sullivan had a follow-up visit with Dr. Wheeler. Id. at 44. Sullivan reported that he had 
completed five sessions of physical therapy and noted more mobility and looseness, but his back 
was “hurting worse.” Id. Sullivan was to continue physical therapy and it was noted Sullivan 
desired to maximize therapy before undertaking invasive treatment. Id. at 45.  
Dr. Wheeler saw Sullivan again on January 14 and February 12, 2015. Id. at 46, 48. In 
January Sullivan complained of an increase in pain and having constant pain. Id. at 46. Sullivan 
did note his right low back pain improved with therapy. Id. Dr. Wheeler recommended that he 
continue for an additional three to five weeks in physical therapy. Id. at 47. In February, Sullivan 
felt “the lower part of his back may be improved, but does note that therapy aggravates this pain 
complaints.” Id. at 48. Sullivan did relay that his centralized low back had aching, burning, and 
stabbing pain. Id. Dr. Wheeler recommended discharge from therapy but advised him to continue 
to engage in a home exercise regimen. Id. at 49. Dr. Wheeler also advised consideration of SI joint 
injections. Id.  
On April 23, 2015, Sullivan presented to Dr. Daniel Bruning for his low back pain. JE 6 at 
52. Sullivan was transitioning into Dr. Bruning’s care from Dr. Wheeler. Id. His pain score for his 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 4 of 28

 
 
5 
 
back was seven out of ten. Id. Dr. Bruning assessed that he had lumbar disc displacement, lumbar 
spondylosis, and lumbar radiculopathy. Id. at 53. An epidural steroid injection was performed. Id. 
He returned to Dr. Bruning on May 8, 2015. Id. at 55. He reported a 20% relief to Dr. Bruning but 
noted that his lower back pain has increased. Id. His pain rating was five out of ten. Id. Sullivan’s 
risk of hyperglycemia was too high and a steroid shot was not given. Id.  
Sullivan returned to see Dr. Wheeler on May 19, 2015. JE 5 at 50. He reported that his pain 
was worse than what he had felt in several months. Id. Dr. Wheeler recommended ablation but 
discussed with him that she cannot guarantee he will have significant extremity improvement. Id. 
at 51. Dr. Wheeler noted he was scheduled to see Dr. Goetz in two days for a consult for hip 
surgery. Id. at 50.  Dr. Wheeler recommended that he proceed with an ablation. Id. at. 51. The 
doctor also recommended Sullivan continue his home exercises.  
 
Sullivan saw Dr. Goetz on May 21, 2015, March 3, 2016, August 9, 2016, and March 6, 
2018. JE 3 at 15, 18, 21, 25. In all of his visits, Sullivan complained of low back pain. Id. at 16, 
18, 21, 25. In August, Dr. Goetz requested a new MRI of the lumbar spine and from those results, 
the doctor would help arrange a referral to spine surgery versus pain management versus additional 
physical therapy. Id. at 22. The MRI of his lumbar spine was performed on September 7, 2016. 
There was no evidence for an acute lumbar spine fracture. Id. at 23. At the L4-5 the mild disk 
bulge and facet hypertrophic changes contributed to bilateral lateral recess narrowing without 
compression of the traversing L5 nerves. Id. Dr. Goetz recommended an epidural steroid injection. 
Id. at 24. However, Sullivan did not receive an epidural steroid injection because he was worried 
about blood sugars related to his diabetes. Id. at 25.  
 
On June 22, 2018, Sullivan was referred by Dr. Goetz to Dr. Ledet at Central Studies 
Medicine for evaluation and management of his low back pain. JE 7 at 58. An updated MRI for 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 5 of 28

 
 
6 
 
the lumbar and pelvic area was ordered as well as bilateral EMGs. Id. at 62. Sullivan returned to 
Dr. Ledet on October 3, 2018. Id. at 64. He continued to complain of low back pain with a pain 
average of six out of ten. Id. Dr. Ledet reviewed the lumbar and pelvic MRIs and reassured Sullivan 
“that there is no evidence of bio-mechanical impingement.” Id. at 67. He recommended that 
Sullivan continue with medication-based treatments at this time. Id. However, if that failed to treat 
the symptoms then Dr. Ledet would consider a trial of implantable technologies to include spinal 
cord stimulation. Id. Sullivan returned to Dr. Ledet on October 26, 2018. Id. at 68. Spinal cord 
simulation information was given and discussed by Dr. Ledet. Id. at 71. On December 17, 2018, 
he had a follow-up visit with Dr. Ledet. Id. at 72. Sullivan reported to Dr. Ledet that since 
discontinuing the medication he has noticed an increase in low back pain. Id. Dr. Ledet concluded 
the pain cannot be treated by surgical procedure. Id. at 74. He scheduled Sullivan for a Behavioral 
Health screening with a follow-up for additional discussion and trial of SCS. Id.  
 
Sullivan’s follow-up visit with Dr. Ledet was on February 12, 2019. Id. at 76. Sullivan 
continued to report low back pain with an average seven out of ten pain rating. Id. The Behavioral 
Health screening was completed and planning towards the SCS trial. Id. at 78. At the screening, 
Sullivan rated that his average pain intensity from the last two weeks was nine out of ten. Id. at 80. 
The social worker did note in the screening that Sullivan may be at risk of medical non-compliance 
with the spinal cord simulator due to a history of non-compliance with checking his blood sugar 
levels as recommended. Id. at 82. Dr. Ledet concluded Sullivan may be a good candidate for dorsal 
column stimulation based on his clinical history, physical examination, and radiographic studies. 
Id. at 78. The dorsal column stimulation educational material was reviewed and questions by 
Sullivan were addressed. Id. The plan was to proceed with the trial of implantable technologies. 
Id.  
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 6 of 28

 
 
7 
 
 
On March 11, 2019, Dr. Joseph Chen performed an IME on Sullivan at the request of 
Defendants. DE C at 15. Sullivan reported his pain was typically seven out of ten but gets up to a 
nine out of ten. Id. at 19. He stated he wanted to proceed with the SCS trial to improve his pain. 
Id. He indicated he had a score of 33 out of 50 or 66 out of 100 on the Oswestry Low Back 
Disability Questionnaire. Id. at 21. Sullivan’s score indicated severe self-report of disability. Id. 
Dr. Chen concluded he had abnormally high scores in his Fear Avoidance Belief Questionnaire. 
Id. at 22. Dr. Chen diagnosed Sullivan’s back pain condition as chronic mechanical myofascial 
thoracic and low back pain. Id. at 23. He concluded the fractures to his T8 and T9 vertebra body, 
T8 spinous process, and L3 and L4 transverse process have healed in the intervening seven years. 
Id. at 22. He noted Sullivan’s current complaints of severe pain to be a result of high Fear 
Avoidance Beliefs. Id. at 23. Dr. Chen concluded the spinal cord stimulator trial is not causally 
related to Mr. Sullivan’s work-related back injury. Id. He also concluded a spinal cord stimulator 
trial is not reasonable and necessary treatment for his work-related back injury because spinal cord 
stimulation treatment will not address his fear-avoidance beliefs and behaviors nor his pain 
catastrophization, rumination, anxiety, or depression. Id. at 24.  
Dr. Chen recommended instead that he: (1) start a general flexibility exercise program; (2) 
start a simple and consistent walking or other aerobic conditioning programs; and (3) correct his 
high fear-avoidance beliefs and behaviors, pain catastrophization, rumination, anxiety, and 
depression. Id. at 25. Based on Dr. Chen’s opinion, the workers’ compensation carrier denied 
Sullivan’s request for the trial spinal cord stimulator. DE F at 37.  
 
On May 9, 2019, Dr. William Boulden performed a records review at the request of 
Defendants. DE D at 29. It was his opinion that surgery was not required. Id. Dr. Boulden did not 
agree with Dr. Ledet’s assessment and concluded Sullivan’s degenerative changes in his back do 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 7 of 28

 
 
8 
 
not need any surgical intervention based on the MRI reports. Id. He agreed with Dr. Hatfield, who 
is a spine specialist, that there is not a surgical problem. Id. Dr. Boulden opined that because 
Sullivan is a smoker it could be one of the reasons he has back problems. Id. He opined that Dr. 
Chen’s assessment was “very well written and very appropriate” and agrees with it. Id.  
 
Dr. John Kuhnlein provided a record review on behalf of Sullivan on October 5, 2019. 
Claimant’s Exhibit (CE) 2 at 3. Dr. Kuhnlein notes that Sullivan’s back pain is chronic and has not 
responded to other forms of conservative treatment. Id. at 5. He agrees with Dr. Ledet that the 
spinal cord stimulation trial is indicated for Sullivan’s low back pain. Id. He concludes that Dr. 
Ledet’s request for a spinal cord stimulator trial is reasonable given he has been through all other 
forms of treatment for chronic pain. Id.  
 
Dr. Ledet responded to a letter from Sullivan’s attorney on October 21, 2019. CE 1 at 5. 
Dr. Ledet stated he would not implant an SCS unless there was a substantive improvement in the 
patient’s ability to participate in activities of daily living during the trial of SCS. Id. The only way 
to know if a patient is a good candidate for SCS is through the process of trial stimulation. Id. Dr. 
Ledet’s opinion is that the chronic pain symptoms are causally related to the work injury and, 
therefore, the recommendation of the SCS trial is also related to his work injury. Id. He also opined 
that Sullivan’s psychological state and cognitive distortions should be addressed with a 
multidisciplinary approach. Id. at 6. Dr. Ledet also agreed with Dr. Boulden regarding Sullivan 
not needing spine surgery. Id. However, Dr. Boulden is not a pain physician and does not treat 
chronic pain patients. Id. Dr. Chen and Dr. Boulden are not actively engaged in the evaluation and 
treatment of patients in chronic pain administering interventional therapies including trial and 
implantation of neuromodulation devices. Id. Dr. Ledet believes he has a higher level of 
specialization and expertise in that area. Id.  
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 8 of 28

 
 
9 
 
 
Dr. Chen and Dr. Boulden provided supplemental record reviews on January 18, 2020. DE 
C at 26; DE D at 31. Dr. Chen opined that he has treated and seen many individuals with chronic 
pain and has found individuals like Sullivan, who hold unreasonable expectations about their 
expected improvement and recovery, are rarely pleased upon completion of invasive treatments. 
DE C at 27. Dr. Chen opined that the spinal cord stimulator treatment will not address any of 
Sullivan’s fear-avoidance beliefs that contribute to chronic pain. Id. He again recommended a 
general flexibility program with walking or other aerobic exercise program to improve his physical 
endurance. Id. at 29. Dr. Chen notes that his opinions were not to prevent Mr. Sullivan from getting 
treatment for his pain and ultimately wants Sullivan to choose for himself what path he wants to 
take according to his knowledge, experience, and values. Id. at 30. Dr. Boulden does agree Dr. 
Ledet does more spinal cord stimulators than him. DE D at 31. However, his opinion is still that 
Sullivan will not be a good candidate because of his pain issues, and in his experience there will 
not be success. Id. Dr. Boulden confirms again that Sullivan’s neurotropic pain is not related to 
the work accident. Id.  
 
Dr. Wheeler and Dr. Goetz both signed a pre-prepared letter by Defendants’ Attorney. DE 
E at 33; DE B at 11. Dr. Wheeler would not recommend a spinal cord stimulator and agrees with 
the opinions of Dr. Chen. DE E at 33. Her opinion is that the spinal cord stimulator is likely not 
going to benefit Sullivan or help him. Id. She also agrees that the spinal cord stimulator being 
recommended is not reasonable and necessary medical treatment for Sullivan’s work injury. Id. at 
33-34. Dr. Goetz agrees the odds of the spinal cord stimulator working in the long term are low 
based upon the examinations of Sullivan, his review of the MRI findings, and his experience 
treating patients. DE B at 12. Dr. Goetz agrees with the opinion of Dr. Chen, Dr. Boulden, and Dr. 
Wheeler and he would not recommend Sullivan having a spinal stimulator. Id.  
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 9 of 28

 
 
10 
 
B. Procedural History  
Sullivan filed an Original Notice, Petition, and Answer Concerning Application for 
Alternate Medical Care on March 8, 2019. Sullivan’s reason for dissatisfaction and relief sought 
is seeking authorization to proceed with a spinal cord stimulator because Petitioners would not 
authorize that recommended treatment. On March 20, 2019, Deputy Commissioner Michelle 
McGoven dismissed Sullivan’s Application for Alternate Medical Care. Deputy McGoven 
dismissed the application because before benefits can be ordered, the compensability of the claim 
must be established, either by admission of liability or by adjudication. Order of Dismissal at 1. In 
the Order it was stated that Iowa Code section 85.27 is not designed to adjudicate disputed 
compensability of a claim, therefore, the action was dismissed. Id.  
On April 18, 2019, Sullivan commenced a contested case by filing a Notice and Petition. 
Respondent’s Brief (Res. Brief) at 8. On June 5, 2020, Deputy Commissioner Andrew Phillips 
denied Sullivan’s Petition for Alternate Medical Care pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27. Arb. 
Dec. at 19. He found the opinions of Dr. Goetz, Dr. Wheeler, Dr. Boulden, and Dr. Chen to be 
more persuasive than the opinions of Dr. Ledet and Dr. Kuhnlein. Id. at 17. The Deputy 
Commissioner concluded that he does not find any information indicating claimant has carried his 
burden of proof to order the alternate care requested. Id. at 18. He opined Dr. Chen has outlined a 
reasonable course of treatment that could serve as an alternative to a trial of a spinal cord 
stimulator. Id.  
On June 22, 2020, Sullivan filed a Motion for Rehearing on the Arbitration Decision. 
Rehearing was requested because the issue of causation was not clear from the Arbitration 
Decision and because the Arbitration Decision did not comply with the Iowa Administrative 
Procedure Act, chapter 17A.16(1). Deputy Commissioner Phillips denied the motion because the 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 10 of 28

 
 
11 
 
Deputy held claimant did not meet his burden of proof for alternate care for the spinal stimulator, 
therefore, causation does not need to be addressed. On June 29, 2020, Sullivan appealed the 
Arbitration Decision filed on June 5, 2020, and the Ruling on Claimant’s Motion for Rehearing 
filed on June 29, 2020. On February 21, 2021, Deputy Commissioner Stephanie Copley reversed 
the Arbitration Decision and the Ruling on the Motion for Rehearing. Appeal Decision at 8. The 
Deputy Commissioner authorized the spinal cord stimulator recommended by Dr. Ledet and its 
payment by Defendants. Id. The Deputy Commissioner was not persuaded by the opinions of Dr. 
Chen and Dr. Boulden that Sullivan’s chronic back pain is not related to his 2011 work injury. Id. 
at 6. The Deputy found the opinions of Dr. Ledet and Dr. Kuhnlein to be more persuasive as to the 
chronic pain symptoms being causally related to claimant’s 2011 work injury. Id. Due to the 
chronic back pain symptoms being causally related to the 2011 injury, the Deputy Commissioner 
found the SCS trial is causally related to claimant’s work injury. Id. The Appeal Decision also 
found the requested SCS was both reasonable and necessary for the treatment of Sullivan’s work-
related chronic back pain. Id. at 7. The Deputy Commissioner concluded Sullivan satisfied his 
burden to prove he is entitled to medical care in the form of the SCS trial as recommended by Dr. 
Ledet. Id.  
On February 27, 2021, Petitioners filed a Motion for Rehearing of the Appeal Decision 
filed on February 8, 2021. One of the issues Petitioners raise is that Claimant has the burden of 
proving that the care authorized by the employer is unreasonable under Long v. Roberts Dairy Co. 
528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995).  Motion for Rehearing at 4. Defendants argue Claimant never met 
this burden because he did not directly address the issue of reasonableness and necessity, but 
addressed it indirectly throughout his argument in Brief Point III. Id.; Appeal Dec. at 6, footnote 
1. Therefore, Defendants argue Deputy Copley was incorrect in reversing Deputy Phillips. Motion 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 11 of 28

 
 
12 
 
for Rehearing 4-5.  
Deputy Copley disagreed and upheld her appeal decision on March 16, 2021. Ruling on 
Rehearing at 6. The Deputy  concluded Long does not apply to this case because Defendants denied 
liability of the SCS being causally related to the work injury. Id. at 2. The Deputy Commissioner 
also concluded Defendants’ denial of the SCS trial due to it not being causally related to the work 
injury amounts to a denial of compensability of the injury. Id. at 5. Deputy Copley affirmed her 
appeal decision as to causation and also found the SCS trial to be reasonable even though she 
concluded Long was not applicable. Id. at 6.  
On April 15, 2021, Petitioners filed a Petition for Judicial Review in District Court. 
Petitioners request this Court to reverse the Appeal Decision and the Ruling on Defendants’ 
Motion for Rehearing of Deputy Copley, reinstate the Arbitration Decision, award Respondent no 
benefits, and dismiss the Petition before the Agency. The basis for Petitioners’ Petition is that the 
Appeal Decision of the Deputy Commissioner prejudiced the substantial rights of Petitioners 
because the agency action is: (1) an error as a matter of law; (2) based upon a determination of fact 
clearly vested by a provision of law in the discretion of the agency that is not supported by 
substantial evidence in the record before the court when that record is viewed as a whole; and (3) 
inconsistent with prior precedents of the agency.  
II. 
STANDARD OF REVIEW 
The Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Iowa Code chapter 17A, governs the scope of the 
Court’s review in workers' compensation cases. Iowa Code § 86.26 (2019); Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 
710 N.W.2d 213, 218 (Iowa 2006). “Under the Act, we may only interfere with the commissioner's 
decision if it is erroneous under one of the grounds enumerated in the statute, and a party's 
substantial rights have been prejudiced.” Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 218.  A party challenging agency 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 12 of 28

 
 
13 
 
action bears the burden of demonstrating the action's invalidity and resulting prejudice. Iowa Code 
§ 17A.19(8)(a). This can be shown in a number of ways, including proof the action was ultra vires; 
legally erroneous; unsupported by substantial evidence in the record when that record is viewed as 
a whole; or otherwise unreasonable, arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion. See id. § 
17A.19(10). The district court acts in an appellate capacity to correct errors of law on the part of 
the agency. Grundmeyer v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 649 N.W.2d 744, 748 (Iowa 2002). 
“If the claim of error lies with the agency's findings of fact, the proper question on review 
is whether substantial evidence supports those findings of fact” when the record is viewed as a 
whole. Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 219. Factual findings regarding the award of workers' compensation 
benefits are within the commissioner's discretion, so the Court is bound by the commissioner's 
findings of fact if they are supported by substantial evidence. Mycogen Seeds v. Sands, 686 N.W.2d 
457, 464-65 (Iowa 2004). Substantial evidence is defined as evidence of the quality and quantity 
“that would be deemed sufficient by a neutral, detached, and reasonable person, to establish the 
fact at issue when the consequences resulting from the establishment of that fact are understood to 
be serious and of great importance.” Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f)(1); Mycogen, 686 N.W.2d at 464. 
“When reviewing a finding of fact for substantial evidence, we judge the finding ‘in light of all the 
relevant evidence in the record cited by any party that detracts from that finding as well as all of 
the relevant evidence in the record cited by any party that supports it.’” Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. 
Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 845 (Iowa 2011) (quoting Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f)(3)).  
“Evidence is not insubstantial merely because different conclusions may be drawn from the 
evidence.” Pease, 807 N.W.2d at 845. “To that end, evidence may be substantial even though we 
may have drawn a different conclusion as fact finder.” Id. “Judicial review of a decision of the 
[Commission] is not de novo, and the commissioner's findings have the force of a jury verdict.” 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 13 of 28

 
 
14 
 
Holmes v. Bruce Motor Freight¸ 215 N.W.2d 296, 297-98 (Iowa 1974). 
The application of the law to the facts is also an enterprise vested in the commissioner. 
Mycogen, 686 N.W.2d at 465. Accordingly, the Court will reverse only if the commissioner's 
application was “irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.” Id.; Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(l). “A 
decision is “irrational” when it is not governed by or according to reason.” Christensen v. Iowa 
Dep’t. of Revenue, 944 N.W.2d 895 at 905 (Iowa 2020).  A decision is “illogical” when it is 
“contrary to or devoid of logic.” Id. “A decision is “unjustifiable” when it has no foundation in 
fact or reason” or is “lacking in justice.” Id.  This standard requires the Court to allocate some 
deference to the commissioner's application of law to the facts, but less than it gives to the agency's 
findings of fact.  Larson Mfg. Co. v. Thorson, 763 N.W.2d 842, 850 (Iowa 2009). However, when 
the legislature has not vested the agency with such authority, the Court reviews an agency’s 
interpretation of a statute for correction of errors at law. Westling v. Hormel Foods Corp., 810 
N.W.2d 247, 251 (Iowa 2012).  
III. 
MERITS 
A. Whether the Agency’s determination that the need for the SCS trial is causally 
related to the work injury is supported by substantial evidence.  
 
Petitioners argue Deputy Copley’s conclusion that the SCS trial is causally related to the 
work injury is not supported by substantial evidence. They argue the burden of proof is on Sullivan 
to prove some employment incident or activity was the proximate cause of the impairment and he 
failed to do so. Petitioners’ Brief at 13. Deputy Phillips in his Arbitration Decision concluded 
Sullivan had not carried his burden of proving the current symptoms were causally connected to 
the 2011 injury. Arbitration Decision at 17. Specifically, Deputy Phillips found the opinions of Dr. 
Goetz, Dr. Wheeler, Dr. Boulden, and Dr. Chen to be more persuasive than Dr. Ledet and Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s opinions. Id. However, Deputy Copley reversed Deputy Phillips and concluded 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 14 of 28

 
 
15 
 
Sullivan’s chronic back pain was causally connected to his 2011 work injury. Appeal Decision at 
6. This was based on her finding that Dr. Kuhnlein and Dr. Ledet’s opinions were more persuasive. 
Id. at 6.  
“A claimant must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the injury is a proximate 
cause of the claimed disability.” Grundmeyer., 649 N.W.2d at 752.  Proximate cause is established 
if it is a substantial factor. Ayers v. D & N Fence Co., 731 N.W.2d 11, 17 (Iowa 2007). The 
preponderance of the evidence is established when the causal connection is probable, rather than 
merely possible. Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348, 354 (Iowa 1980). Usually, 
the determination of causation by the Agency is established through expert testimony. 
Grundmeyer, 649 N.W.2d at 752. Specifically, expert testimony is  necessary to establish the 
causal connection between the injury and the disability for which benefits are claimed. Id. With 
regard to expert testimony,   
[t]he commissioner must consider [such] testimony together with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
The commissioner, as the fact finder, determines the weight to be given to any 
expert testimony. Such weight depends on the accuracy of the facts relied upon by 
the expert and other surrounding circumstances. The commissioner may accept or 
reject the expert opinion in whole or in part.  
 
Id.  
The Agency’s decision must “include an explanation of why the relevant evidence in the 
record supports each material finding of fact . . . .  Each conclusion of law shall be supported by 
cited authority or by a reasoned opinion.” Iowa Code § 17A.16(1). This requirement is not meant 
to be burdensome instead, it is meant to allow a reviewing court to ascertain what evidence was 
considered and the reasoning behind the Agency’s findings. Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care 
Center, 780 N.W.2d 549, 560 (Iowa 2010). The Court may only reverse the Agency's findings if 
they are not supported by substantial evidence. See Univ. of Iowa Hosp. & Clinics v. Waters, 674 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 15 of 28

 
 
16 
 
N.W.2d 92, 95 (Iowa 2004). Under Iowa Code section 17A.19(10)(f)(1), substantial evidence is 
defined as “the quantity and quality of evidence that would be deemed sufficient by a neutral, 
detached, and reasonable person, to establish the fact at issue when the consequences resulting 
from the establishment of that fact are understood to be serious and of great importance.” 
Here, Deputy Copley explained she was not persuaded by Dr. Chen’s and Dr. Boulden’s 
opinions that Sullivan’s chronic back pain was not related to his 2011 work injury. Appeal 
Decision at 6. In light of the fact that Sullivan had a documented trauma of being struck by a train, 
Deputy Copley did not agree with Dr. Chen’s rationale that there are many ways to develop chronic 
back pain. Id. Deputy Copley also rejected Dr. Boulden’s opinion that Sullivan’s back pain was 
attributable to other factors, including his smoking and diabetes. She reasoned that it could be the 
case these factors are contributing to it. Id. However, before his 2011 injury, Sullivan did not have 
issues with back pain. Id. His chronic back pain did not begin until his work injury. Id.  For these 
reasons, Deputy Copley found the opinions of Dr. Kuhnlein and Dr. Ledet to be more persuasive 
than those of  Dr. Boulden and Dr. Chen. Id.  
Petitioners assert Sullivan’s chronic back pain is not causally related to his 2011 work 
injury because his pattern of pain complaints were not consistent with his traumatic injury. 
Petitioners’ Brief at 15. Further, they cite that in his deposition Sullivan testified that his back had 
gotten worse between 2018 and 2019. Id. Petitioners go into further detail in their brief on why 
Dr. Chen’s and Dr. Boulden’s medical opinions regarding the causal connection were more 
persuasive than Dr. Ledet’s and Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinions. However, the standard on judicial review 
is “not whether the evidence supports a different finding than the finding made by the 
commissioner, but whether the evidence ‘supports the findings actually made.’” Meyer, 710 
N.W.2d at 218 (citation omitted).   
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 16 of 28

 
 
17 
 
This Court finds Deputy Copley’s Appeal Decision provided a sufficiently detailed 
explanation of the evidence and the material facts, in addition to her providing a reasoned opinion 
for her conclusions of law. See Iowa Code § 17A.16(1). The Deputy Commissioner as the fact-
finder determined the weight to give each expert and explained why she was more persuaded by 
Dr. Kuhlein and Dr. Ledet’s causation opinions compared to Dr. Chen and Dr. Boulden’s opinions.  
See Grundmeyer, 649 N.W.2d at 752. Therefore, the Court finds there is substantial evidence to 
support Deputy Copley’s conclusion that Sullivan’s chronic back pain is causally connected to his 
2011 work injury. 
B. Whether the Agency’s finding regarding the applicability of Long was irrational, 
illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.  
 
Petitioners contend it was an abuse of discretion and/or error of law for Deputy Copley to 
not apply the holding in Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., once causation had been determined. 
Petitioners’ Brief at 24; 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). In Deputy Copley’s Ruling on Defendants’ 
Motion for Rehearing, she denies that the test and burden of proof set forth in Long are applicable. 
Ruling on Rehearing at 2-5. She found that this case is not the traditional alternate medical care 
setting as presented in Long. Id. at 2. In this case, Petitioners denied liability that the back pain 
was causally connected to the work injury and it is not just “a mere difference of opinion over the 
diagnosis and treatment.” Id. at 2, 5 (internal quotations omitted). Deputy Copley also found that 
Petitioners have abandoned their obligation to provide care due to their denial of compensability. 
Id. at 6 
When an employee sustains a compensable work-related injury, employers are obligated 
to provide reasonable medical services to treat the injured employee. Iowa Code § 85.27(4). Once 
compensability is established, the employer has the right to choose the care the employee receives.  
Id. There are situations, however, in which the employee is permitted to choose his or her own 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 17 of 28

 
 
18 
 
care at the employer’s expense. The situations are: (1) in an emergency when the employer or 
employer’s agent cannot be reached immediately; (2) when the employee and employer have 
consented to alternative medical care to be paid by the employer; or (3) when the workers’ 
compensation commissioner orders alternative care to be paid by the employer. Id.  
However, there are two circumstances in which the employer’s right to choose medical 
care does not prevent the employee from choosing his or her own medical care at his or her own 
expense. Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 204 (Iowa 2010). The 
first circumstance is when the employer denies the compensability of the injury. Id. The second 
circumstance is when the employee abandons the protections of Iowa Code section 85.27 or 
otherwise obtains his or her own medical care independent of the statutory scheme. Id. In the first 
circumstance, when the employer contests compensability the employee has been left to pursue 
his or her own medical care for the injury at his or her own expense. Id. In essence, the injured 
employee has been abandoned by their employer. As a result, the employer has no right to choose 
the medical care. Id. The employee is free to pursue a claim against the employer to recover the 
reasonable cost of the medical care upon proof of compensability. Id.  
The second circumstance is when the employee obtains his or her own unauthorized 
medical care or abandons the protections of section 85.27. Id. Compensability of the injury is 
usually admitted by the employer in this circumstance and the employer has assumed responsibility 
for providing reasonable medical care. Id. The main issue in this circumstance is that the employee 
disagrees with the care provided or rejects the care, and instead obtains alternative medical care 
without consent from either the employer or from the workers’ compensation commissioner. Id.  
Deputy Copley found the first circumstance arose in this case and that by denying liability 
and not offering care, Petitioners abandoned their right to provide care. Ruling on Rehearing at 6. 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 18 of 28

 
 
19 
 
Specifically, this case stepped into some gray area when Petitioners denied liability for the back 
injury in their answer to the Alternate Care Petition. On March 8, 2019, Sullivan filed an Original 
Notice, Petition, and Answer Concerning Application for Alternate Care. Petitioners answered and 
admitted liability for the work injury but denied his current chronic back pain was causally related 
to the work injury. Order for Dismissal for Alternate Care at 1. Deputy McGovern dismissed with 
prejudice the Alternate Care Petition. Id. Deputy McGovern dismissed the petition because 
Defendants cannot deny liability while at the same time direct the course of treatment. Id. Under 
section 85.27, if an employer denies or disputes compensability of an injury, then the Agency must 
dismiss the alternate care application and the petition should instead be filed pursuant to Iowa 
Administrative Code rule 4.1. R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 197 (Iowa 2003). 
This is because the issue of compensability is totally removed from the alternate medical care 
process. Id. at 196. Instead, it is limited to determining the reasonableness and necessity of the 
alternative medical care sought by an employee. Id. at 197. Further, the employer cannot assert an 
authorization defense in response to any subsequent claim of alternative medical care expenses 
when the employer denies compensability. Id. at 198.  
The Court does not completely agree with Deputy Copley’s finding that Petitioners have 
forfeited their right to direct Sullivan’s medical care. Deputy Copley found that when Petitioners 
denied compensability they abandoned their obligation to provide care and such abandonment 
means Defendants have forfeited their right under section 85.27. Ruling on Rehearing at 6. 
However, in Bell Bros. Heating, the Iowa Supreme Court rejected the idea that an employer who 
acknowledges compensability of a work-related injury but later disputes the nature and extent of 
the injury loses all rights to choose medical care under section 85.27. 779 N.W.2d at 207 (emphasis 
added). Such a dispute over the nature and extent of an injury is not grounds alone for a 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 19 of 28

 
 
20 
 
determination that an employer has forfeited its right to select medical care. Id. Section 85.27 
would become “virtually meaningless” and “would lead to absurd results” if an employer only 
controls care until the employee disagrees with the authorized provider’s assessment as to the 
nature and extent of the injury. Id. Additionally, once an employee establishes compensability by 
either admission of the employer or by adjudication, the statutory duty of the employer to furnish 
reasonable medical care emerges under section 85.27. Id. at 206.  
Here, like in Bell Bros. Heating, there is not substantial evidence to support Deputy 
Copley’s finding that Petitioners’ denial of compensability of the injury forfeited any rights they 
have to choose medical care under section 85.27. See id. at 208. Like in Bell Bros. Heating, 
Defendants denied that the extent of the injury was causally related to the work injury in 2011. See 
id. at 196-98. Petitioners admitted in the 2011 work injury, that Sullivan suffered an 8% BAW 
impairment rating, and the award for future medical benefits for Sullivan’s back condition. 
Resistance to Motion for Rehearing filed 3/28/2019 at 1. In this case, Petitioners only denied the 
extent of his current back injury as being causally related to the 2011 work injury. Id. They have 
acknowledged compensability for the 2011 work injury. Id. Therefore, like in Bell Bros. Heating, 
this is not grounds alone for the determination that the employer has forfeited its right to select 
medical care. See 779 N.W.2d at 207.  
Deputy Copley finding that the test and burden of proof as set forth in Long v. Roberts 
Dairy Co. was not supported by substantial evidence, and is irrational, illogical, or wholly 
unjustifiable. Compensability had been established by Deputy Copley when she found the current 
chronic back pain was causally related to the work injury from 2011. See id. at 207. Appeal 
Decision at 6. It has also been determined by this Court that there was not substantial evidence for 
Deputy Copley to find Petitioners forfeited their right to select medical care under section 85.27. 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 20 of 28

 
 
21 
 
In this case, the SCS trial has not been performed and Sullivan is seeking authorization of 
alternative medical care, not reimbursement of alternative medical care. See Bell Bros. Heating, 
779 N.W.2d at 206. As a result, the employee now must establish the claim for alternative medical 
care by proving the alternate medical care is reasonable and necessary, or that the medical care 
provided by the employer is unreasonable. Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 123 (Iowa 
1995); Bell Bros. Heating, 779 N.W.2d at 206, 209.  
C. Whether the Agency’s determination that Sullivan raised the issue regarding 
reasonableness of the SCS trial was an abuse of discretion. 
 
Petitioners argue the Agency’s determination that Sullivan raised the issue of 
reasonableness of the SCS trial on appeal is not supported by substantial evidence, and is an error 
of law and/or is an abuse of discretion. Petitioners’ Brief at 11. Petitioners argue Sullivan failed to 
preserve error on the issue of reasonable and necessary medical treatment under Long, or more 
specifically, the unreasonableness of the treatment recommended by Dr. Chen, Dr. Boulden, Dr. 
Wheeler, and Dr. Goetz. Id. at 18. Petitioners argue Sullivan never directly addressed or raised the 
issue of reasonableness in his appeal brief to the Agency, therefore, it was incorrect for the Appeal 
Decision to hold the issue was not waived. Id.  The Arbitration Decision applied the holding of 
Long and found Claimant had not carried his burden of proof to order the alternate care requested. 
Arbitration Decision at 18. Deputy Copley reversed this finding in her Appeal Decision and found 
that the issue was not waived because Sullivan raised the issue of reasonableness indirectly 
throughout his argument in Brief Point III. Appeal Decision at 6.  
The Court does not find Deputy Copley in her Appeal Decision committed an abuse of 
discretion when she found Sullivan indirectly raised the issue of reasonableness in his appeal brief 
See Boehme v. Fareway Stores, Inc., 762 N.W.2d 142, 145 (Iowa 2009) (holding whether a 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 21 of 28

 
 
22 
 
commissioner correctly interprets the agency’s appellate procedural rules regarding preservation 
of error for an abuse of discretion). Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.28(7) states,  
[t]he appeal will consider the issues presented for review by the appellant and cross-
appellant in their briefs and any issues necessarily incident to or dependent upon 
the issues that are expressly raised, except as provided in 876-4.29(86,17A). An 
issue will not be considered on appeal if the issue could have been, but was not, 
presented to the deputy. An issue raised on appeal is decided de novo and the scope 
of the issue is viewed broadly. If the ruling from which the appeal was taken made 
a choice between alternative findings of fact, conclusions of law, theories of 
recovery or defenses and the alternative selected in the ruling is challenged as an 
issue on appeal, de novo review includes reconsideration of all alternatives that 
were available to the deputy. 
 
However, the Agency has broad authority in agency appeals under Iowa Code section 
17A.15(3). Section 17A.15(3), states that in an appeal, “the agency may reverse or modify any 
finding of fact if a preponderance of evidence will support a determination to reverse or modify 
such a finding, or may reverse or modify any conclusion of law that the agency finds to be in 
error.” Iowa Code § 17A.15(3). When determining whether the agency’s action is an abuse of 
discretion, the court shall consider whether the Agency decision lacked rationality and was made 
clearly against reason and evidence. Dico, Inc. v. Iowa Emp’t Appeal Bd., 576 N.W.2d 352, 355 
(Iowa 1998). Deputy Copley did not commit an abuse of discretion because it was within her 
authority under section 17A.15(3) for her to reverse Deputy Phillips and her finding that Sullivan 
raised the issue within his appeal brief did not lack rationality.  
D. Whether the Agency’s finding that the SCS trial is reasonable and necessary 
treatment is supported by substantial evidence or if the Deputy’s applicability of 
Long is irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.  
 
Petitioners argue the Agency’s determination that the SCS trial is reasonable and necessary 
medical treatment is not supported by substantial evidence. Petitioners’ Brief at 11. Petitioners 
also argue the Deputy’s finding that the treatment offered by Dr. Chen, Dr. Goetz, and Dr. Wheeler 
was unreasonable and was not offered by Petitioners is not supported by substantial evidence. Id. 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 22 of 28

 
 
23 
 
at 11-12. Deputy Copley reversed Deputy Phillips’s Arbitration Decision and found Claimant 
satisfied his burden in proving the SCS trial is both reasonable and necessary treatment of his 
work-related injury. Appeal Decision at 7. Deputy Copley was not persuaded by the opinions of 
Dr. Chen, Dr. Boulden, Dr. Goetz, and Dr. Wheeler when it came to whether the SCS trial is 
reasonable and necessary treatment. Appeal Decision at 7. Dr. Chen and Dr. Boulden questioned 
whether the trial was appropriate based on Sullivan’s pain distribution and because of his 
psychological state. Id. However, the Deputy found Dr. Ledet refuted these concerns in his report 
from November 11, 2019. Id. She was also not persuaded by Dr. Goetz and Dr. Wheeler’s opinions 
that Sullivan is not likely to benefit from an SCS. Id. The Commissioner found Dr. Ledet’s opinion 
that Sullivan is a good candidate to be more persuasive because Dr. Ledet has more expertise when 
it comes to SCS. Id. Based on Dr. Ledet’s opinion, as supported by Dr. Kuhnlein, Deputy Copley 
found the SCS trial is both reasonable and necessary treatment for Sullivan’s work-related chronic 
back pain. Id.   
 
Under Long, in order to establish alternative care under section 85.27, the employee has 
the burden of proving the employer’s course of treatment is unreasonable. 528 N.W.2d 123. 
Determining what is unreasonable under the statute is a question of fact. Id. The question of the 
employer’s obligation under section 85.27 is based on reasonable necessity, not desirability. Id. at 
124. In Long, the court denied claimant’s request for alternative medical care because he furnished 
no proof that the care provided by the defendant would be inferior or less extensive than the care 
offered by claimant as alternative medical care. Id. In Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, the 
court concluded that “when evidence is presented to the commissioner that the employer 
authorized medical care has not been effective and that such care is ‘inferior or less extensive’ than 
other available care requested by the employee . . . the commissioner is justified by section 85.27 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 23 of 28

 
 
24 
 
to order the alternate care.” 562 N.W.2d 433, 437 (Iowa 1997). The treatment offered by employer 
must be (1) prompt, (2) reasonably suited to treat the injury, and (3) without due inconvenience to 
employee. West Side Transp. V. Cordell, 601 N.W.2d 691, 693 (Iowa 1999).  
 
This case started with the Petitioners denying the spinal cord stimulator for two reasons: 1. 
causation, not being causally related to the work injury; and 2. not being reasonable and necessary.  
Record, Tr. 107.   The Deputy found that there was causation and substantial evidence supported 
her decision.  The Deputy also found that the SCS was reasonable and necessary.  The factual issue 
for this Court is what was the care being offered by the Petitioners.  The Court concludes that in 
Deputy Copley’s Appeal Decision and Ruling on the Motion for Rehearing, she correctly applies 
the test and burden of proof from Long and her finding is supported by substantial evidence  
The burden is on Sullivan to prove the medical care being furnished or recommended by 
Petitioners is unreasonable. See Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123. Petitioners have offered a treatment 
plan that they have authorized and find to be reasonable care for Sullivan’s work-related injury. 
Dr. Chen has recommended Sullivan: (1) pursue an intensive cognitive behavioral therapy with a 
pain psychologist; (2) start a general flexibility program with crossing one leg over the other; and 
(3) start a simple and consistent walking program or other aerobic conditioning exercise program 
to improve his physical endurance. DE C at 24-25. However, Deputy Copley concludes claimant 
met his burden of proving the SCS trial is reasonable and necessary treatment. Appeal Decision at 
7. The Deputy was more persuaded by Dr. Ledet’s opinion that the SCS trial is the appropriate 
care for Sullivan’s injury. Id. She goes on to  explain further why she is not persuaded by Dr. Chen, 
Dr. Goetz, Dr. Boulden, and Dr. Wheeler. Id. She further states “Dr. Ledet specifically indicated 
claimant would be a good candidate for the trial.” Id.  
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 24 of 28

 
 
25 
 
 
Under Long, the test is not what is the most appropriate treatment plan or the more desirable 
treatment plan, but whether the treatment plan offered by Petitioners is unreasonable. See Long, 
528 N.W.2d at 124. Deputy Copley found prompt care was not provided by Petitioners at the 
inception of the injury had compensability been acknowledged. See Rehearing Ruling at 6; see 
also Appeal Decision at 7. Due to care not being offered promptly, the Agency has the authority 
to order alternate care, including care from a doctor chosen by the claimant.  West Side Transp., 
601 N.W.2d at 693. Petitioners argue they did offer Dr. Chen’s recommendations at the time of 
the hearing. Petitioners’ Brief at 26. They contend they introduced evidence of reasonable care as 
recommended by four physicians. Id. The Court acknowledges there are references in the record 
to Dr. Chen’s recommendation of a general flexibility program being a reasonable treatment plan 
for Sullivan’s chronic back pain. See Tr. at 37 (quoting “Dr. Chen and Dr. Boulden have given 
alternative treatment options as far as exercises that we think should be given prior to the spinal 
cord stimulator.”). However, our task is not to determine whether there is evidence supporting a 
different finding, but rather, viewing the record as a whole, supports the findings actually made. 
Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 218. As a result, Deputy Copley’s findings are supported by substantial 
evidence.   
 Whether the Agency’s determination that Dr. Goetz referred Claimant for a second 
opinion for pain management is supported by substantial evidence.  
 
Petitioners argue Deputy Copley’s finding that Dr. Goetz referred Sullivan for a second 
opinion is not supported by substantial evidence. Petitioners’ Brief at 13. In the Appeal Decision, 
Deputy Copley stated “given the persistent pain, Dr. Goetz referred claimant for a second opinion 
in pain management.” Appeal Decision at 4. Petitioners argue Dr. Goetz did not use the words 
“second opinion” in his referral for pain management. Petitioners’ Brief at 13. Instead, he said 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 25 of 28

 
 
26 
 
“second opinion” in reference to the spine surgery. Id. Petitioners contend this is an important 
distinction because it goes to their argument that the SCS trial is not reasonable and necessary 
medical treatment based on the opinions of Dr. Goetz who was the long-term authorized treating 
physician. Id.  
Under Iowa Code section 17A.19(10), “the court shall reverse, modify, or grant other 
appropriate relief from agency action ... if it determines that substantial rights of the person seeking 
judicial relief have been prejudiced because the agency action is .... (f ) Based upon a determination 
of fact ... that is not supported by substantial evidence in the record when that record is viewed as 
a whole.” The Iowa Supreme Court has found “substantial rights language analogous to a harmless 
error rule.” City of Des Moines v. Pub. Emp’t Relations Bd., 275 N.W.2d 753, 759 (Iowa 1979). 
The Agency’s actions “should not be tampered with unless the complaining party has in fact been 
harmed.” Id. Petitioners bear the burden of demonstrating the Agency’s decision has resulted in 
prejudice. See Titan Tire Corp. v. Emp’t Appeal Bd., 641 N.W.2d 752, 758 (Iowa 2002).  
Here, this Court has no evidence cited to in the record by Petitioners that clarifies or 
supports a different finding.  Petitioners only evidence is that Dr. Goetz stated “we will help him 
arrange a referral to pain management here locally for consideration of radiofrequency denervation 
again.” Petitioners’ Brief at 13; JE 3 at 22-25. Additionally, Petitioners have failed to show how 
they have been harmed or prejudiced by the Deputy’s finding. Petitioners claim it is important to 
their position that the SCS trial is not reasonable and necessary medical treatment. Petitioners Brief 
at 13. The Court disagrees with this argument by Petitioners. Even if this finding was removed 
from Deputy Copley’s decision, there are still other factual findings, as previously analyzed, to 
support her conclusion it was reasonable and necessary medical treatment. See Hill v. Fleetguard, 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 26 of 28

 
 
27 
 
Inc., 705 N.W.2d 665, 673 (Iowa 2005). Therefore, Deputy Copley’s finding is supported by 
substantial evidence.  
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND DISPOSITIONS 
For all the reasons set forth above, the Court concludes the Agency’s findings are affirmed 
as to: (1) its determination that the need for the SCS trial as being causally related to the work 
injury, (2) it not committing an abuse of discretion when Deputy Copley reversed Deputy Phillips 
and found Sullivan raised the issue of reasonableness of the SCS trial in its appeal, (3) its finding 
that Sullivan met his burden in proving the care offered by the employer was unreasonable, and 
(4) the finding regarding whether Dr. Goetz referred Sullivan for a second opinion for pain 
management . The Court concludes: the Agency’s finding that Long does not apply in this case 
was irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable, however, Deputy Copley applies Long in her 
Ruling on Motion for Rehearing.  
IT IS THE ORDER OF THE COURT that the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commission’s decision is AFFIRMED.  
Costs are assessed equally to Petitioners.  
 
 
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 27 of 28

State of Iowa Courts
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV061689
WEST CENTRAL COOP ET AL VS BRETT SULLIVAN
Type:
ORDER FOR JUDGMENT
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2021-09-24 11:22:23
E-FILED                    CVCV061689 - 2021 SEP 24 11:22 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 28 of 28
