Case Number: 22007160.01
Case Title:  SCHORE, LARRY V. AMAZON.COM SERVICES, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Schore Larry - 22007160.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
LARRY SCHORE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
           File No.  22007160.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
     
 
 
  : 
 
    
vs. 
 
  : 
 
    
 
 
  :                 
AMAZON.COM SERVICES, INC., 
  : 
         ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos.:   1402.40, 1802, 1803, 
LM INSURANCE CORP., 
  : 
 
 
         2502, 2701, 2907,  
 
 
  : 
 
 
         3001, 4000.2 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Larry Schore, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against Amazon.com 
Services, Inc., as the employer and LM Insurance Corp., as the insurance carrier.  This 
case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on March 7, 2024.  
Pursuant to an order from the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this case 
was heard via a Zoom videoconference.   
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing.  On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 8, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 9, as well as Defendants’ Exhibits A through D.  All exhibits were received 
without objection.   
Claimant testified on his own behalf.  No other witnesses testified live at the 
hearing.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.  
However, counsel for the parties requested an opportunity to file post-hearing briefs.  
This request was granted and both parties filed briefs simultaneously on April 12, 2024.  
The case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on that date. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Aug-20  10:45:53     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SCHORE V. AMAZON.COM SERVICES, INC. 
Page 2 
 
1. 
The extent of claimant’s entitlement to temporary disability, or healing 
period, benefits, including a claim for a running healing period. 
2. 
Whether the work injury caused permanent disability. 
3. 
If the injury caused permanent disability, whether claimant is entitled to an 
award of industrial disability benefits or is currently limited to an award of 
functional impairment pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
4. 
If the injury caused permanent disability, the extent of claimant’s 
entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits. 
5. 
The proper commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any. 
6. 
Claimant’s gross average weekly wages at the time of the injury and any 
corresponding weekly worker’s compensation rate. 
7. 
Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of his independent medical 
evaluation fees. 
8. 
Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care into the future. 
9. 
Whether penalty benefits should be imposed against defendants for 
unreasonable delay or denial of weekly benefits. 
10. 
Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
At the commencement of hearing, the parties reached an agreement for 
reimbursement of claimant’s independent medical evaluation expenses pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.39.  The undersigned entered a verbal order at the time of 
hearing directing defendants to reimburse claimant’s independent medical evaluation 
fees, if they have not already done so.  The parties’ agreement and the verbal order 
entered at the commencement of the hearing resolves the dispute pertaining to 
claimant’s request for reimbursement of the independent medical evaluation. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Larry Schore, claimant, is a 60-year-old man.  Mr. Schore graduated from high 
school in 1981.  He earned an associate degree in computers and electronic 
technologies in 1989 and completed an A+ computer certification in 2000.  
Mr. Schore sustained a stipulated work injury to his low back while working for 
the employer, Amazon.com Services, Inc., on May 25, 2022.  On that date, he was 

SCHORE V. AMAZON.COM SERVICES, INC. 
Page 3 
 
working as a yard marshal, loading an empty semi-trailer.  He bent over to pull a handle 
on a device referred to as a “go-cart.”  When he pulled the handle, the handle did not 
move, and claimant heard an audible pop in his low back and experienced immediate 
pain in his right low back. 
Claimant first sought treatment for the injury on May 26, 2022 with his personal 
physician, Steven Sohn, M.D.  Dr. Sohn imposed temporary work restrictions but 
permitted claimant to return to work.  The employer subsequently scheduled claimant 
for evaluation with Concentra.  Physician assistant, Nicholas Ford, diagnosed claimant 
with lumbar disc disease, a lumbar strain with low back pain radiating into claimant’s left 
lower extremity.  Claimant submitted to a low back MRI and was later referred to an 
orthopaedic surgeon for evaluation. 
Brett Rosenthal, M.D., an orthopaedic surgeon at Iowa Ortho, evaluated claimant 
on July 7, 2022.  Dr. Rosenthal did not believe claimant’s condition required surgical 
intervention and he referred claimant for evaluation and management by a physical 
medicine and rehabilitation specialist, Kurt Smith, M.D. 
Dr. Smith obtained a negative EMG and prescribed physical therapy.  Claimant’s 
condition did not improve.  On August 30, 2022, Dr. Smith referred claimant for a pain 
management evaluation with John W. Rayburn, M.D. 
Dr. Rayburn attempted a series of various types of injections into claimant’s low 
back without successful resolution of his symptoms.  Dr. Rayburn ultimately exhausted 
all of his pain management interventions and referred claimant back to Dr. Smith for 
further treatment.  Dr. Rayburn declared maximum medical improvement (MMI) from a 
pain management standpoint on December 19, 2022.  (Joint Ex. 4, pp. 107-109) 
Dr. Smith reevaluated Mr. Shore on January 11, 2023.  He recommended a 
second surgical opinion.  Defendants authorized that recommended evaluation and 
scheduled claimant to be evaluated by Zaki Ibrahim at Capital Orthopaedics.  Dr. 
Ibrahim evaluated claimant on April 11, 2023.  He diagnosed claimant with mild lumbar 
spondylosis and concluded that Mr. Schore’s “complaints of pain are far out of 
proportion to the patient’s clinical and radiographic findings.”  (Joint Ex. 7, p. 168)   
Dr. Ibrihim pondered the possibility of claimant malingering for secondary gain 
purposes.  Dr. Ibrahim opined that claimant achieved MMI on April 11, 2023.  He opined 
that claimant could return to activities as his comfort level would allow and imposed no 
limitations on claimant’s activities.  Dr. Ibrahim further opined that claimant had a 0% 
permanent impairment as a result of the work injury.  (Joint Ex. 7, p. 181) 
Mr. Schore returned to work for the employer after Dr. Ibrahim’s release.  He 
testified that required walking in his position made it difficult to perform his job duties.  
Claimant requested the employer provide him a “cart” to push and lean on to assist with 
weightbearing as he walked.  The employer complied with this request and permitted 
claimant to utilize a cart. 

SCHORE V. AMAZON.COM SERVICES, INC. 
Page 4 
 
Ultimately, the employer requested that claimant seek more specific restrictions 
because the restrictions outlined by Dr. Ibrahim were vague.  Claimant complied and 
sought an evaluation with his personal physician, Dr. Sohn.  Dr. Sohn evaluated 
claimant on June 22, 2023.  He opined that claimant could not lift, push, or pull more 
than 10 pounds, that he should work 90 percent of the time sitting on a stool or a chair, 
and that he should not walk more than 10 percent of the workday.  (Joint Ex. 1, pp. 9-
11) 
Mr. Schore sought and submitted to an independent medical evaluation 
performed by John Kuhnlein, M.D. on August 8, 2023.  Dr. Kuhnlein recommended a 
repeat MRI and further pain management treatment.  However, he concurred with Dr. 
Ibrahim and opined that claimant achieved MMI on April 11, 2023.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 
9)  Dr. Kuhnlein opined that claimant sustained a seven percent functional permanent 
impairment of the whole person as a result of his work injury.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 10)  
Dr. Kuhnlein recommended claimant limit his activities to 10 pounds of lifting on an 
occasional basis, as well as occasional sitting, standing, or walking.  Dr. Kuhnlein also 
recommended that claimant be permitted to change positions between sitting, standing, 
and walking, as needed for comfort.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 10) 
Claimant submitted to a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) on August 25, 
2023.  The therapist opined that the FCE was valid and placed claimant into a light 
physical demand work category.  Specifically, the FCE demonstrated the ability to lift 30 
pounds occasionally, as well as perform occasional overhead reach work, occasional 
bending, squatting, ladder climbing, sitting and standing.  (Joint Ex. 8, p. 183) 
Defendants returned claimant for evaluation and clarification of restrictions by Dr. 
Smith.  Dr. Smith declared MMI on September 8, 2023.  He opined that claimant should 
limit lifting to 20 pounds occasionally, should only lift, bend, stoop, sit, or stand 
occasionally, and should not climb ladders.  (Joint Ex. 4, pp. 120-121)  Dr. Smith opined 
that claimant sustained a five percent permanent impairment of the whole person as a 
result of his work injury.  (Joint Ex. 4, pp. 120-121) 
The initial claim asserted by claimant is a claim for a running healing period.  
Claimant contends that Dr. Kuhnlein has recommended a repeat MRI and further pain 
management evaluation and potential treatment.  I find the opinion of Dr. Smith to be 
most convincing on the issue of MMI.  Dr. Smith re-evaluated claimant after Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s evaluation and placed claimant at MMI on September 8, 2023.  I accept this 
date and find that Mr. Schore reached MMI on September 8, 2023. 
Only Dr. Kuhnlein recommended ongoing or further medical treatment.  However, 
there is no explanation by Dr. Kuhnlein why or how changes in the MRI would be 
related to the work injury.  I also find that claimant was treated by a competent pain 
management physician, Dr. Rayburn, who attempted several interventions and 
ultimately referred claimant back to Dr. Smith.  Dr. Rayburn declared MMI from a pain 
management standpoint and I accept that opinion as well.   

SCHORE V. AMAZON.COM SERVICES, INC. 
Page 5 
 
Ultimately, Dr. Smith re-evaluated claimant after all other physicians.  Dr. Smith 
was responsible for and did make referrals for claimant to obtain both a second 
orthopaedic opinion as well as for pain management.  Upon re-evaluating claimant in 
September 2023, Dr. Smith did not concur with Dr. Kuhnlein’s recommendations.  
Ultimately, I find Dr. Smith had the opportunity to evaluate claimant over a period of time 
on multiple occasions.  I find his opinions to be convincing and accurate.  Therefore, I 
find that Mr. Schore achieved maximum medical improvement on September 8, 2023.  
Similarly, I find that the defendants’ referral of claimant back to Dr. Smith for evaluation 
after Dr. Kuhnlein’s recommendations was reasonable medical care and addressed 
those potential concerns.  I find that defendants have provided reasonable medical care 
and that claimant failed to prove alternate medical care is reasonable and necessary 
under the circumstances. 
With respect to permanent disability, I find that claimant proved he sustained 
permanent disability as a result of the work injury.  I acknowledge Dr. Ibrahim’s opinion 
that claimant sustained a 0% permanent impairment rating and released claimant to 
return to work without specific work restrictions.  However, that opinion is inconsistent 
with the opinions of Dr. Sohn, Dr. Smith, Dr. Rayburn, and Dr. Kuhnlein.  Dr. Ibrahim’s 
opinion is also not consistent with the functional capacity evaluation findings and 
recommendations.  I do not find the opinions of Dr. Ibrahim regarding permanent 
impairment or work restrictions to be convincing. 
Dr. Sohn and Dr. Kuhnlein both recommend permanent restrictions significantly 
more restrictive than the abilities demonstrated by claimant in the FCE.  Limiting 
claimant to a 10-pound occasional lift recommended by these physicians would likely 
unnecessarily limit claimant’s employment opportunities.  Dr. Kuhnlein’s 
recommendation of allowing claimant to change positions as needed for comfort is not 
terribly specific and potentially unworkable for an employer.  I do not find it to be 
convincing. 
Instead, I find the recommendations of Dr. Smith to be reasonable and 
convincing.  Dr. Smith recommends restrictions that include occasional lifting of 20 
pounds.  This is slightly below the abilities documented in the FCE, which demonstrates 
a reasonable, yet conservative, approach by Dr. Smith.  Dr. Smith’s work restrictions 
are reasonable and accepted as accurate. 
Similarly, I find Dr. Smith’s five percent permanent impairment rating to be 
convincing and accurate.  I acknowledge Dr. Kuhnlein’s seven percent impairment 
rating, but ultimately accept Dr. Smith’s opinions as most convincing in this case.  
Therefore, I find that claimant proved he sustained a five percent permanent functional 
impairment of the whole person as a result of the May 25, 2022 work injury.  I also find 
that claimant proved he requires permanent work restrictions as a result of that work 
injury.  Therefore, I find that claimant proved he sustained permanent disability in some 
amount. 
Mr. Schore is in an advancing age for the workforce.  He has demonstrated 
motivation to return to work and has continued to report to work, when offered, by the 

SCHORE V. AMAZON.COM SERVICES, INC. 
Page 6 
 
employer.  Mr. Schore likely does not have sufficient time remaining in his work life to 
justify, or realistically obtain, retraining.  Considering Mr. Schore’s age, educational 
background, employment history, permanent functional impairment, permanent work 
restrictions, inability to return to his prior employment duties, proximity to retirement, 
motivation to return to work, likely inability to retrain at his age, and all other factors of 
industrial disability identified by the Iowa Supreme Court, I find Mr. Schore proved he 
sustained a 60 percent loss of future earning capacity as a result of the May 25, 2022 
work injury. 
Mr. Schore challenges the weekly rate of compensation paid by defendants as 
being too low.  Specifically, Mr. Schore contends that two weeks of wages should be 
removed and replaced from defendants’ calculation of his gross weekly earnings.  
Claimant’s earnings records are located at Claimant’s Exhibit 3.  He contends that the 
weeks ending March 5, 2022 and April 23, 2022 are not representative of his typical 
earnings and should be replaced. 
Review of those records demonstrates that claimant worked 21.2 hours for pay 
period ending March 5, 2022.  He worked 22.37 hours for the week ending April 23, 
2022.  Claimant typically worked more than 22 hours in a week.  I find the weeks of 
March 5, 2022 and April 23, 2022 to be unrepresentative of claimant’s typical weekly 
earnings prior to the injury date. 
Moreover, defendants offer no explanation of how they reached their alleged 
average gross weekly earnings.  Defendants contend that claimant’s average gross 
weekly earnings were $650.00 per week but provide no calculations to support that 
assertion and no argument to demonstrate its accuracy.  My review of the wage records 
does not identify any means or calculations in which the gross average weekly wages 
for claimant are $650.00 prior to the date of injury.  Defendants’ asserted gross average 
weekly wage is not supported by the evidentiary record and is rejected. 
Ultimately, I find claimant’s argument and calculations persuasive.  I find that 
Claimant’s chart and calculations at Claimant’s Exhibit 3, page 22 is accurate.  
Claimant’s gross average weekly wages prior to the date of injury were $673.97.  There 
is no contrary evidence to support the defendants’ argument that the average weekly 
wages totaled $650.00 prior to the date of injury. 
Mr. Schore asserts a claim for penalty benefits.  In this regard, claimant proved 
there was a delay in payment of benefits from issuance of Dr. Smith’s impairment rating 
on October 18, 2023 and actual payment of permanent partial disability benefits on 
January 5, 2024.  In their brief, defendants acknowledge receipt of the permanent 
impairment rating in October 2023 and payment of permanent partial disability the first 
week of January 2024.   
Claimant asserts there is no explanation by defendants for the delay of 70 days 
in payment of permanent partial disability benefits.  Defendants offer no evidence or 
argument to explain or justify the delay in payment of permanent partial disability 
benefits between October 18, 2023 and January 5, 2024.  Defendants offer no evidence 

SCHORE V. AMAZON.COM SERVICES, INC. 
Page 7 
 
that they provided a contemporaneous communication to claimant explaining their basis 
for delay or denial of benefits between October 18, 2023 and January 5, 2024. 
I find claimant proved a delay in payment of permanent partial disability benefits 
between issuance of the October 18, 2023 permanent impairment rating and the actual 
payment of permanent disability benefits on January 5, 2024.  I find that defendants 
failed to prove they conducted an investigation, had a reasonable basis for delay of 
those benefits, or that they contemporaneously conveyed the basis for their delay or 
denial of benefits between October 18, 2023 and January 5, 2024. 
This delay of just over two months is not reasonable.  Permanent disability 
benefits commence under this decision on September 9, 2023.  Therefore, the total 
delay of benefits totals 17 weeks, or a delay of benefits totaling $7,349.78.   
In addition, claimant asserts a claim for penalty benefits for underpayment of 
weekly benefits.  Claimant ultimately proved entitlement to a higher weekly rate.  
Defendants asserted weekly rate has no basis in fact and it was unreasonable to use a 
weekly rate that is not based upon actual wages.  I find that defendants’ underpayment 
of the weekly rate was unreasonable and justifies payment of a penalty in some 
amount.  Considering the purposes of the penalty benefit statute, I find that a penalty 
award totaling $2,500.00 is appropriate to both punish defendants for their 
unreasonable delay and underpayment of benefits and is also sufficient to discourage 
similar behavior in the future. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The initial disputed issue is the extent of claimant’s entitlement to temporary total, 
or healing period, benefits.  Mr. Schore contends that he is entitled to a running healing 
period from May 25, 2022 through the date of the hearing.  In his brief, he contends that 
additional treatment is needed and recommended by Dr. Kuhnlein.  Defendants contend 
that claimant achieved maximum medical improvement and that no further temporary 
disability, or healing period, benefits are owed after MMI was achieved. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 

SCHORE V. AMAZON.COM SERVICES, INC. 
Page 8 
 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
In this case, I found that claimant proved he sustained permanent disability.  
Therefore, any claim for healing period benefits is determined under Iowa Code section 
85.34(1).  Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable “until the 
employee has returned to work, or it is medically indicated that significant improvement 
from the injury is not anticipated or until the employee is medically capable of returning 
to employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of the injury, whichever occurs first.”  In this case, claimant returned 
to work in May 2023 and healing period benefits were appropriately terminated at that 
juncture.  Claimant achieved MMI, which is the commonly used term to signify that “it is 
medically indicated that significant improvement from the injury is not anticipated.”  See 
Iowa Code section 85.34(1).  Having reached MMI in September 2023 and not being 
under any new medical restrictions at the time of hearing that precluded claimant from 
all work, I conclude that claimant failed to prove entitlement to additional healing period 
benefits.  
The next disputed issue for resolution is whether the work injury caused 
permanent disability.  Once again, as noted above, claimant bears the burden of proof 
to establish that the work injury caused permanent disability.  I found the opinions of Dr. 
Smith convincing and ultimately found that claimant proved he sustained permanent 
impairment as a result of the work injury and that he required permanent work 
restrictions as a result of the work injury.  Therefore, I found that claimant proved the 
May 25, 2022 work injury caused permanent disability. 
Having reached this finding and conclusion, I must determine whether claimant’s 
permanent disability should be compensated with a functional impairment or with 
industrial disability benefits.  Under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, permanent 
partial disability is compensated for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or for loss of earning capacity under section 
85.34(2)(v).  However, Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) provides an exception when the 
injured worker returns to work for the employer at the same or greater earnings. 
Specifically, Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) provides: 
If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or 
would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the 
employee received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment 

SCHORE V. AMAZON.COM SERVICES, INC. 
Page 9 
 
resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the employee’s earning 
capacity. 
Mr. Schore’s injury involves an injury to the low back.  The low back is not a 
scheduled injury compensable under any of the scheduled injury sections of Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(t).  Accordingly, the provisions of Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) 
apply.   
Unfortunately, it is not clear from the statute how the provisions of Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(v) should apply in this situation.  Claimant returned to work for this 
employer earning the same or greater wages after the injury date.  However, prior to the 
arbitration hearing, claimant was removed from his work assignment and placed on an 
involuntary leave of absence.  At the time of hearing, claimant was earning no wages 
from the employer.   
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) further provides:  
[I]f an employee who is eligible for compensation under this 
paragraph returns to work with the same employer and is compensated 
based only upon the employee’s functional impairment resulting from the 
injury as provided in this paragraph and is terminated from employment by 
that employer, the award or agreement for settlement for benefits under 
this chapter shall be reviewed upon commencement of reopening 
proceedings by the employee for a determination of any reduction in the 
employee’s earning capacity caused by the employee’s permanent partial 
disability.  
In this case, claimant did return to the employer and earned the same or greater 
wages.  Neither an award nor agreement for settlement was entered prior to this case.  
If read literally, two separate causes of action would be needed to pursue industrial 
disability benefits in this type of action.  However, it would be inefficient to require the 
parties to enter into a settlement or proceed to a hearing to obtain a functional 
impairment award to immediately re-file and pursue a second cause of action that was 
ripe for determination at the time of the initial arbitration hearing. 
Additionally, it is not clear under the statutory language whether an involuntary 
removal from employment duties and placement into a leave of absence status is 
considered a “termination” under the statutory language.  However, it would be strange 
and perhaps absurd to interpret the statute to permit an employer to extend an offer of 
employment to an injured worker at the same or higher wages than were being paid at 
the time of injury, only to remove that worker from the job after one hour and place them 
into an indefinite leave of absence.  This would allow the employer to indefinitely delay 
or bar any industrial disability recovery by an injured worker while realistically not 
returning that employee to the workforce.  I do not deem it reasonable to interpret the 
statute to allow an employer to use procedural gimmicks to bar an industrial disability 
award.  Therefore, I interpret the statutory reference to “termination” to include an 

SCHORE V. AMAZON.COM SERVICES, INC. 
Page 10 
 
involuntary removal from the workforce and involuntary placement into a leave of 
absence related to the work injuries. 
For purposes of administrative efficiencies and to provide a realistic interpretation 
of the statute that prevents gamesmanship or semantics from barring recovery of 
significant benefits, I interpret Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) to permit recovery of 
industrial disability benefits in this situation where the claimant sustained an 
unscheduled injury, returned to work, but was subsequently involuntarily removed from 
his employment and placed into an unspecified leave of absence program.  I interpret 
the statute to deem this as a constructive discharge or termination that permits the 
recovery of industrial disability benefits.  I further interpret the statute to permit that 
claim to be made when ripe, as in this case, rather than requiring an award of a 
functional disability only to require a second contested case proceeding to award 
industrial disability benefits.  Therefore, I conclude claimant has proven entitlement to 
an industrial disability award at this time. 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City R. Co., 219 
Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the Legislature 
intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning capacity and 
not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of the total 
physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961).  Compensation shall be paid in 
relation to 500 weeks as the disability bears to the body as a whole.  Section 
85.34(2)(v). 
In addition to the traditional industrial disability factors outlined by the Iowa 
Supreme Court and referenced above, the Iowa legislature amended Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v) to require this agency to consider “the number of years in the future it was 
reasonably anticipated that the employee would work at the time of the injury.”  In this 
case, Mr. Schore was 58 years old on the date of injury and 60 years old at the time of 
hearing.  It is realistic to anticipate Mr. Schore would have continued to work between 7 
and 12 more years at the time of his injury. 
Considering claimant’s age, proximity to retirement, educational background, 
employment history, permanent functional impairment, permanent work restrictions, 
inability to return to his former position with the employer, his motivation to continue 
working, as well as all other factors of industrial disability outlined by the Iowa Supreme 
Court, I found Mr. Schore proved he sustained a 60 percent loss of future earning 

SCHORE V. AMAZON.COM SERVICES, INC. 
Page 11 
 
capacity as a result of the May 25, 2022 work injury.  This is equivalent to a 60 percent 
industrial disability.  Using the 500-week schedule for industrial disability injuries, I 
conclude claimant proved entitlement to 300 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
Permanent disability benefits commence when MMI has been achieved and the 
extent of permanent impairment can be determined.  In this case, I found the opinions of 
Dr. Smith to be most convincing.  Therefore, I found claimant achieved MMI on 
September 8, 2023.  At that juncture, it was possible to determine a permanent 
impairment rating for claimant’s injuries.  I conclude claimant’s permanent partial 
disability benefits commence on September 9, 2023.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2). 
Section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the 
employee at the time of the injury. The section defines weekly earnings as the gross 
salary, wages, or earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the 
employee worked the customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee 
was injured as the employer regularly required for the work or employment. The various 
subsections of section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings 
depending upon the type of earnings and employment. 
If the employee is paid on a daily or hourly basis or by output, weekly earnings 
are computed by dividing by 13 the earnings over the 13-week period immediately 
preceding the injury. Any week that does not fairly reflect the employee’s customary 
earnings is excluded, however. Section 85.36(6). 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3). 
In this case, I found that the weeks challenged by claimant were not 
representative of his typical earnings prior to the date of injury.  I found that claimant’s 
calculation of the gross average weekly earnings was accurate and that claimant’s 
gross average weekly earnings prior to the date of injury were $673.97.  Pursuant to the 
Commissioner’s rate tables, an individual that is single and entitled to only one 
exemption with the above earnings qualifies for a weekly worker’s compensation rate of 
$417.92.  Therefore, I conclude all benefits should be awarded at the rate of $417.92 
per week. 
Mr. Shore also asserted a claim for alternate medical care.  Iowa Code section 
85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has 
the right to choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly 
and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience 
to the employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the 
care offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 

SCHORE V. AMAZON.COM SERVICES, INC. 
Page 12 
 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
An application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because 
claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving.  Mere dissatisfaction with 
the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical 
care.  Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not 
reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the 
claimant.  Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). 
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the 
employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27; Holbert v. Townsend 
Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner, 78 
(Review-Reopening 1975).   
“Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.”  
Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 123 (Iowa 1995). 
In this case, claimant asserts that additional treatment is necessary, as 
recommended by his independent medical evaluator.  However, defendants offered 
additional medical evaluation after the claimant’s independent medical evaluation by a 
physician who recommended and directed significant medical treatment for claimant 
throughout this claim, including an orthopaedic evaluation and a subsequent second 
opinion, a pain specialist, physical therapy, among other treatment offered.  Ultimately, 
the authorized treating physician, Dr. Smith, provided reasonable, timely, and 
appropriate medical care.  He recommends no additional care at this time, and I 
accepted his opinion as the most credible opinion in this case.  I specifically find and 
conclude that defendants provided reasonable and appropriate medical care and that 
claimant failed to prove additional medical care is reasonable or necessary at this time.  
Therefore, I conclude that claimant failed to carry his burden of proof to establish that he 
is entitled to an order for alternate medical care.   
Mr. Schore asserts that defendants unreasonably delayed and/or denied his 
weekly benefits in this case and that defendants should be ordered to pay penalty 
benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 10A.315.   
Iowa Code section 10A.315(4) provides: 
a. 
If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits 
occurs without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the 
employer or insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, 
or termination of benefits, the workers’ compensation commissioner shall 
award benefits in addition to those benefits payable under this subchapter, 
or chapter 85, 85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits 

SCHORE V. AMAZON.COM SERVICES, INC. 
Page 13 
 
that were denied, delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse. 
b. 
The workers’ compensation commissioner shall award 
benefits under this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the 
following facts: 
(1) 
The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in 
payment, or termination of benefits. 
(2) 
The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or 
probable cause or excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or 
termination of benefits. 
In Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 (Iowa 1996), and 
Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996), the supreme court 
said: 
Based on the plain language of section 86.13, we hold an employee is 
entitled to penalty benefits if there has been a delay in payment unless the 
employer proves a reasonable cause or excuse.  A reasonable cause or 
excuse exists if either (1) the delay was necessary for the insurer to 
investigate the claim or (2) the employer had a reasonable basis to 
contest the employee’s entitlement to benefits.  A “reasonable basis” for 
denial of the claim exists if the claim is “fairly debatable.” 
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
The supreme court has stated: 
 
(1) If the employer has a reason for the delay and conveys that reason 
to the employee contemporaneously with the beginning of the delay, no 
penalty will be imposed if the reason is of such character that a 
reasonable fact-finder could conclude that it is a "reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse" under Iowa Code section 86.13.  In that case, we will 
defer to the decision of the commissioner.  See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d 
at 260 (substantial evidence found to support commissioner’s finding of 
legitimate reason for delay pending receipt of medical report); Robbennolt, 
555 N.W.2d at 236. 
 
(2) If no reason is given for the delay or if the “reason” is not one that 
a reasonable fact-finder could accept, we will hold that no such cause or 
excuse exists and remand to the commissioner for the sole purpose of 
assessing penalties under section 86.13.  See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 
261. 

SCHORE V. AMAZON.COM SERVICES, INC. 
Page 14 
 
 
(3) Reasonable causes or excuses include (a) a delay for the 
employer to investigate the claim, Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260; 
Kiesecker v. Webster City Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d at 109, 111 (Iowa 
1995); or (b) the employer had a reasonable basis to contest the 
claimthe “fairly debatable” basis for delay.  See Christensen, 554 
N.W.2d at 260 (holding two-month delay to obtain employer’s own medical 
report reasonable under the circumstances).  
 
(4) For the purpose of applying section 86.13, the benefits that are 
underpaid as well as late-paid benefits are subject to penalties, unless the 
employer establishes reasonable and probable cause or excuse.  
Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 237 (underpayment resulting from application 
of wrong wage base; in absence of excuse, commissioner required to 
apply penalty). 
   If we were to construe [section 86.13] to permit the 
avoidance of penalty if any amount of compensation benefits 
are paid, the purpose of the penalty statute would be 
frustrated.  For these reasons, we conclude section 86.13 is 
applicable when payment of compensation is not timely . . . 
or when the full amount of compensation is not paid. 
Id. 
 
(5) For purposes of determining whether there has been a delay, 
payments are “made” when (a) the check addressed to a claimant is 
mailed (Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 236; Kiesecker, 528 N.W.2d at 112), 
or (b) the check is delivered personally to the claimant by the employer or 
its workers’ compensation insurer.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 235.   
 
(6) In determining the amount of penalty, the commissioner is to 
consider factors such as the length of the delay, the number of delays, the 
information available to the employer regarding the employee’s injury and 
wages, and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 
N.W.2d at 238. 
 
(7) An employer’s bare assertion that a claim is “fairly debatable” does 
not make it so.  A fair reading of Christensen and Robbennolt, makes it 
clear that the employer must assert facts upon which the commissioner 
could reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.”  See 
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996).   
Weekly compensation payments are due at the end of the compensation week.  
Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 235. 

SCHORE V. AMAZON.COM SERVICES, INC. 
Page 15 
 
Penalty is not imposed for delayed interest payments.  Davidson v. Bruce, 594 
N.W.2d 833, 840 (Iowa App. 1999).  Schadendorf v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 757 N.W.2d 
330, 338 (Iowa 2008).   
When an employee’s claim for benefits is fairly debatable based on a good faith 
dispute over the employee’s factual or legal entitlement to benefits, an award of penalty 
benefits is not appropriate under the statute.  Whether the issue was fairly debatable 
turns on whether there was a disputed factual dispute that, if resolved in favor of the 
employer, would have supported the employer's denial of compensability.  Gilbert v. 
USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001). 
In this case, I found that defendants did not offer a reasonable excuse for the 
delay in payment of permanent partial disability benefits after issuance of a permanent 
impairment rating by Dr. Smith in October 2023.  Iowa Code section 10A.315(4)(b)(2).  
Defendants did not contemporaneously convey their bases for delay of benefits.  Iowa 
Code section 10A.315(4)(c)(3).  Defendants bore the burden to establish a reasonable 
basis, or excuse, and to prove the contemporaneous conveyance of those bases to the 
claimant.  Defendants failed to carry their burden of proof on the penalty issues, and a 
penalty award is appropriate.  Iowa Code section 10A.315(4). 
With respect to the issue of underpayment of claimant’s weekly rate, I also found 
that defendants failed to have a reasonable basis for the weekly rate they paid.  I found 
claimant’s weekly rate was higher than was paid by defendants.  Given that defendants’ 
weekly rate had no basis in fact, and they offered no evidence that they conveyed the 
basis for their rate or payment at a rate less than alleged by claimant, I again conclude 
a penalty benefit in some amount is appropriate and required.  Iowa Code section 
10A.315(4). 
The purpose of Iowa Code section 10A.315 is both punishment for unreasonable 
conduct but also deterrence for future cases.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 237.  In this 
regard, the Commission is given discretion to determine the amount of the penalty 
imposed with a maximum penalty of 50 percent of the amount of the delayed, or denied, 
benefits.  Christensen v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 261 (Iowa 1996).   
In exercising its discretion, the agency must consider factors such as the length 
of the delays, the number of delays, the information available to the employer regarding 
the employee’s injury and wages, and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Meyers 
v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502, 505 (Iowa 1996).  Defendants offered no 
delay or justification for their delay in payment of permanent partial disability benefits, 
though the delay is not egregious or ongoing.  The delay or underpayment of the weekly 
rate was an ongoing issue and defendants’ rate had no basis in fact.  This is an 
aggravating factor that suggests a more significant penalty is necessary for punitive 
purposes and to prevent future action of this type.  Neither party put evidence on, or 
offered argument, about the information available to the employer or the employer’s 
past record of penalties. 

SCHORE V. AMAZON.COM SERVICES, INC. 
Page 16 
 
Having considered the relevant factors and the purposes of the penalty statute, I 
conclude that a section 10A.315 penalty in the amount of $2,500.00 is appropriate in 
this case.  Such an amount is appropriate to punish the employer for delays in payment 
of permanent partial disability benefits and underpayment of claimant’s rate.  A penalty 
in this amount is justified under these facts and should serve as a deterrent against 
future conduct.  However, the facts of this case are not of such an egregious nature that 
an additional penalty is warranted.  
The final disputed issue is whether costs should be assessed against either 
party.  Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency.  Iowa Code section 10A.328.  
In this case, claimant receives an award of permanent partial disability benefits.  
Exercising the agency’s discretion, I conclude that claimant’s costs should be assessed 
in some amount. 
Claimant seeks reimbursement of his filing fee, which is a reasonable and 
permissible cost.  876 IAC 4.33(7).  I conclude defendants should be ordered to 
reimburse claimant’s filing fee in the amount of $103.00. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendant shall pay claimant three hundred (300) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits commencing on September 9, 2023. 
All weekly benefits shall be payable at the weekly rate of four hundred thirty-two 
and 34/100 dollars ($432.34) per week. 
Defendant is entitled to the stipulated credit for weekly benefits paid to claimant. 
If additional weekly benefits are owed after the aforementioned credits are taken 
and applied, interest shall be payable at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury 
constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled 
as of the date of injury, plus two percent. See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File 
No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018). 
Defendants shall pay claimant two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) in 
penalty benefits. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of one hundred three 
dollars ($103.00). 
If they have not already done so, defendants shall reimburse claimant’s 
independent medical evaluation pursuant to their agreement and my order at the 
commencement of the arbitration hearing. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 

SCHORE V. AMAZON.COM SERVICES, INC. 
Page 17 
 
Signed and filed this ___20th___ day of August, 2024. 
 
 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Nick Platt 
 
 (via WCES) 
Alison Stewart 
 (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days from the date 
above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ 
Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the 
following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, 
Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a 
weekend or legal holiday. 
   WILLIAM H. GRELL 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
