Case Number: 22700150.01
Case Title:  SCEARCY, WILLIAM V. CITY OF DES MOINES
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Scearcy William-22700150.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
WILLIAM SCEARCY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
File No. 22700150.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
 
  :               ARBITRATION DECISION 
CITY OF DES MOINES, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
     Head Notes: 1400; 1402; 1803 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
The claimant, William Scearcy, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from self-insured employer, City of Des Moines (“Des Moines”).  
Christopher Spaulding appeared on behalf of the claimant.  Molly Tracy appeared on 
behalf of the defendant.  Also present were Reagan Peterson, an assistant city attorney, 
and Payton Kitterman, a law clerk in the claimant’s office.   
 
The matter came on for hearing on May 31, 2023, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips.  Pursuant to an order of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, the hearing occurred electronically via Zoom.  
The hearing proceeded without significant difficulty.  
 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibit 1, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-2, and 
Defendant’s Exhibits A-E.   
The claimant testified on his own behalf.  SueAnn Jones was appointed the 
official reporter and custodian of the notes of the proceeding.  The evidentiary record 
closed at the end of the hearing, and the matter was fully submitted after the parties 
filed post-hearing briefing on June 22, 2023.     
STIPULATIONS 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged 
injury.   
 
2. That the claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the course of 
employment, on February 8, 2022. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Aug-29  10:38:33     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SCEARCY V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 2 
 
3. That the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery.   
 
4. That, if the injury is found to be a cause of permanent disability, the disability 
is a scheduled member disability to the hand.   
 
5. That the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any 
are awarded is February 24, 2022.   
 
6. That, at the time of the alleged injury, the claimant’s gross earnings were one 
thousand two hundred ten and 07/100 dollars ($1,210.07), per week, the 
claimant was single and entitled to one exemption, providing the claimant with 
an agreed upon rate of seven hundred thirty-two and 56/100 dollars 
($732.56).   
 
7. That the costs in Claimant’s Exhibit 2 have been paid.   
 
Entitlement to temporary disability and/or healing period benefits was no longer 
in dispute.  Credits are also no longer in dispute.  The defendant waived their affirmative 
defenses.     
 
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability.   
  
2. The extent of permanent disability benefits, should any be awarded.   
 
3. Whether the claimant is entitled to reimbursement for the costs of an 
independent medical examination (“IME”) pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.39.   
 
4. Whether a specific taxation of costs is appropriate.   
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
William Scearcy, the claimant, resides in Des Moines, Iowa.  (Testimony).  He 
was born in 1956. (Testimony).  At the time of his injury, he was single, with three adult 
kids.  (Testimony).  He graduated from high school in Des Moines in 1974, and attended 
a theology class following his graduation.  (Testimony).  However, he never received a 
degree or certification.  (Testimony).   

SCEARCY V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 3 
 
 
For the last 41 years, Mr. Scearcy worked for Des Moines.  (Testimony).  Initially, 
he worked as an animal control officer.  (Defendant’s Exhibit E:23).  Since 1989, he has 
been working in sewer maintenance for the Department of Public Works.  (Testimony).  
Specifically, Mr. Scearcy is a sewer maintenance worker.  (DE A:1).  Among other job 
duties, Mr. Scearcy uses a sledgehammer and jackhammer.  (Testimony).  Some of his 
other job duties included cleaning sewers, digging ditches and trenches, backfilling 
holes around pipes, repairing breaks in sewer lines, cleaning catchbasins, cleaning 
culverts, operating air hammers, pumps, and compressors, and occasionally driving 
light trucks.  (DE A:1).  About one year prior to the hearing, Des Moines upgraded their 
equipment to provide workers with better drill bits and make their jobs easier.  
(Testimony).   
 
Included in the record are claims notes from EMC Risk Services, LLC (“EMC”).  
(DE B:2-13).  Some of these notes predate the alleged date of injury in this matter.  The 
notes begin on August 16, 2019, with a note that Mr. Scearcy originally called EMC on 
August 12, 2019, alleging a diagnosis by his personal doctor of work-related bilateral 
carpal tunnel issues.  (DE B:13).  Mr. Scearcy indicated that he had surgery planned for 
the next Wednesday and that “it needs to be paid for.”  (DE B:13).  The claims associate 
from EMC informed Mr. Scearcy that no claim had been turned in, and that he needed 
to report it to his employer.  (DE B:13).   
 
Following the August 12, 2019, phone call, EMC called “Roxanne at DMOS” on 
August 13, 2019, to inform her of the claimant’s allegations of work-related bilateral 
carpal tunnel.  (DE B:12).  EMC told DMOS that they were not authorizing the surgery 
on Wednesday, to which they were told that the claimant simply had an appointment 
scheduled for the upcoming week, and not a surgery.  (DE B:12).  EMC informed DMOS 
that any appointments were not authorized, and requested a copy of the previous 
medical records.  (DE B:12).   
 
Included in EMC’s claims notes is a summary of a visit of the claimant with “Dr. 
Rodgers” at DMOS on August 14, 2019.  (DE B:12).  Mr. Scearcy told the doctor that his 
left hand felt weak and no longer worked like it used to.  (DE B:12).  He also noted 
“postural and nocturnal paresthesias.”  (DE B:12).  Mr. Scearcy expressed an interest in 
surgery, and was told that he should decide on filing a workers’ compensation claim.  
(DE B:12).  Surgery would be scheduled “once we get work comp [sic] approval.”  (DE 
B:12).   
 
Mr. Scearcy reported an injury to his bilateral wrists on August 16, 2019.  (DE 
C:14).  Namely, this was “[c]arpul [sic] [t]unnel in both hands,” which Mr. Scearcy’s 
personal doctor recommended that he “report … to the city.”  (DE C:14).  The cause 
was noted as “[u]nsure.  Constant repetitive work over long periods of time.”  (DE C:14).   
 
On August 19, 2019, an adjuster from EMC spoke to a “Dr. Penix,” who indicated 
that the claimant required restrictions even though the underlying carpal tunnel issues 
were “undetermined” as related to work.  (DE B:12).  “Dr. Penix” also made mention of 
cubital tunnel issues which needed to be addressed.  (DE B:12).   
 
The adjuster also reviewed a medical record from an August 19, 2019, visit with 
UnityPoint.  (DE B:9-10).  The claimant complained of pain in both of his hands due to 

SCEARCY V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 4 
 
use of jackhammers and heavy tools.  (DE B:9).  Pain was most severe in his left hand, 
which also had issues with grip.  (DE B:9).  Mr. Scearcy felt strongly that his injuries 
were work related.  (DE B:9).  The doctor requested additional medical records to 
review to determine if the issues were work related, and then placed the claimant on 
modified duty with limited grasping, pinching, and repetitive wrist and elbow motions.  
(DE B:10).   
 
A record from August 20, 2019, contains a note summarizing the results of a 
recorded statement taken from Mr. Scearcy.  (DE B:11).  Mr. Scearcy recounted a 
history of bilateral elbow tendonitis.  (DE B:11).  Recently, he had issues sleeping, so he 
visited “Dr. Brown,” who thought that he may have a work-related issue.  (DE B:11).  
“Dr. Brown” referred the claimant for some testing, which “confirmed he had carpal 
tunnel in both wrist[s].”  (DE B:11).  He saw several other providers, including “Dr. 
Rogers [sic],” who opined that the claimant had cubital tunnel, and provided him with 
braces.  (DE B:11).  Mr. Scearcy indicated that he knew when he saw “Dr. Brown” in 
late May of 2019 that the issue was work related.  (DE B:11).   
 
Des Moines, through EMC, denied the initial claim.  (DE B:3).  Mr. Scearcy 
expressed disappointment with this decision.  (DE B:5).   
 
On February 8, 2022, Mr. Scearcy was drilling a hole in a street.  (Testimony).  
He had to manipulate the drill when it twisted back and caused his left wrist to torque.  
(Testimony).  Mr. Scearcy also reported a similar incident having occurred on January 
30, 2020.  (DE E:27).   
 
Following the February 8, 2022 incident, on February 9, 2022, Mr. Scearcy 
reported to UnityPoint Occupational Medicine in Des Moines, Iowa.  (Joint Exhibit 1:1-
4).  He complained of a throbbing, sharp pain in his left hand after drilling a hole in the 
street.  (JE 1:2).  He checked a box on the intake form indicating he had a similar injury 
in the past and wrote, “SAME THING.”  (JE 1:2).  Judith Nayeri, D.O., examined the 
claimant.  (JE 1:4).  Mr. Scearcy recounted the drill or jackhammer twisting after 20 
minutes of use causing him to develop left wrist pain.  (JE 1:4).  He rated his pain 7 to 8 
out of 10.  (JE 1:4).  He also had a shooting pain from his thumb to his wrist.  (JE 1:4).  
Upon examination, Mr. Scearcy demonstrated normal range of motion without pain, and 
normal grip strength.  (JE 1:4).  Dr. Nayeri reviewed x-rays, which showed moderate 
degenerative changes at the first carpometacarpal joint with mild degenerative changes 
at the “STT” joint.  (JE 1:4).  Dr. Nayeri characterized this as a “considerable amount of 
degenerative joint disease.”  (JE 1:4).  She diagnosed Mr. Scearcy with left wrist 
pain/strain, and a left thumb strain.  (JE 1:4).  She allowed the claimant to continue 
working, but restricted him from using vibrating or twisting tools.  (JE 1:4).  He could use 
his hand as tolerated, and was asked to wear a wrist splint until his next follow-up visit.  
(JE 1:4).   
 
Kate Swift, A.R.N.P., examined Mr. Scearcy on February 24, 2022, at UnityPoint 
Occupational Medicine.  (JE 1:5).  Mr. Scearcy felt improved since the initial visit.  (JE 
1:5).  He took Tylenol and wore his wrist splint during the day.  (JE 1:5).  The claimant 
denied any pain, numbness, or tingling in his left wrist, and as such rated his pain 0 out 
of 10.  (JE 1:5).  Upon palpation, the claimant demonstrated no pain in his left wrist or 

SCEARCY V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 5 
 
thumb.  (JE 1:5).  He demonstrated the ability to make a fist and extend all of his digits.  
(JE 1:5).  Ms. Swift reiterated the diagnoses provided by Dr. Nayeri.  (JE 1:5).  Mr. 
Scearcy told her that he felt he could do his job on “regular duty.”  (JE 1:5).  Ms. Swift 
released him to full duty.  (JE 1:5-6).  She discharged him from care with no plans for a 
return appointment.  (JE 1:5-6).   
 
At the arrangement of claimant’s counsel, the claimant had an IME with Sunil 
Bansal, M.D., M.P.H., on August 18, 2022.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 1:1-7).  Dr. Bansal is 
board certified in occupational medicine.  (CE 1:1).  Dr. Bansal began his report by 
reviewing the medical records noted above.  (CE 1:2).  Throughout the report, Dr. 
Bansal makes mention of the claimant’s previous carpal tunnel syndrome.  (CE 1:1-7).  
This is noted as for “Second Injury Fund” purposes.  (CE 1:3).  The Second Injury Fund 
is not a party to this matter, having previously resolved the claims against them.  He 
also interviewed the claimant, who recounted the injury and that the machine “jerked 
and twisted his wrist.”  (CE 1:2-3).  The claimant also recalled pain, numbness, and 
tingling in his left wrist and left thumb, which later became swollen.  (CE 1:3).  Dr. 
Bansal noted that Mr. Scearcy had bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome, and was scheduled 
for carpal tunnel release surgeries to both hands in October of 2022.  (CE 1:3).  Mr. 
Scearcy also told Dr. Bansal that he was previously diagnosed with arthritis in his left 
hand, but that he did not seek treatment for this condition.  (CE 1:3).   
 
At the time of the examination, Mr. Scearcy had pain, numbness, and tingling in 
his left hand.  (CE 1:3).  He noted that numbness and tingling were “particularly intense 
at night,” and that the issues woke him up.  (CE 1:3).  In spite of this, Mr. Scearcy felt 
that he had no issues with his grip strength.  (CE 1:3).  Upon physical examination Dr. 
Bansal observed tenderness to palpation in the volar aspect and carpometacarpal joint 
of the left wrist.  (CE 1:3).  Mr. Scearcy also displayed a loss of two-point sensory 
discrimination over the long finger.  (CE 1:3).  Dr. Bansal performed range of motion 
testing, and found the claimant to have 60 degrees of flexion, 60 degrees of extension, 
20 degrees of radial deviation, and 30 degrees of ulnar deviation.  (CE 1:4).  Dr. Bansal 
also tested the carpometacarpal joint motion in the left hand.  (CE 1:4).  He found thumb 
“MP” flexion of 31 degrees, thumb “IP” flexion of 49 degrees, and opposition lack of 1 
cm.  (CE 1:4).  Dr. Bansal performed grip strength testing with a dynamometer for both 
the left and right hands.  (CE 1:4).  The right wrist showed grip strength of 41 kg, 42 kg, 
and 42 kg.  (CE 1:4).  The left wrist showed grip strength of 35 kg, 33 kg, and 33 kg.  
(CE 1:4).   
 
Dr. Bansal diagnosed Mr. Scearcy with an aggravation of carpometacarpal 
arthritis, and left carpal tunnel syndrome.  (CE 1:5).  Dr. Bansal felt that “[t]he 
mechanism of having his left wrist and thumb sharply jerked and twisted by the 
jackhammer is consistent with the aggravation of his carpometacarpal joint arthritis.”  
(CE 1:6).  Therefore, Dr. Bansal concluded that the left hand or wrist injury and “the 
disability resulting therefrom” was caused by the claimant’s employment with Des 
Moines.  (CE 1:6).  Dr. Bansal referred to Figures 16-12, 16-15, 16-8a, and 16-9 of the 
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, in opining that 
the claimant suffered a permanent impairment.  (CE 1:5).  Based upon those portions, 
Dr. Bansal opined that the MP flexion of the thumb at 31 degrees resulted in a 4 percent 

SCEARCY V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 6 
 
thumb impairment, while the IP flexion of the thumb at 49 degrees resulted in a 2 
percent thumb impairment, and that the opposition lack of 1 cm resulted in a 1 percent 
thumb impairment.  (CE 1:5).  The result of the foregoing impairment percentages was a 
7 percent thumb impairment, a 3 percent hand impairment, or a 3 percent upper 
extremity impairment.  (CE 1:5).  Dr. Bansal then provided impairment based upon 
carpal tunnel syndrome for “SIF,” which presumably refers to the Second Injury Fund.  
(CE 1:5).  This impairment was 1 percent due to sensory deficits in the left hand.  (CE 
1:5).  Dr. Bansal placed the claimant at maximum medical improvement (“MMI”) as of 
February 24, 2022, recommended no further treatment, and provided a permanent 
restriction to avoid the use of vibrating hand tools.  (CE 1:6-7).   
 
Mr. Scearcy sought no care after seeing his own doctor because he received a 
second opinion.  (Testimony).   
 
At the time of the hearing, Mr. Scearcy was back to work at full-duty with the 
same department.  (Testimony).  He testified that this was because he wanted to return 
to work.  (Testimony).  He described continued symptoms, including difficulty donning 
gloves, difficulty gripping knives, and pain in his thumb when he twists.  (Testimony).  
He described dropping things, numbness, and shooting pain in his left hand up to his 
shoulder.  (Testimony).  He also testified to pain at night below his left thumb.  
(Testimony).   
 
During his deposition, Mr. Scearcy indicated that he had “ghost pains” in his 
hands.  (DE E:34-35).  Mr. Scearcy could not remember when he began experiencing 
ghost pain in his hand.  (Testimony).  He has a history of bilateral carpal tunnel, and 
was asked on cross-examination how he did not know that his current issues were due 
to his carpal tunnel issues.  (Testimony).  Mr. Scearcy could not explain how he knew 
the issues were not related, but asserted that they were not.  (Testimony).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.904(3).   
Permanent Disability 
 
The claimant alleges that the February 8, 2022, work incident and injury to his left 
wrist caused a permanent impairment to his left hand and wrist.   
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is 
probable, rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 
148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); 
Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).   
 
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 

SCEARCY V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 7 
 
2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156.  When considering 
the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination 
occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the 
nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and 
practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  
Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985).  Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994).  Supportive lay testimony may be used 
to buttress expert testimony, and therefore is also relevant and material to the causation 
question.   
 
Iowa employers take an employee subject to any active or dormant health 
problems, and must exercise care to avoid injury to both the weak and infirm and the 
strong and healthy.  Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 176 N.W. 823 (1920).  While a 
claimant must show that the injury proximately caused the medical condition sought to 
be compensable, it is well established that a cause is “proximate” when it is a 
substantial factor, or even the primary or most substantial cause to be compensable 
under the Iowa workers’ compensation system.  Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 
N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 
1980).   
 
The claimant has a pre-existing carpal tunnel issue, which workers’ 
compensation denied.  He planned on having surgery to repair the carpal tunnel issues.  
Mr. Scearcy was asked about his “ghost pains” in his left hand.  He could not recall 
when the “ghost pains” began, and also could not explain how he knew his current 
issues were unrelated to his left wrist carpal tunnel syndrome.   
 
The claimant alleges that he was drilling a hole in a street on February 8, 2022, 
when the drill twisted and caused his left wrist to torque.  He further alleges that he 
developed shooting pain in the left wrist from his thumb to his wrist.  He was examined 
by a physician on February 9, 2022, for his alleged injury, and noted he had a similar 
injury in the past.  He even recorded “SAME THING” in a medical record.  He was 
diagnosed with a left wrist pain, a left wrist strain, and a left thumb strain.  An x-ray 
showed moderate degenerative changes at the first carpometacarpal joint with mild 
degenerative changes to another joint.  The doctor allowed the claimant to work, but 
recommended that the claimant avoid working with vibratory or twisting tools.   
 
By a February 24, 2022, follow-up with Nurse Practitioner Kate Swift, Mr. 
Scearcy noted improvement to his issues.  He denied numbness, pain, or tingling in his 
left wrist.  He showed no pain on palpation, and he rated his pain 0 out of 10.  Mr. 
Scearcy testified that he was never asked to rate his pain.  However, elements of 
evidence give me reason to question Mr. Scearcy’s credibility, as will be discussed 
further below.  Mr. Scearcy felt that he could perform his position without restrictions on 
“regular duty.”  Ms. Swift discharged the claimant from care with no restrictions or plans 
for a return appointment.   

SCEARCY V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 8 
 
 
Mr. Scearcy had an IME with Dr. Bansal in August of 2022.  Dr. Bansal opined 
that the claimant suffered an aggravation to his carpometacarpal arthritis, and left carpal 
tunnel syndrome when the tool jerked and twisted the left wrist.  Based upon this 
mechanism of injury, Dr. Bansal opined that the claimant sustained a permanent 
impairment.  Dr. Bansal performed certain measurements, and an examination.  Based 
upon his application of the Guides, Dr. Bansal opined that the claimant had a 7 percent 
thumb impairment, a 3 percent hand impairment, or a 3 percent upper extremity 
impairment.  Dr. Bansal placed the claimant at MMI as of February 24, 2022, and 
recommended no further treatment.   
 
The evidence in this case supports that the claimant suffered an injury at work on 
February 8, 2022.  He subsequently treated with UnityPoint on two occasions.  During 
his February 24, 2022, visit, Mr. Scearcy reported no pain.  He also demonstrated no 
pain upon palpation.  During that visit, Mr. Scearcy expressed a desire to return to work 
on “regular duty.”  The nurse practitioner that examined Mr. Scearcy allowed him to 
return to work without restrictions and with no recommendation for additional medical 
care.  No treating provider opined as to any permanent impairment on behalf of the 
claimant. 
 
The only opinion that points to a permanent impairment on behalf of the claimant 
is that of Dr. Bansal.  Dr. Bansal cannot explain why the claimant had no pain and then 
suddenly began to experience pain by the time of his IME.  Neither Dr. Bansal, nor Mr. 
Scearcy, could explain how the claimant’s current pain issues were unconnected from 
his pre-existing carpal tunnel pain.  I would note that I am not summarily rejecting Dr. 
Bansal’s opinions.  The claimant’s own statements and medical records undercut his 
claims to Dr. Bansal, and Dr. Bansal’s report.  Namely, the claimant indicated that he 
had no pain during his February 24, 2022, visit with the nurse practitioner.  He also 
exhibited no pain behaviors during that visit.  Finally, the visit concluded with Mr. 
Scearcy being allowed to work full-time, full-duty with no need for additional medical 
care.  While not determinative in and of itself, it is an objective indication of a lack of 
permanency.  Additionally, Dr. Bansal’s report is based only upon medical records 
following the alleged February 8, 2022, work injury.  Dr. Bansal did not review, or have 
access to, the considerable medical records related to the claimant’s previous carpal 
tunnel issues.  This casts serious doubt on the thoroughness of information relied upon 
by Dr. Bansal.   
 
Above, I made mention of credibility issues with the claimant.  The defendant 
astutely notes in their posthearing brief that the claimant told a prior workers’ 
compensation claims adjuster that he was scheduled to have bilateral carpal tunnel 
surgery.  (DE B:13).  This was later shown to be a mistake, as the doctor’s office 
indicated that a surgery was never scheduled.  (DE B:13).  Additionally, the claimant 
denied being diagnosed with carpal tunnel during his deposition.  (DE E).  The claimant 
also denied in his deposition that he ever sought workers’ compensation benefits in 
2019, which is false.  (DE B, E).   
 
Based upon the foregoing, the claimant failed to meet his burden of proof by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the February 8, 2022, work injury caused a 

SCEARCY V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 9 
 
permanent disability.  He also did not prove that it was a permanent aggravation of his 
pre-existing carpal tunnel issues. 
Reimbursement for IME pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39   
 
The claimant seeks reimbursement for the IME and subsequent report of Dr. 
Bansal in the amount of two thousand seven hundred eighty-nine and 00/100 dollars 
($2,789.00).  The defendant makes no argument in their posthearing brief as to this 
issue; however, it is still the claimant’s burden to prove entitlement thereto. 
 
Iowa Code 85.39(2) states:   
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and upon 
delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its insurance 
carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, and reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses incurred for the examination.     
 
. . .    
An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined to be compensable under this 
chapter or chapter 85A or 85B.  An employer is not liable for the cost of 
such an examination if the injury for which the employee is being examined 
is determined not to be a compensable injury.  A determination of the 
reasonableness of a fee for an examination made pursuant to this 
subsection shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider 
to perform an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is 
conducted.     
Iowa Code section 85.39(2).     
 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant’s 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  An opinion finding 
a lack of causation is tantamount to a zero percent impairment rating.  Kern v. Fenchel, 
Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 2021 WL 3890603 (Iowa App. 2021).     
 
No doctor retained by the defendant provided any opinions as to permanent 
impairment, nor did any doctor opine as to causation.  Therefore, the defendant is not 
responsible for reimbursing Dr. Bansal’s IME fees.   
Costs   
 
Claimant seeks the award of costs.  Specifically, the claimant seeks costs of the 
filing fee and Dr. Bansal’s IME report.  Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the 

SCEARCY V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 10 
 
deputy commissioner hearing the case.  See 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33; Iowa 
Code section 86.40.  876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33(6) provides:    
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes.     
 
Pursuant to the holding in Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 
867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015), only the report of an IME physician, and not the 
examination itself, can be taxed as a cost according to 876 IAC 4.33(6).  The Iowa 
Supreme Court reasoned, “a physician’s report becomes a cost incurred in a hearing 
because it is used as evidence in lieu of the doctor’s testimony,” while “[t]he underlying 
medical expenses associated with the examination do not become costs of a report 
needed for a hearing, just as they do not become costs of the testimony or deposition.”  
Id.  (Noting additionally that “[i]n the context of the assessment of costs, the expenses of 
the underlying medical treatment and examination are not part of the costs of the report 
or deposition”).  The commissioner has found this rationale applicable to expenses 
incurred by vocational experts.  See Kirkendall v. Cargill Meat Solutions Corp., File No. 
5055494 (App. December 17, 2018); Voshell v. Compass Group, USA, Inc., File No. 
5056857 (App. September 27, 2019).     
 
In my discretion I decline to award the claimant costs. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
That the claimant shall take nothing further. 
 
That the defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by 
this agency pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 3.1(2) and 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 11.7.   
 
 
 
 
 

SCEARCY V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 11 
 
Signed and filed this ___29th ___ day of August, 2023. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Christopher Spaulding (via WCES) 
Molly Tracy (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
