Case Number: 23011294.01
Case Title:  RAYMUNDO PEREZ, DIEGO (DEC) V. PEREZ ROOFING & CONSTRUCTION, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Raymundo Perez Diego-23011294.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
CATARINA GUZARO, as surviving 
  : 
dependent, and as mother and next 
  : 
friend of MARIA RAYMUNDO PEREZ,   : 
 
   File No. 23011294.01 
surviving child of DIEGO RAYMUNDO 
  : 
PEREZ (DEC.), 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
           ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
                  
 
 
  :         
PEREZ ROOFING & CONSTRUCTION,  : 
 
     
INC.,    
  : 
 
 
  :                            
 
Uninsured Employer, 
  : 
         Head Notes:  1402.10, 2001, 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
 
 
 
2002, 2907 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Catarina Guzaro, as surviving dependent, and as mother and next friend of Maria 
Raymundo Perez, surviving child of Diego Raymundo Perez, claimant, filed a petition in 
arbitration seeking workers’ compensation benefits from Perez Roofing and 
Construction, employer, as defendant.   
Pursuant to agency procedure, on September 18, 2023, the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner issued a Hearing Assignment Order (HAO).  The HAO set 
this case for hearing on March 28, 2024.  The HAO also set forth additional information 
regarding the hearing, discovery deadlines, and evidence.  Hearing was held via Zoom 
videoconference on March 28, 2024.     
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  The 
hearing report was reviewed at the outset of the hearing.  Paragraph 8 of the hearing 
report was amended to reflect that the itemized list of medical expenses is set forth in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 6.  Paragraph 8(c) was amended to state “stipulated.”  (Hearing 
Transcript, pp. 9-12)  All of the stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated 
into this arbitration decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Catarina Guzaro Ramirez, Gregorio Domingo Maton Perez, Yingrein Alvarado 
Velasquez, Juan Eliu Lopez Raymundo, and Domingo Elias Raymundo Perez all 
testified live at trial.  The evidentiary record also includes Claimant’s Exhibits 1-8 and 
Defendant’s Exhibits A-AE.  No joint exhibits were offered in this case. On March 19, 
2024 defendant filed a motion to exclude all of claimant’s exhibits from evidence on the 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Aug-19  14:32:59     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

RAYMUNDO PEREZ V. PEREZ ROOFING & CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 2 
 
basis of hearsay and authentication.  Defendant’s objection was overruled and 
claimant’s exhibits were admitted into evidence.  Defendant’s Exhibits A-AE were 
received without objection. (Tr. pp. 12-14) At the outset of the hearing counsel for the 
defendant sought to admit additional exhibits into the record.  The proposed exhibits 
were an affidavit and an audio recording of the affiant, neither of which had been 
disclosed to the claimant in a timely fashion.  Even at the time of hearing, claimant’s 
counsel still had not been provided a copy of the affidavit or the audio recording. The 
affiant was not available for the hearing; therefore, claimant would not have had an 
opportunity for cross-examination.  I found that the affidavit and the audio recording 
were not timely disclosed and the admission of the affidavit and/or the audio recording 
would be unfairly prejudicial to the claimant.  Defendant’s request to submit the affidavit 
and/or audio recording as an exhibit was denied.  (Tr. pp. 17-31) The evidentiary record 
closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.       
An interpreter was used during the testimony portions of the proceeding.  The 
first interpreter for the proceeding was Brandon Penny.  Pursuant to the HAO, the case 
was scheduled for 3.0 hours.  The case lasted longer than 3.0 hours and Mr. Penny had 
another interpreting job he had to attend.  Therefore, midway through the hearing the 
interpreter changed to Lourdes Jimenez.   
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on June 2, 2024, and June 3, 2024, 
with the case fully submitted on June 3, 2024, to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. Whether there was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the 
alleged December 21, 2020 work injury. 
2. Whether Diego Raymundo Perez sustained an injury which arose out of and 
in the course of employment on December 21, 2020. 
3. Whether claimant’s claim is barred by operation of Iowa Code section 85.26, 
for lack of timely notice. 
4. Whether Catarina Guzaro and/or the minor daughter were dependents of 
Diego. 
5. The appropriate weekly workers’ compensation rate. 
6. Whether defendant is responsible for past medical expenses. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 

RAYMUNDO PEREZ V. PEREZ ROOFING & CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
 On December 21, 2020, Diego Raymundo Perez (“Diego”) fell off a two-story 
home while performing his roofing job.  (Tr. pp. 92-93) Tragically, he died on December 
22, 2020. (Claimant’s Exhibit 8, pp. 80-89) Catarina Guzaro Ramirez (“Catarina”) was 
Diego’s girlfriend. (Tr. p. 35) She testified that at the time of the accident she was living 
with Diego, along with their infant daughter who was born on October 24, 2020.  (Tr. pp. 
34-35; Cl. Ex. 5)    
 
Catarina learned of Diego’s accident when his mother and then one of his 
brothers, Elias Raymundo Perez, called to tell her that Diego had fallen off a house.  
(Tr. pp. 45, 48) Elias told her they were taking Diego to St. Luke’s Emergency Room.  
(Tr. p. 46) Catarina went to the hospital but was unable to speak with Diego because he 
was not conscious.  (Tr. pp. 48-49) 
Diego’s older brother, Gregorio Domingo Maton Perez (“Gregorio”), was at the 
job site on the day of Diego’s fall.  (Tr. p. 126, line 23-Tr. p. 127, line 5) Gregorio is the 
owner of Perez Roofing.  (Tr. p. 104) Gregorio was there because it was the first day of 
the job, so he needed to be there to show Diego the expectations of the job. (Tr. p. 127) 
He was not there to perform the work.  (Tr. p. 139) Gregorio testified that Diego was 
performing his normal roofing duties when he fell.  (Tr. p. 128) According to Gregorio, 
Diego fell from the roof of a two-story home.  (Tr. p. 127) He was the one who drove 
Diego to the hospital and told the medical staff that Diego had slipped and fallen on ice.  
(Tr. pp. 127-128) Gregorio testified that they did not want any companies to get in 
trouble, so they did not report that he fell off a roof.  (Tr. p. 128) 
At the hospital Gregorio advised Catarina that if she told the medical providers 
that Diego had fallen off a roof she would get in trouble.  (Tr. pp. 92-93, 97) Because 
Catarina did not want to cause any problems between brothers, and it had already been 
reported that Diego had fallen on a flight of stairs, she did not say anything to the 
medical providers about Diego falling off a roof.  (Tr. p. 93)  
 
The emergency records state that Diego was a 21-year-old male with witnessed 
slip and fall on ice striking the back or side of his head with immediate loss of 
consciousness and witnessed seizure activity.  (Cl. Ex. 8, pp. 38, 77) His brother 
witnessed the slip and fall.  The patient was placed in a personal vehicle and brought to 
the emergency room.  (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 77) Diego was admitted to the hospital with 
traumatic intracranial hemorrhage, small subdural hemorrhage/bilateral subarachnoid 
hemorrhage/frontal contusion; seizure; herniation; anoxic brain injury; multiple skull 
fractures/basilar skull fracture/fracture involving right carotid canal. (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 79) 
Neurosurgical opinion was sought from the University of Iowa.  Unfortunately, the level 
of brain injury rendered was not compatible with life.  (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 85) The notes stated, 
“[p]atient’s injuries are not consistent with the patient slipping and falling on the back of 
his head.” (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 64) Sadly, Diego passed away on December 22, 2020. (Cl. Ex. 
8, pp. 80-89)   
 
The initial dispute in this case is whether there was an employee-employer 
relationship between Diego and Perez Roofing at the time of the tragic December 21, 
2020 accident.  Claimant contends Diego was an employee of Perez Roofing.  

RAYMUNDO PEREZ V. PEREZ ROOFING & CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 4 
 
Defendant contends that Diego had his own company, D & C Exteriors, Inc., and he 
was not an employee of Perez Roofing.   
   
Gregorio testified that for the past six years he has been the sole owner of Perez 
Roofing, a roofing and siding business. (Tr. p. 104) Prior to Perez Roofing, Diego and 
Gregorio worked together as subcontractors at Garcia Construction. (Tr. pp. 41, 141) 
While they were working at Garcia Construction, Gregorio formed Perez Construction.  
(Tr. p. 41) Diego left Garcia Construction to work at his brother’s company.  (Tr. p. 63)  
Gregorio testified that initially Perez Roofing had employees. However, his 
accountant, Richard Arthur, advised him that he should not be hiring any more 
employees. (Tr. pp. 104-105) According to Gregorio, while doing his taxes for his first 
year in business, Richard said, “you can’t have all these people working for you.  It’s 
going to – it’s going to cause problems.  What you need to do is work – work with just 
other contractors.”  (Tr. p. 105) Gregorio testified that after receiving that advice, he 
continued to work as a contractor and only contracted other contractors; he did not have 
employees. (Tr. pp. 105-106) Some of the individuals that Gregorio had considered 
employees continued to work for him as contractors.  (Tr. p. 106)      
 
When he was asked how Diego was paid, Gregorio replied, 
So first I paid him with a company check from – Perez Roofing & 
Construction with a – with, you know, the form 1099, but then my 
accountant [Richard Arthur], you know, said, well, he’s supposedly a 1099 
employee but he’s not.  He’s not registered.  He’s not insured.  So he said 
he would need to register with the state and to get insured before he could 
have his – before I could pass work off to him. 
(Tr. p. 107, lines 11-19) 
 
The documents show that Perez Roofing issued Diego 1099 tax forms for the 
year 2019. (Ex.1) Gregorio testified that at first he paid Diego by the hour because 
Diego was just helping Gregorio. (Tr. pp. 107-108) Later he began to pay Diego by the 
job. (Tr. pp. 107-108)  
There is a Transaction Detail of a Perez Roofing bank account in evidence at 
Exhibit 4, page 9.  The bottom portion of the document lists payments made to Diego 
from March 27, 2020 through August 12, 2020, which totaled $19,200.00. (Ex. 4, p. 9) 
This averages approximately $967.00 per week. The top portion of the document lists 
payments made to D & C Exteriors, Inc., from August 18, 2020 through December 7, 
2020, which totaled $207,114.00.  (Ex. 4, p. 9) This averages approximately $12,945.00 
per week.      
D & C Exteriors was a company that Diego started.  (Defendant’s Exhibit C) The 
Articles of Incorporation for D & C Exteriors was filed with the Iowa Secretary of State 
on August 3, 2020. (Ex. C, p. 1; Ex. E, p. 1) The incorporator was Diego. (Ex. C, pp. 1, 
3) The address listed for D & C Exteriors was Diego’s residential address.  (Tr. p. 75; 

RAYMUNDO PEREZ V. PEREZ ROOFING & CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 5 
 
Ex. C, p. 2) The registered agent for D & C Exteriors is Richard Arthur.  (Ex. C, p. 1) D & 
C Exteriors was administratively dissolved effective September 28, 2022 for failure to 
deliver the 2022 Biennial Report as required by Iowa Code section 490.1622. (Ex. A, p. 
1) 
In August 2020 D & C Exteriors obtained Commercial General Liability insurance. 
(Ex. 2 & 3) Perez Roofing wrote the check to Farmers National for the insurance of D & 
C Exteriors. (Ex. 3, p. 8) The check is dated August 8 and in the amount of $2,508.84, 
the exact amount of the August 7 insurance quote. (Ex. 2, pp. 3-7; Ex. 3, p. 8) Gregorio 
testified he wrote the check for the insurance because Diego did not have the means to 
pay for it, so Diego asked him for an advance.  (Tr. p. 140) Gregorio said he gave him 
an advance because Diego was his brother.  (Tr. p. 140) 
D & C Exteriors opened a checking account at Hills Bank on August 14, 2020.  
(Ex. K) Diego was listed as the President of D & C Exteriors, and he was the sole signer 
for the account.  (Ex. K & L) On August 3, 2020, D & C Exteriors received an employer 
identification number. (Ex. W) On August 4, 2020, D & C Exteriors, Inc. received 
notification that as a new business with a likely federal tax deposit obligation, they were 
enrolled in the Electronic Federal Tax Payment System. (Ex. Y) 
There are copies of numerous checks from D & C Exteriors’ bank account to a 
number of individuals.  (Ex. Q, pp. 4-6; Ex. R, pp. 5-9; Ex. S, pp. 6-9; Ex. T, pp. 7-10; 
Ex. U, pp. 5-6) Catarina agreed that the checks from the D & C Exteriors’ bank account 
were signed by Diego.  (Tr. pp. 80, 83-84) Catarina was not familiar with most of the 
payee names listed on the D & C Exteriors’ checks.  (Tr. pp. 78-79)  Gregorio testified 
that he was only familiar with two of the names listed as payees; they previously 
performed roofing work for Perez Roofing, then they went to D & C Exteriors.  (Tr. pp. 
120-121) 
According to Catarina, D & C Exteriors, “was a company that Diego had – had 
opened to kind of help his brother, and so they would – they would make the checks to 
pay some of the employees.  Diego and Carlos opened that so that they wouldn’t have 
to pay so many taxes.”  (Tr. p. 42) Catarina testified that Diego went by both names, 
Diego and Carlos.  The “D” and “C” in D & C Exteriors came from the names “Diego” 
and “Carlos.”  (Tr. p. 43, 65) When Diego started D & C Exteriors, she and Diego went 
to an accountant in Iowa City. (Tr. p. 43)  
Catarina testified that “they were going to start that company [D & C Exteriors] in 
– in 2021, and they just – they just opened it beforehand. And Gregorio put money in 
the bank so that it wouldn’t – it wouldn’t expire or run out, but then they were going to 
open it in 2021.” (Tr. pp. 43-44) It was her understanding that Gregorio provided money 
for D & C Exteriors because Gregorio wanted to help Diego with his company so that 
Diego could make some money. (Tr. p. 44)  
When asked about the payments that Perez Roofing paid D & C Exteriors from 
August 18, 2020 to December 7, 2020 which totaled $207,114.00, Catarina stated, “[s]o 
I don’t know.  I only know that Diego said when they went to open the company his 

RAYMUNDO PEREZ V. PEREZ ROOFING & CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 6 
 
brother put money in the bank account to – to be able to finance the checks that would 
pay Gregorio’s employees.  I don’t know if he kept putting money in that account.”  (Tr. 
p. 67) She did not have access to the D & C Exteriors’ bank account.  I find that 
Catarina’s knowledge regarding the finances of D & C Exteriors was limited.  
I find that the Transaction Detail of a Perez Roofing & Construction, Inc. bank 
account demonstrates that once D & C Exteriors was established in August 2020, Perez 
Roofing paid D & C Exteriors, rather than Diego, and the amount of the payments 
increased dramatically.  (Ex. 4, p. 9) This is consistent with Gregorio’s testimony that 
initially he paid Diego by the hour, but later paid him by the job.  (Tr. pp. 107-108) 
After Diego started D & C Exteriors in August 2020, he continued to perform 
roofing work. (Tr. pp. 108-109) The materials for the roofing jobs he performed were not 
provided by Perez Roofing; the materials were provided by Garcia Construction.  (Tr. p. 
110) According to Gregorio, Garcia Construction was the general contractor who 
obtained the jobs and then contracted, by the job, with Perez Roofing. (Tr. pp. 113, 140-
141) Perez Roofing then contracted, by the job, with D & C Exteriors.  Garcia 
Construction paid Perez Roofing by the job.  (Tr. p. 144) Gregorio considered Diego to 
be his subcontractor.  (Tr. p. 140) The only subcontractor Perez Roofing ever employed 
was D & C Exteriors.  (Tr. p. 143) Gregorio had the option to contact a different 
contractor to perform work but he chose Diego.  He chose Diego because, “he’s my 
brother, and we support family, and I wanted him to thrive how I was thriving.  I wanted 
to thrive; and if the opportunity was there, I wanted it for him.”  (Tr. pp.114, 143) I find 
that Perez Roofing had the option to contact a different contractor to perform work.  
Additionally, I find there is no evidence that D & C Exteriors could not contract with other 
entities.  I find that either Perez Roofing or Diego (D & C Exteriors) had the right to 
terminate the relationship.   
At the beginning of a job, Gregorio would provide information to Diego regarding 
what Garcia Roofing wanted done. (Tr. pp. 113-114) Garcia Roofing did not deal directly 
with Diego. (Tr. p. 113) Gregorio was not at job sites daily to tell Diego what to do or 
how the work was to be performed.  Gregorio only inspected the jobs at the end to see if 
the work was done to the satisfaction of Garcia Construction.  (Tr. p. 141)  Diego did not 
have a set or regular work schedule; his schedule depended on the job.  (Tr. p. 113) 
There is no evidence that Gregorio had any control over how Diego accomplished the 
results.   
Catarina provided her understanding of Diego’s work. Catarina did not work with 
Diego.  She only went to his work site on approximately 2 occasions.  (Tr. p. 88) 
Understandably, much of the information she has regarding Diego’s work is not first-
hand information.  Diego worked replacing roofs. (Tr. p. 40) Catarina testified that on the 
date of the accident, December 21, 2020, Diego was working for Perez Roofing.  (Tr. 
pp. 39-40)  
Catarina testified she was not aware of any of Diego’s day-to-day work activities 
changing after D & C Exteriors was started.  (Tr. p. 44) It was her belief that Diego kept 
working for Perez Roofing and he never went out on his own.  (Tr. p. 44) According to 

RAYMUNDO PEREZ V. PEREZ ROOFING & CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 7 
 
Catarina, Diego provided his own tool belt where he carried his tools such as a hammer, 
nail gun, and staples. (Tr. p. 41) The tools Diego used were kept in a trailer that 
Gregorio would pull and keep in front of Gregorio’s house. (Tr. pp. 87-88) Gregorio 
testified that Diego was newer to roofing so initially Gregorio let Diego use his tools 
while Diego accumulated his own.  (Tr. pp. 112-113) Based on the evidence, I find it is 
not clear how many, if any, of Gregorio’s tools Diego may have been using in December 
2020.    
Diego told Catarina that his boss or supervisor was his brother, Gregorio. (Tr. p. 
42) It was her understanding that Gregorio would just go and check over the jobs. (Tr. p. 
88) She was not aware of Diego finding roofing jobs on his own. (Tr. p. 42) It was 
Catarina’s understanding that Diego did not have any employees that worked for him.  
(Tr. p. 42) It was her belief that Gregorio paid Diego approximately $25.00 or $27.00 per 
hour. (Tr. p. 64) It was her impression that Diego’s pay from Perez Roofing remained 
the same even after Diego started D & C Exteriors.  (Tr. p. 44)   
 
Yingrein Alvarado Velasquez testified at the hearing. (Tr. p. 147) He has been 
the owner of a general construction company for the past seven years. (Tr. pp. 147- 
148, 150)  He never met Diego and is not familiar with Perez Roofing & Construction or 
Gregorio Perez. (Tr. p. 150) He has no personal knowledge regarding any business 
arrangements regarding Perez Roofing & Construction. (Tr. p. 150) He received some 
documents about this case the day before the hearing which he believes he may have 
spent around one hour reviewing. (Tr. p. 152) Based on the documents he reviewed, it 
is his belief that Diego was a subcontractor. (Tr. p. 149) In his experience companies in 
the construction industry contract with one another. (Tr. pp. 148-149) 
Juan Eliu Lopez Raymundo also testified at the hearing. (Tr. p. 155) He 
performed work for D & C Exteriors. (Tr. p. 156) He testified that Diego was the owner 
of D & C Exteriors. (Tr. p. 156) Diego contracted Juan to perform roofing work. (Tr. pp. 
156-157) He first worked for D & C Exteriors in September 2020. According to Juan, he 
never worked for Perez Roofing. (Tr. p. 159) Diego was the one who contracted and 
paid him to do the roofing work. (Tr. pp. 156-57) Juan was paid by the hour. (Tr. p. 157) 
He worked as needed and was paid in cash. (Tr. p. 157) Diego supervised his work.  
(Tr. p. 158) He was asked if he recalled seeing Gregorio on job sites when he was 
working for Diego. (Tr. p. 159) He replied, “Sometimes he [Gregorio] would come to the 
job site and they would talk; but to be at the – at work, at the job site, no.”  (Tr. p. 159)   
Domingo Elias Raymundo Perez also testified at the hearing.  (Tr. p. 164) He is 
the younger brother of Gregorio and Diego.  (Tr. p. 167) He testified that he performed 
work for D & C Exteriors. (Tr. p. 165) Diego was his boss and he paid him in cash.  He 
usually worked two or three days per week. (Tr. p. 165) He denied ever seeing Gregorio 
at a job site where he was working with Diego.  (Tr. p. 169)  
 
Catarina’s first-hand knowledge of her boyfriend’s daily work responsibilities and 
the D & C Exteriors’ financials is limited. Catarina’s understanding that the financial 
arrangement between Perez Roofing and Diego remained the same after D & C 
Exteriors was formed is not consistent with the banking records in evidence.  The 

RAYMUNDO PEREZ V. PEREZ ROOFING & CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 8 
 
records demonstrate that Diego was no longer paid as an individual; rather, payments 
were made to D & C Exteriors.  (Ex. 4)  Additionally, D & C Exteriors issued checks to 
numerous individuals who performed roofing work for D & C Exteriors.  (Ex. Q, pp. 4-5; 
R, pp.5-9; S, pp. 6-9; T, pp. 7-10; U, pp. 5-6) These checks were signed by the sole 
signer for the account, Diego. I find that the documentation does not support the notion 
that Diego was paid by the hour after D & C Exteriors was formed.  I find that the 
documentation supports Gregorio’s testimony that Perez Roofing paid D & C Exteriors 
by the job. I find that Diego was paid at a level that allowed him to have hired 
subcontractors or employees to complete the jobs he was assigned.  I find the pay 
scheme was not that of an individual working as an employee.  I find that the materials 
for the job were provided by Garcia Roofing.  (Tr. p. 110) 
 
Juan and Domingo both testified that they performed work for D & C Exteriors.  
(Tr. pp. 156, 165) Both testified that Diego was their boss or supervisor.  There is no 
evidence that Gregorio hired, paid, or supervised them or any of the individuals paid by 
D & C Exteriors.  Juan and Domingo testified that Diego was responsible for paying 
each of them.  I find that these individuals performed work for D & C Exteriors.  I further 
find that Diego was responsible for paying the individuals who performed work for D & C 
Exteriors in cash and with D & C Exteriors’ checks.  There is no evidence that Perez 
Roofing controlled the manner in which Diego’s work was performed.  There is also no 
evidence that Perez Roofing controlled the day-to-day activities or schedule of Diego.  
Additionally, I find that Diego was responsible for how the work was performed; he 
supervised and controlled the performance of the work. I further find that Gregorio is the 
owner of Perez Roofing and was not responsible for the details of how Diego’s work 
was performed.  Rather, he merely inspected the final results.  Additionally, I find that in 
December 2020 Diego was paid by the job, not by the hour. 
 
I find that Diego established his own roofing business, D & C Exteriors. Diego 
filed Articles of Incorporation with the Iowa Secretary of State for his business.  Diego 
opened a bank account for his business and was the sole signer for the account.  D & C 
Exteriors had an employer identification number and commercial general liability 
insurance.  Diego hired and supervised individuals to perform work for his business.  I 
find that all of these actions demonstrate that Diego owned and operated his own 
roofing business and did not intend to form an employee-employer relationship with 
Perez Roofing.  I find that once D & C Exteriors was established, Diego was paid by the 
job. I find that there was a mutual intention between Diego and Gregorio to create an 
independent status or relationship.  I find there was not a mutual intention between 
Diego and Gregorio to create an employer-employee relationship.   
 
I find that Gregorio owned Perez Roofing and Diego owned D & C Exteriors.  I 
further find that each business had the right to select who they performed work for and 
each business retained the authority to terminate their relationship at any time.  
Gregorio testified that Diego opened D & C Exteriors to try and thrive like he had with 
Perez Roofing.  (Tr. p. 143)  Catarina testified that part of the reason Diego opened D & 
C Exteriors was so that he could make some money.  (Tr. p. 44) I find that Diego 

RAYMUNDO PEREZ V. PEREZ ROOFING & CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 9 
 
benefited from the work he performed and the work performed by the individuals who 
were paid by D & C Exteriors. 
 
When considering the relationship between Diego and Perez Roofing, I find that 
claimant has failed to establish a prima facie case that Diego was a person that entered 
into the employment of, or worked under a contract of service for Perez Roofing.  
 
Because claimant has failed to carry their burden of proof establishing the 
existence of an employer-employee relationship between the decedent and Perez 
Roofing, all other issues, except that regarding costs are moot. 
 
Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner or the deputy hearing the case.  I find that claimant was not successful in 
their claim and therefore exercise my discretion to not assess costs against the 
defendant.  Each party shall bear their own costs.    
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
The primary disputed issue in this case is whether Diego was an employee of 
Perez Roofing on December 21, 2020, when he was injured. Claimant contends that 
Diego was an employee, while Perez Roofing contends that he was an independent 
contractor. 
Section 85.61(11) provides in relevant part: “‘Worker’ or ‘employee’ means a 
person who has entered into the employment of, or works under contract of service, 
express or implied, or apprenticeship, for an employer. . . .” 
It is claimant's duty to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the 
decedent was an employee within the meaning of the law. Where claimant establishes a 
prima facie case, defendant then has the burden of going forward with the evidence 
which rebuts claimant's case. The defendant must establish, by a preponderance of the 
evidence, any pleaded affirmative defense or bar to compensation. Nelson v. Cities 
Service Oil Co., 259 Iowa 1209, 146 N.W.2d 261 (1967). 
Factors to be considered in determining whether an employer-employee 
relationship exists are: (1) the right of selection, or to employ at will, (2) responsibility for 
payment of wages by the employer, (3) the right to discharge or terminate the 
relationship, (4) the right to control the work, and (5) identity of the employer as the 
authority in charge of the work or for whose benefit it is performed. The overriding issue 
is the intention of the parties.  Where both parties by agreement state they intend to 
form an independent contractor relationship, their stated intent is ignored if the 
agreement exists to avoid the workers’ compensation laws, however.  Likewise, the test 
of control is not the actual exercise of the power of control over the details and methods 

RAYMUNDO PEREZ V. PEREZ ROOFING & CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 10 
 
to be followed in the performance of the work, but the right to exercise such control.  
Also, the general belief or custom of the community that a particular kind of work is 
performed by employees can be considered in determining whether an employer-
employee relationship exists.  Caterpillar Tractor Co. v. Shook, 313 N.W.2d 503 (Iowa 
1981); McClure v. Union et al., Counties, 188 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa 1971); Nelson, 259 
Iowa 1209, 146 N.W.2d 261; Lembke v. Fritz, 223 Iowa 261, 272 N.W. 300 (1937); Funk 
v. Bekins Van Lines Co., I Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 82 (App. December 
1980). In Mallinger v. Webster City Oil Co., 234 N.W. 254, 211 Iowa 847 (1931), the 
Iowa Supreme Court outlined similar factors to determine whether a worker is an 
independent contractor or an employee.  Specifically, the Mallinger Court identified the 
following factors: 
(1) The existence of a contract for the performance by a person of a 
certain piece or kind of work at a fixed price; (2) independent nature of his 
business or his distinct calling; (3) his employment of assistants with the 
right to supervise their activities; (4) his obligation to furnish necessary 
tools, supplies, and materials; (5) his right to control the progress of the 
work, except as to the final results; (6) the time for which the workman is 
employed; (7) the method of payment, whether by time or by job; (8) 
whether the work is part of the regular business of the employer.  If the 
workman is using the tools or equipment of the employer, it is understood 
and generally held that the one using them, especially if of substantial 
value, is a servant. 
Mallinger, 234 N.W. at 257. 
 
 Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude the claimant has failed to prove a 
prima facie case that the decedent was engaged in an employer-employee relationship 
at the time of his tragic injury.  I found that either Perez Roofing or the decedent had the 
right to terminate the relationship.  Additionally, I found that Perez Roofing paid the 
decedent by the job.  Further, I found D & C Exteriors was responsible for paying the 
individuals who performed work for D & C Exteriors.  I found that both the decedent and 
Perez Roofing benefited from the job.  I found that Perez Roofing did not control the 
manner or method of the work, merely the result.  Additionally, I found there was not a 
mutual intention between the decedent and Perez Roofing to create an employer-
employee relationship.  
Because claimant has failed to carry their burden of proof establishing the 
existence of an employer-employee relationship between the decedent and the 
defendant, all other issues, except that regarding costs are moot. 
 
 Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner or the deputy hearing the case.  876 IAC 4.33. I find that claimant was 
not successful in their claim and therefore exercise my discretion to not assess costs 
against the defendant.  Each party shall bear their own costs.    
 

RAYMUNDO PEREZ V. PEREZ ROOFING & CONSTRUCTION, INC. 
Page 11 
 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings. 
Each party shall bear their own costs. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this _19th ___ day of August, 2024. 
 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Eric Bigley (via WCES) 
Mickelle Wordehoff (via WCES) 
Mike Mbanza (via WCES)  
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
                ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
