Case Number: 1658822.01
Case Title:  GREEN, KORI V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Green Kori-1658822.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
KORI GREEN, 
  : 
 
 
  :                    File No. 1658822.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER, 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SAFETY NATIONAL CASUALTY CORP., : 
 
 
  :        Head Note Nos.:  1100, 1108.50, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
   1802, 1803, 2500 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Kori Green seeks workers’ compensation benefits from the defendants, employer 
Broadlawns Medical Center (Broadlawns) and insurance carrier Safety National 
Casualty Corp., for an alleged work injury to the body as a whole. The undersigned 
presided over an arbitration hearing on April 8, 2021, held by internet-based video 
under order of the Commissioner. Green participated personally and through attorney 
Jason D. Neifert. The defendants participated by and through attorney Valerie A. 
Landis. Rick Barrett, legal counsel for Broadlawns, served as the defendant-employer’s 
representative. 
ISSUES 
Under rule 876 IAC 4.149(3)(f), the parties jointly submitted a hearing report 
defining the claims, defenses, and issues submitted to the presiding deputy 
commissioner. The hearing report was approved and entered into the record via an 
order because it is a correct representation of the disputed issues and stipulations in 
this case. The parties identified the following disputed issues in the hearing report: 
1) Did Green sustain an injury arising out of and in the course of her 
employment with Broadlawns on January 7, 2019? 
2) Is Green entitled to temporary disability or healing period benefits from 
January 7, 2019, through October 3, 2019? 
3) What is the nature and extent of permanent disability, if any, caused by the 
alleged injury? 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Feb-23  13:27:59     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 2 
4) Is Green entitled to payment of the medical expenses itemized in Joint 
Exhibit 19? 
5) Is Green entitled to taxation of the costs against the defendants? 
STIPULATIONS 
 
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between Green and Broadlawns 
at the time of the alleged injury. 
2) Although entitlement to temporary disability or healing period benefits cannot 
be stipulated, Green was off work from January 7, 2019, through October 3, 
2019. 
3) If the alleged injury is found to be a cause of permanent disability, the 
disability is an industrial disability. 
4) The commencement date for permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits, if 
any are awarded, is October 4, 2019. 
5) At the time of the stipulated injury: 
a) Green’s gross earnings were five hundred seventy-nine and 58/100 
dollars ($579.58) per week. 
b) Green was married. 
c) Green was entitled to three exemptions. 
6) With reference to the disputed medical expenses: 
a) Although disputed, the medical providers would testify as to the 
reasonableness of their fees and/or treatment set forth in the listed 
expenses and the defendants are not offering contrary evidence. 
b) Although causal connection of the expenses to a work injury cannot be 
stipulated, the listed expenses are at least causally connected to the 
medical condition(s) upon which the claim of injury is based. 
The parties’ stipulations in the hearing report are accepted and incorporated into 
this arbitration decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. This decision 
contains no discussion of any factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations 
except as necessary for clarity with respect to disputed factual and legal issues. 
 
 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 3 
FINDINGS OF FACTS 
The evidentiary record in this case consists of the following:  
 Joint Exhibits (Jt. Ex.) 1 through 22;  
 Defendants’ Exhibit (Def. Ex.) A; and 
 Hearing testimony by Green and Heidi Garton, a supervisor at Broadlawns.  
After careful consideration of the evidence and the parties’ post-hearing briefs, the 
undersigned enters the following findings of fact. 
Green has lived in central Iowa her whole life. (Hrg. Tr. p. 13) At the time of 
hearing, she lived in Mingo. (Hrg. Tr. p. 13) Green was 43 years old at the time of 
hearing. (Hrg. Tr. p. 14) 
Green graduated from high school in 1996. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 14–15; Jt. Ex. 15) She 
then attended Indian Hills Community College, obtaining her certified nursing assistant 
(CNA) certificate. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 15, 43) She obtained her advanced CNA certificate as 
part of the nursing program at Des Moines Area Community College (DMACC) but did 
not finish the nursing program. (Hrg. Tr. p. 43–44; Jt. Ex. 15, p. 97)  
In 2003, Green was in a car crash. (Hrg. Tr. p. 59) Green filed a civil suit against 
the other driver, alleging she sustained a whiplash injury. (Hrg. Tr. p. 59) The parties 
ultimately settled the case. (Hrg. Tr. p. 59) There is an insufficient basis in the evidence 
from which to conclude Green had ongoing symptoms after the 2003 crash.  
Green worked full time for Mercy as a patient care technician (that organization’s 
label for the position with duties that are largely those traditionally performed by a CNA) 
on the oncology floor. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 16–17; Jt. Ex. 15, pp. 99) Her job duties included 
assisting patients with daily activities such as bathing, walking, and transferring them 
from bed to a cart. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 16–17) Green had no physical issues performing her job 
duties at Mercy and sustained no work injuries while employed there. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 17–
18) 
In 2006, Green left employment at Mercy to work at Lutheran as a CNA. (Hrg. Tr. 
p. 18; Jt. Ex. 15, pp. 98–99) She worked on the medical-surgical (med-surg) floor there. 
(Hrg Tr. p. 18) Green’s tenure with Lutheran was injury free until 2009, when she 
ruptured a disk in her back while lifting a patient from a low bed and required three 
surgeries. (Hrg. Tr. p. 20–21) Green’s treating surgeon, Lynn Nelson, M.D., released 
her from care in 2011. As part of the parties’ settlement of Green’s workers’ 
compensation claim stemming from her back injury at Lutheran, she resigned from her 
job as a CNA there. (Hrg. Tr. p. 22)  
According to Green, her treating doctor assigned her a lifting restriction of up to 
fifty or sixty-five pounds that was not permanent in nature and there is no indication to 
the contrary in the evidentiary record. (Hrg. Tr. p. 22–23, 48–49; Jt. Ex. 22, Depo. p. 13) 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 4 
Green testified she believed a lifting limit of fifty pounds would have prevented her from 
working as a CNA. (Hrg. Tr. p. 48) However, at least at Broadlawns, CNAs are required 
to lift up to fifty pounds, so such a restriction would not have disqualified her from 
working there. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 83) The evidence shows it is more likely than not Dr. 
Nelson did not assign Green a work restriction that would have disqualified her from the 
CNA position at Broadlawns. 
Green continued to take pain medication “as needed” for symptoms relating to 
her 2009 work injury. (Hrg. Tr. p. 62; Jt. Ex. 22, Depo. pp. 22, 29) Her doctors continued 
to prescribe her these medications with the intent she take them when her symptoms 
created a need. (Hrg. Tr. p. 62; Jt. Ex. 22, Depo. pp. 22, 29) The weight of the evidence 
shows Green did not take the pain medications regularly because her symptoms were 
irregular. (Jt. Ex. 22, Depo. p. 28) Green’s intermittent symptoms necessitated taking 
pain medication when they were significant enough to require her to do so. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
62; Jt. Ex. 22, Depo. pp. 22, 28–29)  
In 2013, Green was in another car crash. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 60; Jt. Ex. 22, Depo. pp. 
14–16) The crash caused her to sustain a whiplash injury. (Hrg. Tr. p. 60) She 
experienced left-arm radiculopathy because of it. (Hrg. Tr. p. 60)  
After Green’s employment at Lutheran ended, she did not work for pay for a few 
years due to lingering issues with her back. (Hrg. Tr. p. 49) However, she did tend bar 
at a restaurant owned by a family member without getting paid. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 49–50) 
Green considered it helping out a family member as opposed to work because she did 
not receive payment for her time or efforts. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 49–50) Nonetheless, she listed 
the activity on her application to work at Broadlawns. (Hrg. Tr. p. 50) Green did not 
misrepresent the nature of her tending bar at the restaurant to Broadlawns during the 
hiring process or in her testimony during this case. 
During this time, on advice from her attorney, Green applied for disability benefits 
from the federal Social Security Administration (SSA) and was denied. (Hrg. Tr. p. 61–
62) She also performed at-home rehabilitation exercises. (Hrg. Tr. p. 23) They helped 
improve her back condition to the point she felt comfortable performing the job duties of 
a CNA again. (Hrg. Tr. p. 23) 
In 2015, Green returned to work with the temporary staffing firm IntelliStaff. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 23; Jt. Ex. 15, p. 98) IntelliStaff employed Green and assigned her to work 
temporarily as a CNA at third-party facilities. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 23–24) She earned between 
fifteen and eighteen dollars per hour depending on the facility and position. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
24) Green did not sustain any on-the-job injuries while working for IntelliStaff. (Hrg. Tr. 
p. 24) She was able to physically perform the job duties of a CNA while employed there. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 24) 
Green started working at Broadlawns through IntelliStaff in 2016. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 25, 
46; Jt. Ex. 15, p. 98; Jt. Ex. , p. 130, Depo. p. 17) In 2017, Broadlawns bought out 
Green’s contract with IntelliStaff and hired her as a healthcare technician. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
25) Green underwent a physical before she began her employment with Broadlawns 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 5 
and passed it. (Hrg. Tr. p. 25) Green worked as a floater between all departments 
except mother-baby. (Hrg. Tr. p. 25) The Broadlawns job description for the position 
Green held requires those who hold it to lift up to fifty pounds and frequent carrying of 
up to twenty-five pounds. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 83) Green credibly testified she had no issues 
physically performing her job duties until January 7, 2019. (Hrg. Tr. p. 26) 
It is undisputed between the parties Broadlawns gave Green positive job reviews. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 103) But there is some question regarding the nature of reprimands 
Broadlawns issued Green during her employment. Green testified she believed 
Broadlawns issued her oral warnings that it memorialized in writing. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 54–58) 
Defense counsel contended they were written warnings. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 54–58) 
Regardless, Broadlawns memorialized in writing two reprimands Green received for 
“occurrences relating to attendance” and one for alleged use of profane language while 
on the job. (Hrg. Tr. p. 54–58, 113; Def. Ex. A)  
While the documents memorializing Green’s warnings included boilerplate 
language often used by employers on reprimands to preserve their rights as an at-will 
employer under Iowa law, there is an insufficient in the evidence basis from which to 
conclude Broadlawns placed Green on what is often referred to as a last chance 
agreement during her employment. (Def. Ex. A, Hrg. Tr. pp. 103–05) The weight of the 
evidence shows Green was good at her job, Broadlawns gave her positive permanence 
reviews because of it, Broadlawns reprimanded Green three times, Broadlawns never 
suspended Green, and Broadlawns never issued Green a last-chance warning because 
of misconduct. 
Patients in the ICU are more acute, so it is important for Broadlawns to monitor 
their vitals at all times. (Hrg. Tr. p. 113) To help hospital staff do this, Broadlawns has 
monitors at the nurse’s station that go off when there is a change in an ICU patient’s 
vitals. Every patients that is on a telemetry has a screen monitor hooked up to the 
monitor in their room. (Jt. Ex. 22, p. 130, Depo. p. 22)  
When something is wrong, the monitor sounds an alarm that is a loud, repetitive, 
and annoying beep. (Jt. Ex. 22, p. 130, Depo. p. 23) An alarm sounds due to changes in 
condition, mechanical faults, or something going wrong with a lead (like it falling off). 
(Hrg. Tr. pp. 113–14, 117) Sometimes an alarm indicates a life-threatening emergency. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 114, 117) When the alarm goes off, staff does not know the cause. (Jt. Ex. 
22, p. 130, Depo. p. 23) Monitor alarms do not go off very often in Green’s experience. 
(Jt. Ex. 22, p. 13), Depo. p. 23) Broadlawns expects its staff to respond quickly to 
alarms because of the potential for a life-threatening emergency. (Hrg. Tr. p. 114) 
On January 7, 2019, Green was working in the Broadlawns intensive care unit 
(ICU). (Hrg. Tr. p. 26) She was working on a computer, completing charts, at the 
nursing station. (Hrg. Tr. p. 27) While Green was working at the nursing station, the 
alarm on a monitor located behind her went off. (Hrg. Tr. p. 26) In order to determine 
what caused the alarm, Green turned her head and felt a pop in her neck. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
26) Thus, Green turning her head to check patient vitals in response to an alarm was a 
part of her job duties at Broadlawns that directly related to patient health. (Hrg. Tr. p. 29)  

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 6 
After the injury, Green attempted to perform her work duties but could not do so, 
even after taking an over-the-counter pain reliever. (Hrg. Tr. p. 30) Green told multiple 
Broadlawns employees what happened. (Hrg. Tr. p. 30) She told the house supervisor 
what had happened and that she was in pain. (Hrg. Tr. p. 30–31) The next day, Green 
followed up with her supervisor at the time, Garton, who filed an incident report. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 31, pp. 110)  
The Broadlawns incident report is typewritten and submitted by computer. (Jt. Ex. 
1, pp. 1–2; Hrg. Tr. p. 110) Green did not type out the information contained in it; Garton 
did. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 1; Hrg. Tr. p. 98–99, 110) On the report, Garton wrote Green “was 
sitting and turned her head to the right and felt a ‘pop’ in her neck and began feeling 
pain immediately.” (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 1)  
The defendants sent green to Occupational Medicine at UnityPoint Health for 
care. (Hrg. Tr. p. 31; Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 3–5) On January 9, 2019, Green filled out an intake 
form and stated she injured herself when she “turned [her] head and [her] neck 
popped.” (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 3) She also stated her symptoms included pain in her neck and 
right arm, numbness in her hand, a headache, and dizziness. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 3)  
Betsy Bolton, PA-C, recounted in her progress notes for the appointment state 
under the header “History of Present Illness”:  
The patient states on 01/07/2019, at roughly 9 AM, she was working in the 
ICU charting vitals. She turned her head to the right and felt a pop in her 
neck. She had immediate pain that she rates a 9/10 in her neck and 
tingling into her right arm. The patient states she did not turn her head 
quickly. She did not startle. There was nothing abnormal about the 
situation or the way she turned her head to the right. The patient states 
she then started getting numbness into her arm and hand the following 
morning on 01/08/2019. She also started having a headache to the 
posterior aspect of her head, which she describes as someone squeezing 
her head, and some dizziness which also started yesterday morning. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 4) During Green’s hearing testimony, she disputed the accuracy of the part 
of the note describing the way she turned her head as not quickly. (Hrg. Tr. p. 33)  
Under the “Comments” section, Bolton stated, “Per patient report, this is a work-
related injury that occurred as she was charting and simply turned her head to the right 
causing popping in her neck, instant pain in her neck, and tingling into her right arm 
followed by numbness into her right arm, with headache and dizziness to follow the next 
day.” (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 5) She assigned Green work restrictions, effective January 9, 2019, 
of: 
 No lifting, pushing, or pulling of more than ten pounds; 
 Sitting, standing, and walking as tolerated;  
 No overhead work or reaching with her right arm; 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 7 
 No climbing.  
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 6) 
These work restrictions were set to be in place until Green’s scheduled follow-up on 
January 16, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 6) 
On January 10, 2019, Green gave a recorded statement to a claims adjuster at 
EMC. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 74–75; Jt. Ex. 17, pp. 104–10) The EMC representative (Q) and 
Green (A) had the following the interaction regarding how her injury occurred: 
Q: 
At nurse’s station. Okay. And can you describe in detail to me what 
happened? 
A: 
I was just sitting in the chair and I turned my head to check the 
vitals and my neck popped. 
Q: 
Okay. Which way did you turn your head? 
A: 
To the right. 
(Jt. Ex. 17, p. 107)  
Green attempted to go to her scheduled follow-up appointment at UnityPoint on 
January 16, 2019. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 33, 77–78) But she was unable to do so because it was 
cancelled. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 33, 78) In a letter dated January 10, 2019, EMC informed Green 
her workers’ compensation claim was denied. (Hrg. Tr. p. 77; Jt. Ex. 12, p. 90) This 
denial of care necessitated Green getting care on her own. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 33, 38) 
On January 18, 2019, Green went to her primary personal care provider, Laura 
Francisco, D.N.P., at Altoona Family Medicine. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 7–10) Francisco noted 
Green “turned her neck quickly on 1/7/19 and since then has had excruciating neck pain 
with a cold, numb feeling down [her right] arm.” (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 10) Francisco prescribed 
oral steroids, hydrocodone so Green could rest, heat, and a physical therapy evaluation. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 10) Green attended physical therapy at the direction of Francisco. (Hrg. Tr. 
p. 80; Jt. Ex. 19, pp. 115–16) 
Francisco also completed certification paperwork for leave under the federal 
Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA). (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 10–14) Broadlawns placed Green 
on FMLA leave due to her neck injury. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 86–88) On Aril 11, 2019, Green 
exhausted her FMLA leave and Broadlawns sent her a letter, offering extended leave. 
(Jt. Ex. 11, p. 85) The letter also informed Green she could request an unpaid leave of 
absence, but Broadlawns might fill her position based on its needs. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 85) 
Broadlawns also informed Green it had paid her health and dental premiums through 
May 31, 2019, and she would have to continue this insurance through COBRA 
beginning on June 1, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 85) Green remembers requesting an unpaid 
leave of absence, but no such documentation is in her personnel file. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 51–
52) No such documentation is in evidence. 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 8 
Broadlawns sent Green a letter dated June 3, 2020, informing her that her family 
health, dental, and vision benefits were terminated on May 31, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 89) 
The evidence shows it is most likely Broadlawns was terminating her insurance effective 
May 31, 2019, and she had the option to extend it by paying the premiums herself 
through COBRA. (Jt. Ex. 11, pp. 85, 89) Therefore, the letter informing Green that 
Broadlawns had terminated her insurance effective May 31, 2019, does not allow for an 
inference regarding whether or not she requested an unpaid leave of absence.  
It is more likely than not Green’s employment with Broadlawns ended when she 
exhausted all FMLA leave on April 11, 2019. There is no indication Broadlawns granted 
Green an unpaid leave of absence after she exhausted her FMLA leave, regardless of 
whether she requested one. Green did not file a claim for unemployment insurance 
benefits immediately after her employment with Broadlawns ended. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 53–54)  
After Green’s symptoms did not improve, Francisco referred her to Christopher 
Stalvey, D.O., a neurologist at Mercy. (Hrg. Tr. p. 34; Jt. Ex. 5) On the intake form for 
Dr. Stalvey, Green wrote she “turned [her] neck to chart.” (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 17) Dr. Stalvey 
noted Green “was turning her head/neck and felt her neck ‘crunch’” and pain “shoot[ing] 
down her [right] arm.” (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 21) The medical records from Dr. Stalvey’s care 
incorrectly state Green’s date of injury and her history as a smoker. (Hrg. Tr. p. 82–83) 
Dr. Stalvey performed a steroid injection for radiculopathy at C4 through C7. (Jt. Ex. 5, 
pp. 24–25) 
Green also saw Todd Troll, M.D., at the Iowa Clinic. (Jt. Ex. 7) In the medical 
records for Green’s first visit, Dr. Troll noted, “She developed sudden onset of neck pain 
with radiation down the right arm in January of this year. Pain is accompanied by 
tingling in the fingers of the right hand as well.” (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 56) Dr. Troll was unable to 
offer additional treatment and referred Green to pain management. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 61) 
Over the seven months Green treated with Dr. Stalvey, she continued to feel pain 
in her neck and tingling down her arm and into her hands. (Hrg. Tr. p. 34; Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 
27, 31, 35, 40, 46) On July 15, 2019, Dr. Stalvey opined Green had spondylosis without 
myelopathy or radiculopathy in the cervical region. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 34) Dr. Stalvey 
performed a nerve block that helped temporarily alleviate Green’s neck pain but did little 
to reduce the tingling in her arm or hand. (Hrg. Tr. p. 34) On October 3, 2019, Dr. 
Stalvey released Green from care. (Hrg. Tr. p. 34; Jt. Ex. 5, p. 50) 
Because Dr. Stalvey was unable to provide treatment that provided lasting relief 
from her pain, Green stopped seeking specialized care for her symptoms. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
35) Since Dr. Stalvey released Green from care, she has continued to receive care from 
Francisco at the Altoona Family Clinic. (Hrg. Tr. p. 35) She has seen Francisco five or 
six times for prescriptions of pain medication. (Hrg. Tr. p. 35)   
Green filed a claim for unemployment insurance benefits on March 15, 2020, at 
the start of the COVID-19 pandemic because she figured it was worth a shot. (Jt. Ex. 
13, p. 91; Hrg. Tr. p. 40–41) In a fact-finding determination, the Division of 
Unemployment Insurance Services at Iowa Workforce Development (IWD) denied her 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 9 
claim based on the finding she voluntarily quit work on January 6, 2019, because of a 
non-work-related injury or illness and her quitting was therefore not caused by her 
employer.1 (Jt. Ex. 13, p. 91) Consequently, Green’s claim was denied. (Jt. Ex. 13, p. 
91; Hrg. Tr. p. 40–41) She did not appeal the fact-finding determination. (Hrg. Tr. p. 41) 
In July of 2020, the Iowa Clinic hired Green as a patient experience 
representative. (Hrg. Tr. p. 40) The position is primarily a desk job that does not involve 
Green physically providing patient care. (Hrg. Tr. p. 40) She is able to perform her job 
duties without issue. (Hrg. Tr. p. 41) Green held the job at the time of hearing. (Hrg. Tr. 
p. 41) Green was making eighteen dollars per hour in the position. (Hrg. Tr. p. 65)  
Green does not need a CNA certificate for this job. (Hrg. Tr. p. 66) Her CNA 
certificate was set to expire in 2021. (Hrg. Tr. p. 66) As of the time of hearing, Green 
has not taken any action to maintain or renew her CNA certificate. (Hrg. Tr. p. 66) 
On February 11, 2021, Green underwent an independent medical examination 
(IME) arranged by her attorney at Medix with John Kuhnlein, D.O. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 62) As 
part of the IME, Dr. Kuhnlein reviewed medical records, spoke with Green over Zoom 
for about 30 minutes, and performed an in-person physical examination that lasted 
about 60 minutes. (Hrg. Tr. p. 96–97; Jt. Ex. 8) 
In Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME report, he states Green described her injury as follows: 
Ms. Green relates that on or about January 7, 2019, she was working in 
the intensive care unit. She says that she was charting with her back to 
the coronary monitoring screens when one of the monitor alarms went off. 
She turned her head quickly, given that she was working in an intensive 
care unit with severely ill patients and a coronary monitor had just gone 
off. She says that she heard a pop in her neck with the immediate onset of 
severe right-sided neck pain that soon after developed into pain radiating 
down the right arm when she did so. She checked the patient, noting that 
a lead had come loose that she replaced. She returned to her charting, 
stating she could not turn her neck because of the severe pain she 
experienced. She notified the house supervisor and went home. 
(Jt. Ex. 8, p. 63) 
Dr. Kuhnlein diagnosed Green with cervical spondylosis and right 
radiculopathy/radiculitis, as well as possible peripheral nerve entrapment and benign 
paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV). (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 68) On causation, Dr. Kuhnlein 
opined in his report that when Green turned her head to check a patient’s vitals, she: 
                                                 
1 Under Iowa Code section 96.6(4), findings of fact and conclusions of law made by IWD with respect to a 
claimant’s entitlement to unemployment insurance benefits under the Iowa Employment Security Law, 
Iowa Code chapter 96, are not binding in a case before the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
such as this one. This decision does not adopt any finding or conclusion from the IWD fact-finding 
determination regarding Green’s entitlement for unemployment insurance benefits. 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 10 
“lit up” and materially aggravated the underlying degenerative changes in 
her neck, producing the radiculopathic or radiculitic symptoms from which 
she now suffers. The arm and forearm symptoms that she describes 
would not be related to the potential peripheral median/ulnar nerve 
entrapment, as these are on the opposite side of the arm. She may have a 
concurrent peripheral nerve entrapment that would not be related to the 
January 7, 2019, incident. Turning her head suddenly, while it might cause 
neck problems and the BPPV, would not produce a peripheral nerve 
entrapment. 
Ms. Green states that she did not have the BPPV symptoms before 
January 7, 2019, when she suddenly turned her head to look at a monitor 
in an Intensive Care Unit setting, and I have no reason to disbelieve what 
she says. When she Ms. Bolton two days later, on January 9, 2019, she 
complained of dizziness that started the day before. BPPV can be 
triggered by a sudden movement of the head. Ms. Green states that she 
did not have the symptoms before, she did afterward, and still rarely has 
the BPPV symptoms. It is more likely than not that the BPPV was causally 
related to the January 7, 2019, work related incident. 
(Jt. Ex. 8, p. 69) 
Dr. Kuhnlein opined Green reached maximum medical improvement (MMI) for 
her cervical condition on October 3, 2019, but had not yet reached MMI for the BPPV 
condition. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 70) On the question of further care, Dr. Kuhnlein said epidural 
injections and reconsideration of radiofrequency ablation were possible treatments but 
deferred to Dr. Stalvey. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 69) He assigned Green permanent work 
restrictions when lifting weight that is kept close to her body’s axial plane of: 
 Lifting up to thirty pounds occasionally from floor to waist; 
 Lifting up to thirty-five pounds occasionally from waist to shoulder 
height; and 
 Lifting up to twenty pounds occasionally over shoulder height. 
Dr. Kuhnlein also assigned Green permanent work restrictions when 
reaching or lifting more than elbow’s distance away from the body of: 
 Lifting up to twenty pounds occasionally from floor to waist; 
 Lifting up to twenty-five pounds occasionally from waist to shoulder 
height; and 
 Lifting up to ten pounds occasionally over shoulder height.  
(Jt. Ex. 8, p. 70) 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 11 
Dr. Kuhnlein opined Green can sit, stand, and walk on an unrestricted basis with 
the ability to change positions for comfort. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 70) She can frequently bend, 
stoop, squat, and kneel. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 70) Green can occasionally crawl and work above 
shoulder height. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 70) 
On the question of permanent impairment, Dr. Kuhnlein used the Fifth Edition of 
the American Medical Association (AMA) Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment to conclude: 
The DRE method is indicated according to pages 379 – 380. Turning to 
Table 15-5, page 392, I would place Ms. Green between DRE Cervical 
Category II and III and assign 10% whole person impairment. At this time, 
there would be no impairment for the BPPV. 
(Jt. Ex. 8, p. 70) 
On February 16, 2021, defense counsel took Green’s deposition. (Jt. Ex. 22, p. 
130, Depo. p. 1) Green explained that she was sitting in a swivel office chair on wheels. 
(Jt. Ex. 22, p. 130, Depo. p. 20–21) When asked how she could be charting with her 
back to the monitors, Green explained: 
There’s two computers. So, like, if you’re on the front computers and you 
are facing the monitor, you’re also facing the patient rooms. Then, like, if 
you were, like, right behind you, there would be another computer that’s 
facing, like, the wall, so my back would be towards your back, and that’s 
how I was charting on the back computer. And then I turned around. Like, 
the monitors were in front of you, so then I turned real fast and turned my 
neck just -- like my head just to see what the alarm was. 
When asked how the injury occurred, Green stated, “I was sitting on the back 
desk of the ICU and had my back to the monitors, and the monitor alarm went off. And I 
went to turn around to look to see why it was going off; and when I did, my neck just 
popped and instantly was pain.” (Jt. Ex. 22, p. 130, Depo. p. 20) In response to follow-
up questioning, Green explained that she turned her head before her body and the chair 
followed. (Jt. Ex. 22, p. 130, Depo. p. 21) She experienced instant pain in her neck, on 
the right side, that shot down her arm to her fingertips. (Jt. Ex. 22, p. 130, Depo. p. 24)   
Ultimately, it turned out a patient’s EKG lead, which monitors the patient’s heart rhythm, 
was off. (Jt. Ex. 22, p. 130, Depo. p. 22) 
On February 18, 2021, Green served answers to interrogatories propounded by 
the defendants. (Jt. Ex. 15, p. 95) Interrogatory No. 10 asked and Green answered as 
follows: 
Describe in claimant’s own words the incident or manner in which claimant 
contends the incident alleged in claimant’s pleadings was sustained; 
including but not limited to: 
a. The time, date and place of the alleged incident, event, or exposure; 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 12 
b. A detailed description of the incident, event, or exposure; and 
c. The name and address of each person present at the events alleged in 
claimant’s pleadings and state what each person’s involvement was in 
said events. 
ANSWER: 
On January 7, 2019, I was charting and the alarm was going off on a heart 
monitor behind me, so I turned my head quickly to look at the monitor, and 
I heard a pop in my neck and immediately felt pain. I couldn’t turn my head 
afterwards and felt numbness down my right arm. 
(Jt. Ex.15, p. 101) 
Green saw Trevor Schmitz, M.D., for a medical examination arranged by defense 
counsel on March 17, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 9) Dr. Schmitz examined documents including 
Green’s petition in this case, her answers to interrogatories, and medical records 
relating to care for her neck and arm symptoms. (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 77–78) It does not appear 
Dr. Schmitz considered Green’s previous car crashes in his report. (Jt. Ex. 9, pp. 77–82) 
Dr. Schmitz diagnosed Green with “self-reported axial neck pain” because she 
did not have significant findings on her MRI or on physical examination other than her 
subjective pain complaints. (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 81) On the question of causation, Dr. Schmitz 
opined: 
I would state that her diagnosis is not causally related to her work at 
Broadlawns Medical Center. She does not have any findings of acute 
injury on my examination nor did she have any findings of injury on MRI or 
EMG. Thus, she is presenting with subjective complaints only with no 
evidence of any objective findings. I would state that individuals turn their 
head all day every day. I could not state that a minor head turn was in any 
way sufficient to cause a neck injury nor could I state that her work was 
more likely than not the cause of her neck injury. Obviously, this was not a 
significant mechanism of injury and certainly would not be enough to 
cause a significant injury to her neck. 
(Jt. Ex. 9, p. 81)  
Dr. Schmitz opined Green did not need any further treatment. (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 82) 
He further stated, “She certainly did not sustain any permanent impairment nor does 
she need any permanent restrictions for any alleged injury, particularly given the fact 
she has no evidence of injury by any objective measurement.” (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 82) 
At hearing, Green testified she “was sitting at the back half of the nurse’s station 
doing my charting, and then one of the monitors went off that was behind me, and I 
turned to look at it and [I] turned my head, and my neck popped and like couldn’t move 
my neck after that and my arm started to go numb.” (Hrg. Tr. p. 27) She further testified 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 13 
to details about the incident that are largely consistent with her deposition testimony. 
(Hrg. Tr. pp. 28–30) 
As detailed above, there are multiple documents reflecting statements Green 
made about the mechanism of injury. Some are hearsay because their substance is 
based on how someone else chose to describe the incident based on a conversation 
with Green (medical records and the Broadlawns incident report). Some are Green’s 
statements and therefore not hearsay (EMC interview transcript, Green’s deposition 
transcript, her interrogatory answers, and the hearing testimony). The undersigned 
gives the hearsay evidence less weight than the transcripts, her interrogatory answer, or 
her sworn hearing testimony, which was generally credible.  
There are discrepancies in the descriptions of how her injury occurred. Some of 
that is most likely due to the nature of the interactions that resulted in the descriptions. A 
medical provider may not ask a series of questions in the way an attorney might when 
eliciting testimony during litigation if the medical provider feels the patient has given 
enough information for diagnosis and treatment purposes. With respect to the transcript 
of Green’s conversation with the EMC representative, it shows Green fielded no follow-
up questions seeking more details about how her injury occurred, let alone follow-up 
questions similar to those she fielded during her deposition or hearing testimony.  
Further, it is common for the description of an injury-causing event to become 
more detailed as litigation progresses. This is due to the nature of fill-in-the-blank forms, 
the notice pleading standard, discovery, and hearing testimony during direct and cross-
examination. The weight of the evidence shows the thrust of Green’s description of her 
injury has been consistent. She felt a pop and immediate pain after she turned her head 
to check vitals. The additional details Green provided in response to detailed 
interrogatories and questioning by attorneys do not undermine Green’s credibility in this 
case. 
The evidence establishes it is more likely than not Green was sitting at the ICU 
nurse’s station with her back to the monitors while charting. One of her duties was to 
quickly respond to monitor alarms. The monitor alarms are loud, repetitive, and 
annoying. When a monitor alarm went off on the day in question, Green reacted by 
turning her head to check the monitors. This resulted in her feeling a pop or crunch in 
her neck, followed by pain that radiated down her arms to her fingertips.  
Green’s injury has not prevented her from enjoying pools for leisure. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
71) She is able to go camping with her family, using their recreational vehicle (RV). 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 71–72) Green can drive a motorized boat. (Hrg. Tr. p. 72)  
Green is able to go deer-hunting with the accommodation of using a crossbow. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 72) She must use a crossbow because she is physically incapable of using 
a standard bow. (Hrg. Tr. p. 102–03) Green has submitted the requisite paperwork to 
get a license to use a crossbow when hunting deer in Iowa. (Hrg. Tr. p. 102) 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 14 
Green and her husband shoot pool as a hobby. (Hrg. Tr. p. 70) They play in a 
pool league once per week. (Hrg. Tr. p. 71) Her husband competes in more pool 
tournaments than Green does. (Hrg. Tr. p. 70) She used to participate in one American 
Poolplayers Association (APA) tournament per year, but they did not qualify in 2019 and 
the COVID-19 pandemic caused its cancellation in 2020. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 70–71) 
Green testified that at the time of hearing, her pain level had gone down since 
the end of her care with Dr. Stalvey but the tingling in her arm never went away. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 36) She uses a heat pad almost every day and purchased a new bed to elevate 
her neck to help reduce her pain and sleep better. (Hrg. Tr. p. 37) Constant head 
movement, driving for long periods of time, and sitting in the same position for too long 
make her pain worse. (Hrg. Tr. p. 38) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
In 2017, the Iowa legislature amended the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
See 2017 Iowa Acts, ch. 23. The 2017 amendments apply to cases in which the date of 
an alleged injury is on or after July 1, 2017. Id. at § 24(1); see also Iowa Code § 3.7(1). 
Because the injury at issue in this case occurred after July 1, 2017, the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act, as amended in 2017, applies. Smidt v. JKB Restaurants, LC, File 
No. 5067766 (App. Dec. 11, 2020). 
1 .  
P e r s o n a l  I n j u r y.  
Under Iowa Code section 85.3(1), an employer covered by the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act must:  
[P]rovide, secure, and pay compensation according to the provisions of 
this chapter for any and all personal injuries sustained by an 
employee arising out of and in the course of the employment, and in such 
cases, the employer shall be relieved from other liability for recovery of 
damages or other compensation for such personal injury. 
Section 85.61(4) provides the words “injury” or “personal injury” must be construed to 
“include death resulting from personal injury” and “shall not include a disease unless it 
shall result from the injury and they shall not include an occupational disease as defined 
in section 85A.8.” But the statute provides no additional definition. 
In the seminal workers’ compensation case of Almquist v. Shenandoah 
Nurseries, Inc., the Iowa Supreme Court held: 
A personal injury, contemplated by the Iowa Workmen's Compensation 
Law, obviously means an injury to the body, the impairment of health, or a 
disease, not excluded by the act, which comes about, not through the 
natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of a 
traumatic or other hurt or damage to the health or body of an employee. 
The injury to the human body here contemplated must be something, 
whether an accident or not, that acts extraneously to the natural 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 15 
processes of nature, and thereby impairs the health, overcomes, injures, 
interrupts, or destroys some function of the body, or otherwise damages or 
injures a part or all of the body. This is the personal injury contemplated by 
[the statute]. 
254 N.W. 35, 39 (1934) (citations omitted); see also Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire & Cas. Co., 
526 N.W.2d 845, 850–51 (Iowa 1995) (quoting Almquist, 254 N.W. at 39); JBS Swift & 
Co. v. Ochoa, 888 N.W.2d 887, 896 (Iowa 2016) (quoting Almquist, 526 N.W. at 39); 
Tew v. Sparboe Farms, Inc., File No. 5065716 (App. December 5, 2019) (quoting 
Almquist, 526 N.W. at 39).  
The parties dispute whether Green sustained an injury arising out of and in the 
course of her employment with Broadlawns. Dr. Schmitz’s opinion questions whether 
Green sustained an injury at all. Dr. Kuhnlein opined she “lit up” preexisting 
degenerative changes in her neck when turning her head to check vitals on a monitor 
after an alarm sounded and diagnosed her with cervical spondylosis and right 
radiculopathy/radiculitis, as well as BPPV. Dr. Stalvey also diagnosed Green with 
cervical spondylosis. As found above, Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinion is more credible. It 
supports the conclusion Green sustained a “personal injury” under the law. 
2 .  
C a u s a t i o n.  
“In order for an injury to be compensable in Iowa, there must be ‘a connection 
between the injury and the work.’” Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 169, 173 (Iowa 
2007) (quoting Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 221 (Iowa 2006)). To recover, a 
claimant must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the injury for which the 
claimant is seeking workers’ compensation arose (1) out of the claimant’s employment 
and (2) in the course of the claimant’s employment. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 
N.W.2d 646, 652 (Iowa 2000) (citing Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 
(Iowa 1996)); see also Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996).  
“‘The two tests are separate and distinct.’” Blue, 743 N.W.2d at 174 (quoting 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311). Under Iowa law, “‘both must be satisfied in order for an 
injury to be deemed compensable.’” Id. (quoting Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311). In this 
case, the parties agree Green’s injury occurred in the course of her employment at 
Broadlawns. They dispute whether it arose out of her employment under the actual risk 
rule. 
The Iowa Supreme Court has “divided this causation requirement into two 
separate determinations: (1) factual or medical causation and (2) legal causation.” 
Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 1995) (citing Newman 
v. John Deere Ottumwa Works of Deere & Co., 372 N.W.2d 199, 202 (Iowa 1985) and 
Schreckengast v. Hammermills, Inc., 369 N.W.2d 809, 810–11 n.3 (Iowa 1985)). 
Factual or medical causation “involves whether a particular event in fact caused certain 
consequences to occur.” Schreckengast, 369 N.W.2d at 811 n.3. “In the context of 
this workers' compensation case, factual causation means medical causation, that is 
whether the employee's injury is causally connected to the employee's employment.” 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 16 
Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 853 (citing Schreckengast, 369 N.W.2d at 810). “Legal 
causation presents a question of whether the policy of the law will extend responsibility 
to those consequences which have in fact been produced.” Id. (citing Schreckengast, 
369 N.W.2d at 810 n.3). Application of the actual risk rule is a mixed question of law and 
fact. Blue, 743 N.W.2d at 173 (citing Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 218). 
a .  
T h e  A c t u a l  R i s k  R u l e .  
“An injury ‘arises out of’ employment if there is a causal connection between the 
employment and the injury.” Gray, 604 N.W.2d at 652 (citing Bailey v. Batchelder, 576 
N.W.2d 334, 338 (Iowa 1998)). “‘In other words, the injury must not have coincidentally 
occurred while at work, but must in some way be caused by or related to the working 
environment or the conditions of [the] employment.’” Blue, 743 N.W.2d at 174. (quoting 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311). Subject to limited exceptions, the actual risk rule applies 
in cases brought under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. Bluml v. Dee Jay’s Inc., 
920 N.W.2d 82, 85–86 (Iowa 2018).  
The Iowa Supreme Court’s holding in Lakeside v. Blue, cited above, fleshes out 
the actual risk rule. In that case, the claimant fell while using stairs on the job. Id. at 171. 
The Commissioner found the injury arose in the course of employment. Id. at 172.  
The court addressed the Commissioner’s apparent injection of the positional-risk 
rule into the actual risk analysis. Id. at 176. Under the positional-risk rule, “‘[a]n injury 
arises out of the employment if it would not have occurred but for the fact that the 
conditions and obligations of the employment placed claimant in the position where he 
would be injured.’” Id. (quoting 1 Arthur Larson & Lex K. Larson, Larson’s Workers’ 
Compensation Law § 3.05, at 3–6). The court held, “Iowa has not adopted the 
positional-risk rule, and we decline to do so now under the circumstances presented in 
this case” even though “Larson argues in his treatise that an unexplained fall should be 
compensated under the positional-risk rule.” Id. at 176–77 (citing Larson at § 7.04[1][a], 
at 7–28 to 7–29). 
The court also found error in the district court’s reversal on judicial review, which 
stated “there was ‘no indication that the conditions of Blue’s employment exposed her to 
a hazard not generally associated with traversing stairs.’” Id. at 177 n.7 (emphasis in 
original). On appeal, the Iowa Supreme Court reversed the district court even though it 
ostensibly applied the actual risk rule because “its rationale is more consistent with the 
discarded increased-risk rule” and the “detour to increased-risk analysis may account 
for the district court’s mistaken conclusion that the Commissioner’s application of the 
actual-risk rule was incorrect.” Id.  
The court then affirmed the Commissioner’s determination under the actual risk 
rule, which holds: 
If the nature of the employment exposes the employee to the risk of such 
an injury, the employee suffers an accidental injury arising out of and 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 17 
during the course of the employment. And it makes no difference that the 
risk was common to the general public on the day of injury. 
Blue, 743 N.W.2d at 174 (quoting Hanson v. Reichelt, 452 N.W.2d 164, 168 (Iowa 
1990)).  
The focus on the actual risk created by the nature of the employment is 
consistent with the court’s holding in Almquist that the nature of the employee’s body 
movement when performing work is not dispositive: 
If in doing his work the employee, in a usual or unusual manner, lifts an 
object, stoops, or takes a step, or makes any movement of his limbs or 
body, and such exertion unexpectedly and unintentionally results in an 
injurious strain upon his nerves, muscles, heart, or any other organ, so as 
to incapacitate him for work, the event or result is an injury as 
contemplated by the act. 
Almquist, 254 N.W. at 40–41 (quoting Southern Cas. Co. v. Flores, 294 S.W. 932, 933–
34 (Tex.Civ.App. 1927) (emphasis added by the Iowa Supreme Court)).  
Thus, the inquiry under the actual risk rule focuses on the nature of the 
employment, not the employee’s work exertion or body movement outside of that 
context. The reason for this is commonsense. Bending, stooping, lifting, twisting, 
kneeling, turning, walking, using stairs, turning one’s head, etc. are all common body 
movements at work and outside of it. The human body can only move in so many ways, 
so the type of body movement cannot dictate whether the allegedly resultant injury is 
within the purview of the statute. Disqualifying an injury from compensation under the 
Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act because people outside of work frequently perform 
the movement that caused it would significantly limit the scope of the statute’s 
coverage, which would run contrary to the precedent underpinning the Iowa Supreme 
Court’s adoption of the actual risk rule: 
We think the actual risk rule is the better rule and more in line with how we 
construe our Workers' Compensation Act. We construe the Act liberally in 
favor of the employee; we resolve all doubts in favor of the employee. 
Hanson, 452 N.W.2d at 168 (citing Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405, 406–07 (Iowa 
1986)); see also Xenia Rural Water Dist. v. Vegors, 786 N.W.2d 250, 257 (Iowa 2010) 
(“We apply the workers’ compensation statute broadly and liberally in keeping with its 
humanitarian objective: the benefit of the worker and the worker’s dependents.”).  
At the time of injury, Green was working at a nurse’s station. She was in the ICU, 
where staff provide intensive care for patients. Patients in the ICU are more acute, so 
Broadlawns continuously monitors their vitals. As part of her job duties in the ICU, 
Green was required to monitor patient vitals. 
 
 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 18 
To aid Broadlawns staff with this important duty, the nurse’s station had monitors 
equipped with alarms to alert them when a patient’s vitals changed in a possibly 
dangerous way. The alarms were loud, repetitive, and annoying. Sometimes an alarm 
signaled a life-threatening situation for a patient and other times the cause was much 
more benign—but staff did not know the cause when the alarm sounded. Given the 
possible stakes, Broadlawns understandably expected its staff to respond quickly when 
one of the monitor alarms goes off.  
Sitting at the back of the nurse’s station, the monitors were directly behind Green 
because she was facing the other way while charting. An alarm that could have signaled 
an emergency interrupted her work. In response, she turned her head to perform the job 
duty of checking the monitors so she could quickly respond as Broadlawns expected 
her to do. Green’s sudden head movement to check patient vitals on the monitor 
caused her neck to pop and her to feel immediate pain.  
For these reasons, the fact that Green’s neck injury happened while she was 
working was not coincidental to her employment at Broadlawns. She sustained an 
injurious strain during a one-time movement of her body when performing a work duty. 
Therefore, the evidence establishes her injury was caused by or related to the working 
environment or the conditions of employment. Green’s injury arose out of her 
employment at Broadlawns under the actual risk rule. 
b .  
M e d i c a l  C a u s a t i on .  
The parties also dispute medical causation. To prevail on this question, the 
claimant must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the “injury has a direct 
causal connection with the employment.” IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410, (Iowa 
2001) (quoting Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire & Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 1995)). 
“Medical causation ‘is essentially within the domain of expert testimony.’” Cedar Rapids 
Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 845 (Iowa 2011) (quoting Dunlavey, 526 
N.W.2d at 853). The weight given an expert’s opinion may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts relied upon by the expert, the completeness of the premise with which the 
expert is given, and other surrounding circumstances. Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care 
Ctr., 780 N.W.2d 549, 560 (Iowa 2010); Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 853.  
Two doctors have opined on medical causation in this case. Neither of them 
provided Green with treatment relating to this case. Dr. Kuhnlein opined Green’s injury 
arose out of her employment after an IME arranged by claimant’s counsel. Dr. Schmitz’s 
opined Green sustained no injury after an examination arranged by defense counsel.  
Dr. Schmitz’s opinion in this case is unpersuasive. He stresses that Green’s 
complaints are “subjective” in nature and that he did not have objective evidence of a 
“significant” injury. Dr. Schmitz impliedly found Green’s pain complaints were not 
credible. 
 
 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 19 
Dr. Schmitz’s opinion on Green’s credibility is contrary to the weight of the 
evidence in this case. Green consistently described her pain symptoms to providers 
throughout her treatment. Further, Green’s demeanor during her testimony about her 
symptoms was credible. She was not evasive or tense. Green also candidly testified her 
pain level had gone down over time and was lower at the time of hearing than closer to 
the date of injury.  
Further, Green’s pain complaints led to work restrictions that caused her to use 
FMLA for unpaid leave and ultimately lose her job at Broadlawns. This caused Green 
pecuniary loss in the form of lost income. Her discharge was also a setback for her 
career since she had held jobs with duties consistent with those of a CNA (though with 
sometimes with different job titles) dating back about twenty years.  
Green’s ongoing symptoms caused her to not seek another CNA job because 
she felt she would risk the health of patients due to her physical limitations. Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s permanent work restrictions proved her belief correct. The symptoms 
Green’s injuries caused ended her career as a CNA, the focus of the postsecondary 
education or training she was able to complete and the type of position she held for 
about twenty years. This undermines the credibility of Dr. Schmitz’s causation opinion. 
On the mechanism of injury, Dr. Schmitz dismissed how Green was injured by 
stating “individuals turn their head all day every day” and he could not state “a minor 
head turn was in any way sufficient to cause a neck injury.” Dr. Schmitz’s general 
dismissal is inconsistent with the weight of the evidence in this case. As discussed 
above, Green’s suddenly turned her head while working in the ICU and in response to 
an alarm regarding patient vitals that could signal a life-or-death situation. His apparent 
misunderstanding of the circumstances surrounding Green’s injury further damages the 
credibility of his opinion. 
In contrast, Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinion is premised on a conclusion about the validity 
of her symptoms that is in line with the weight of the evidence in this case. His report 
also reflects a more accurate understanding of the circumstances surrounding Green’s 
injury. Dr. Kuhnlein diagnosed Green with cervical spondylosis and right 
radiculopathy/radiculitis as well as BPPV. Dr. Stalvey also diagnosed her with cervical 
spondylosis. Dr. Kuhnlein credibly opined Green’s sudden turn of her head “‘lit up’ and 
materially aggravated the underlying degenerative changes in her neck, producing the 
radiculopathic or radiculitic symptoms from which she now suffers” and that her head-
turn is the most likely cause of her BPPV symptoms. Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinion on 
causation is therefore the most credible. 
Green has satisfied her burden of proof on medical causation. The weight of the 
evidence demonstrates Green’s sudden turn of her head to check monitors in response 
to an alarm caused her injury. The question now turns to her entitlement to benefits.  

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 20 
3 .  
B e n e f i t s .  
Green contends she is entitled to temporary disability or healing period benefits 
from January 7, 2019, through October 3, 2019, and permanent disability benefits. The 
defendants dispute her entitlement to any benefits. They have paid Green no benefits to 
date. 
Under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, “if a claimant had a pre-existing 
condition or disability, aggravated, accelerated, worsened or ‘lighted up’ by an injury 
which arose out of and in the course of employment resulting in a disability found to 
exist, [she] would be accordingly entitled to compensation.” Musselman v. Cent. Tel. 
Co., 154 N.W.2d 128, 132 (Iowa 1967); see also Plumrose USA v. Hathaway, 844 
N.W.2d 469 (Iowa App. 2014) (Table). Because the weight of the evidence in this case 
establishes Green sustained a work injury by lighting up underlying degenerative 
changes in her neck when she turned her head to check a patient’s vitals, she is entitled 
to workers’ compensation if she can establish that she sustained a disability in 
accordance with applicable statutory criteria. 
a .  
H e a l i n g  P e r i o d .  
Temporary benefits compensate an employee for lost wages until the employee 
is able to return to work. Mannes v. Fleetguard, Travelers Ins. Co., 770 N.W.2d 826, 
830 (Iowa 2009). An injured employee is entitled to temporary total disability (TTD) or 
healing period (HP) benefits when the employee is unable to work during a period of 
convalescence caused by a work injury. Iowa Code §§ 85.33(1), 85.34(1). Whether an 
employee’s injury causes a permanent disability dictates whether the employee’s 
temporary benefits are considered TTD or HP. Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. 
Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 200 (Iowa 2010) (citing Clark v. Vicorp Rests., Inc., 696 
N.W.2d 596, 604–05 (Iowa 2005)). If there is a permanent disability, the benefits are 
considered HP; if not, they are TTD. See id. 
As discussed below, Green has sustained a permanent disability. Consequently, 
her benefits for time off work are considered healing period benefits under the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Act. Under Iowa Code section 85.34(1): 
If an employee has suffered a personal injury causing permanent partial 
disability for which compensation is payable as provided in subsection 2 of 
this section, the employer shall pay to the employee compensation for a 
healing period, as provided in section 85.37, beginning on the first day of 
disability after the injury, and until the employee has returned to work or it 
is medically indicated that significant improvement from the injury is not 
anticipated or until the employee is medically capable of returning to 
employment substantially similar to the employment in which the 
employee was engaged at the time of injury, whichever occurs first. 
The evidence shows Green left work on January 7, 2019, because she was 
unable to continue working due to the pain caused by her work injury. Bolton, the 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 21 
defendants’ chosen care provider, placed her on work restrictions that prevented her 
from being able to physically perform her job. After the defendants denied liability and 
refused to provide additional care, she sought care with her family provider, Francisco, 
who took her off work until further notice and completed certification paperwork for 
FMLA leave, which Broadlawns accepted. Green credibly testified at hearing Francisco 
did not release her to work because of her ongoing symptoms and there is no 
documentary evidence to the contrary. Dr. Kuhnlein found Green had reached 
maximum medical improvement (MMI) on October 3, 2019, the day Dr. Stalvey released 
her from care, and opined on her permanent functional impairment. 
For these reasons, the weight of the evidence shows Green is entitled to healing 
period benefits from January 7, 2019, through October 3, 2019. This time period 
consists of thirty-eight weeks and three days. The defendants shall pay to Green 
healing period benefits for this amount of weeks. 
b .  
P e r m a n e n t  D i s a b i l i t y.  
“‘A claimant must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the injury is a 
proximate cause of the claimed disability.’” Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care Ctr., 780 
N.W.2d 549, 560 (Iowa 2010) (quoting Grundmeyer v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 649 N.W.2d 
744, 752 (Iowa 2002). “Ordinarily, expert testimony is necessary to establish the causal 
connection between the injury and the disability for which benefits are claimed.” Id. The 
same standards apply to expert opinions in the disability context as medical causation 
context. Id. 
Dr. Kuhnlein is the only doctor to opine on extent of permanent functional 
impairment. He did so solely by utilizing the Guides. His opinion that Green sustained a 
ten percent functional impairment to the body as a whole caused by her work injury of 
January 7, 2019, at Broadlawns. Dr. Kuhnlein’s permanent functional impairment rating 
is adopted.  
Green sustained a neck injury causing permanent functional impairment. The 
neck is not a scheduled member listed under Iowa Code section 85.34(2). Therefore, 
Green’s injury is to the body as a whole and her disability is industrial in nature, which 
means it is determined based on the impact on her earning capacity. Iowa Code 
§ 85.34(2)(v); Clark v. Vicorp Rest., Inc., 696 N.W.2d 596, 605 (Iowa 2005). The agency 
considers the following factors when determining industrial disability: functional 
disability, age, education, qualifications, work experience, inability to engage in similar 
employment, earnings before and after the injury, motivation to work, personal 
characteristics, and the employer’s inability to accommodate the functional limitations. 
See E.N.T. Assoc. v. Collentine, 525 N.W.2d 827, 830 (Iowa 1994); Neal v. Annett 
Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 526 (Iowa 2012); IBP, Inc. v. Al-Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 
621, 632–33 (Iowa 2000); Ehlinger v. State, 237 N.W.2d 784, 792 (Iowa 1976). 
“Showing that the employee’s actual earnings have decreased is not always necessary 
‘to demonstrate an injury-caused reduction in earning capacity.’” Clark, 696 N.W.2d at 
605 (quoting Gray, 604 N.W.2d at 653). 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 22 
Green was forty-three years of age at the time of hearing. She was unable to 
complete DMACC coursework in the field of nursing. Her permanent work restrictions 
more likely than not preclude her from working as a nurse in the future.  
Green was able to obtain her CNA certificate, the only postsecondary training or 
education that she has completed and for which she obtained a certificate or degree. 
Since obtaining her CNA certificate, Green has worked almost exclusively in jobs with 
duties substantially similar to those of a CNA. The permanent work restrictions assigned 
by Dr. Kuhnlein due to the physical limitations caused by her work injury mean she will 
more likely than not be unable to work as a CNA again. Thus, Green’s primary vocation 
is no longer available to her because of the work injury.  
Green applied for an obtained a job at the Iowa Clinic as a patient experience 
representative. It is sedentary office work. She checks patients in at the Iowa Clinic, sits 
during the majority of her workday, uses a computer and fax machine to complete most 
of her job duties, and works only forty hours per week. Green earns over two dollars 
more per hour in this position than she did as a CNA but works less overtime. 
Green has met her burden of proof on permanent disability. The evidence shows 
it is more likely than not the work injury caused lost earning capacity. Based on the 
factors for determining lost earning capacity, her industrial disability is thirty-five percent. 
This entitles her to one hundred seventy-five weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits (thirty five percent multiplied by five hundred weeks equals one hundred 
seventy-five weeks), commencing on October 4, 2019.  
c .  
R a t e .  
The parties stipulated that Green’s gross earnings were five hundred seventy-
nine and 58/100 dollars ($579.58) per week at the time of injury. They also stipulated 
she was married and entitled to three exemptions. Consequently, Green’s workers’ 
compensation rate is four hundred one and 86/100 dollars ($401.86) per week. 
4 .  
M e d i c a l  E x p e n se s .  
For compensable injuries under Iowa Code chapter 85, the employer must 
“furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, 
physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies therefor 
and shall allow reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for such 
services.” Iowa Code § 85.27(1). Here, the defendants denied liability and refused care. 
After they did so, Green sought care on her own. 
The defendants’ denial of liability means they lost the right to choose Green’s 
care for the work injury. Winnebago Indus., Inc. v. Haverly, 727 N.W.2d 567, 575 (Iowa 
2006) (citing Trade Prof’ls, Inc. v. Shriver, 661 N.W.2d 119, 124 (Iowa 2003)). Green 
could therefore obtain reasonable care from any provider for the injury, at her expense, 
and seek reimbursement for such care through this contested case proceeding. See 
Trade Prof’ls, 661 N.W.2d at 121–25 (affirming on judicial review an agency decision 
ordering the payment of medical expenses for unauthorized care because the 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 23 
defendants denied liability for the alleged injury and therefore lost the right to control 
care).  
Green has proven compensability. Therefore, the defendants are responsible for 
the cost of reasonable care. The evidence establishes it is more likely than not the care 
itemized in Joint Exhibit 19 is related to the compensable work injury. Further, the care 
Green obtained was conservative in nature and after it had a limited effect, Green 
stopped seeking out care except for prescription medications through her family 
physician. The weight of the evidence shows the care was reasonable. Green is 
therefore entitled to payment for the medical expenses in Joint Exhibit 19. 
5 .  
C o s t s .  
“All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be taxed in the 
discretion of the commissioner.” Iowa Code § 86.40. “Fee-shifting statutes using ‘all 
costs’ language have been construed ‘to limit reimbursement for litigation expenses to 
those allowed as taxable court costs.’” Des Moines Area Reg'l Transit Auth. v. Young, 
867 N.W.2d 839, 846 (Iowa 2015) (quoting City of Riverdale v. Diercks, 806 N.W.2d 
643, 660 (Iowa 2011)). Statutes and administrative rules providing for recovery of costs 
are strictly construed. Id. (quoting Hughes v. Burlington N. R.R., 545 N.W.2d 318, 321 
(Iowa 1996)).  
Because Green prevailed on the disputed issues, she is entitled to taxation of the 
following costs under the following provisions of 876 IAC 4.33:  
 One hundred eighteen and 00/100 ($118.00) for the amount paid for 
the transcript and videoconference for Green’s deposition as the cost 
of the attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or presence of 
mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, 876 IAC 
4.33(1), and transcription costs, id. at 4.33(2);  
 
 Thirteen and 90/100 dollars ($13.90) for the cost of service, id. at 
4.33(3); and 
 
 One hundred three and 00/100 dollars ($103.00) for the filing fee, id. at 
4.33(7). 
Green also seeks taxation of the cost of Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME report. The 
assessment of costs includes “the reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two 
doctors’ or practitioners’ reports.” 876 IAC 4.33(6).  
A “report” is a “formal oral or written presentation of facts or a 
recommendation for action.” Black's Law Dictionary 1492 (10th ed.2014). 
The word “obtain” is used as a modifier in the rule and means “[t]o bring 
into one's own possession; to procure, esp[ecially] through effort.” Id. at 
1247. Thus, the concept of obtaining a report for a hearing is separate 
from the concept of a physical examination. A “physical examination” is 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 24 
“[a]n examination of a person's body by a medical professional to 
determine whether the person is healthy, ill, or disabled.” Id. at 680. The 
concept of “obtaining” a report is separate from the process of “obtaining” 
an examination. Our legislature recognized as much by separately 
authorizing the commissioner to appoint “a duly qualified, impartial 
physician to examine the injured employee and make report.” Iowa Code § 
86.38. A medical report for purposes of a hearing is aligned with a 
prehearing medical deposition. In the context of the assessment of costs, 
the expenses of the underlying medical treatment and examination are not 
part of the costs of the report or deposition. 
Young, 867 N.W.2d at 845–46.  
Dr. Kuhnlein conducted a full IME of Green for this case. His report shows he 
performed an examination and reviewed medical records. However, there is no itemized 
bill in evidence and Green paid for the IME and report with one check. (Jt. Ex. 20, p. 
121) Consequently, the weight of the evidence shows Green is not entitled to the full 
three thousand ninety and 50/100 dollars ($3,090.50) paid to Dr. Kuhnlein. While 
somewhat speculative, the undersigned awards half this amount as the cost of the 
report. The defendants shall pay Green one thousand five hundred forty-five and 25/10 
($1,545.25) as the cost of an expert report under 876 IAC 4.33(6). 
ORDER 
Based on the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) The defendants shall pay to Green at the rate of four hundred one and 86/100 
dollars ($401.86) per week: 
a) One hundred seventy-five (175) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits from the commencement date of October 4, 2019. 
b) Thirty-eight and 43/100 (38.43) weeks of healing period benefits from 
January 7, 2019, through October 3, 2019. 
2) The defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
3) The defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein 
as set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
4) The defendants shall pay the medical expenses itemized in Joint Exhibit 19. 
5) The defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by Rule 876 
IAC 3.1(2). 
 
 

GREEN V. BROADLAWNS MEDICAL CENTER 
Page 25 
6) The defendants shall pay to Green the following amounts for the following 
costs: 
a) One hundred eighteen and 80/100 dollars ($118.80) for the attendance 
of a certified shorthand reporter or presence of mechanical means at a 
deposition and a copy of Green’s deposition transcript under 876 IAC 
4.33 (1) and (2); 
b) Thirteen and 90/100 dollars ($13.90) for the cost of service under id. at 
4.33(3);  
c) One thousand five hundred forty-five and 25/10 ($1,545.25) for Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s IME report as the cost of an expert report, id. at 4.33(6); 
and 
d) One hundred three and 00/100 dollars ($103.00) for the filing fee under 
rule id. at 4.33(7). 
7) The parties shall be responsible for paying their own hearing costs. Each 
party shall pay an equal share of the cost of the transcript.  
Signed and filed this _23rd _ day of February, 2022. 
 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
          COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Jason Neifert (via WCES) 
Valerie Landis (via WCES) 
Jane Lorentzen (via WCES) 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal mus t 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
