Case Number: 22700162.01
Case Title:  BARACH, JOHN V. CITY OF DES MOINES
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Barach John-22700162.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JOHN BARACH, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
File No. 22700162.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                 
CITY OF DES MOINES, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
          Head Note:  1402.20 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
John Barach, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits against City of Des Moines, a self-insured employer. This case 
came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on April 13, 2023. The case 
proceeded to a live video hearing via Zoom.   
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing. On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations were 
accepted, and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 3, and Defendant’s Exhibits A through C. All exhibits were received without 
objection. 
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf.  No other witnesses testified at hearing.  
The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing.  All parties 
served their post-hearing briefs on May 12, 2023, at which time this case was deemed 
fully submitted to the undersigned. 
 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the course 
of employment, on January 1, 2020;  
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Oct-12  09:19:32     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BARACH V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 2 
 
2. Whether the alleged January 1, 2020, injury is a cause of temporary 
disability during a period of recovery; 
 
3. Whether the alleged injuries were a cause of permanent disability; 
 
4. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits, 
if any; and  
 
5. Costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
The instant case involves alleged injuries occurring on January 1, 2020, and 
November 19, 2021.  This decision will also discuss an injury that occurred on 
November 20, 2019; however, the November 20, 2019, injury is not a matter in dispute 
within the current case.  The claimant at the center of this case is John Barach.  At the 
time of the evidentiary hearing, Barach was 43 years old. (Hearing Transcript, page 9) 
He attended high school in Des Moines, Iowa and graduated with a diploma in 1998. 
(Id.) Barach subsequently completed an apprenticeship with Cement Finishers Local 21 
and received training through Des Moines Area Community College. (Id.)   
 
Barach’s employment history largely consists of manual labor work involving 
concrete. (Hr. Tr., p. 10)  In 2014, Barach applied for and ultimately accepted a 
maintenance position in the Streets Department for the City of Des Moines. (Hr. Tr., p. 
10)  In this role, claimant performed semi-skilled work in connection with the 
maintenance and construction of roads and other City facilities. (Defendant’s Exhibit A, 
p. 1)  In 2018, Barach made the switch from working in the Streets Department to 
working in the Sewers Department. (Hr. Tr., p. 10)  In the Sewers Department, Barach 
tears out and rebuilds broken sewer structures. (Hr. Tr., p. 11)  The job involves “very 
heavy” work. (Id.) 
 
The first injury that will be discussed in this decision occurred on November 19, 
2021.  On this date of injury, Barach was on his hands and knees finishing concrete. 
(Hr. Tr., p. 12)  Barach slipped in the process and extended his hands in an attempt to 
break his fall. (Id.)  Regrettably, during this maneuver, his left ring finger became 
ensnared on a form and pulled away from his middle finger. (Joint Exhibit 2, p. 20)  
Defendant accepted the injury and directed claimant’s care to ZeHui Han, M.D.  
 
An MRI, dated February 10, 2022, revealed a small amount of fluid along the 
volar margin of the fourth metacarpal head; however, there was no evidence of a high-
grade muscular strain or injury. (JE3, p. 27)  Based on the MRI report, Dr. Han opined 
he did not have a good answer for what was causing claimant’s pain. (JE4, p. 29)  

BARACH V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 3 
 
Nevertheless, Dr. Han referred claimant to occupational therapy in an attempt to 
improve his pain. (Id.) 
 
Dr. Han discharged Barach on March 11, 2022, following a verbal altercation that 
will be discussed in greater detail below. (JE4, p. 31) 
 
Following his release from Dr. Han’s care, Barach presented to Shane Cook, 
M.D. for a second opinion on April 5, 2022. (JE5, p. 37)  Claimant complained of a sore 
left ring finger, with additional soreness in the palm under the finger. (Id.)  Dr. Cook 
reviewed the February 10, 2022, imaging and diagnosed Barach with left ring finger and 
small finger stenosing flexor tenosynovitis. (Id.)  Dr. Cook recommended a 
corticosteroid injection of the left ring finger. (Id.)   
 
The injection was performed on April 21, 2022, but provided no benefit. (JE5, pp. 
40, 44)  In response, Dr. Cook provided, 
 
I did state it is very unusual to not have any triggering and have the 
injection not be helpful.  His MRI was reviewed again.  I do not see any 
reason why he is having this level of pain.  He does have a small fluid 
collection deep to the flexor tendons of the fourth digit but no collateral 
ligament injury or volar plate injury.  
 
(Id.)  Dr. Cook then opined he did not have any further treatment to offer and placed 
Barach at maximum medical improvement, without restrictions. (Id.)   
 
 
In a letter dated May 23, 2022, Dr. Cook summarized his treatment of claimant 
and assessed claimant’s permanent impairment. (See JE5, p. 47)  Dr. Cook noted that 
claimant had no mechanical signs of triggering in the left ring or small fingers. (JE5, p. 
47)  He further noted that claimant had full range of motion of the MP, PIP and DIP 
joints of the left ring and small fingers. (Id.)  Dr. Cook confirmed that claimant had 
reached MMI and assigned zero percent upper extremity impairment. (Id.)  Dr. Cook’s 
rating was made pursuant to the AMA Guidelines to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition. (Id.) 
 
 
Barach returned to Dr. Cook on November 10, 2022, with complaints of ongoing 
pain in the palm of his hand. (JE5, p. 50)  Given the claimant’s significant pain with any 
palpation over the A1 pulley region and fullness of the area, Dr. Cook offered both 
surgical and non-surgical treatment options.  Barach elected to pursue an A1 pulley 
release with flexor tenosynovectomy. (Id.)   
 
Dr. Cook performed the recommended surgery on November 29, 2022. (JE5, p. 
52)  Nine weeks later, Dr. Cook placed claimant at maximum medical improvement and 
released him to return to work without restrictions. (JE5, p. 57)  Dr. Cook did not provide 
an updated impairment assessment. (See id.) 
 

BARACH V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 4 
 
In response to Dr. Cook’s initial impairment assessment, claimant sought an 
independent medical evaluation with Sunil Bansal, M.D. (Claimant Exhibit 1) As part of 
the evaluation, Dr. Bansal conducted a records review and physical examination.  The 
examination took place on November 17, 2022. (Ex. 1, p. 1)   
 
Notably, Dr. Bansal's report primarily addresses the November 20, 2019, and 
January 1, 2020, injuries; it does not address the alleged November 19, 2021, work 
injury to claimant’s left ring and small fingers. (See Ex. 1, p. 1)  When addressing 
causation, Dr. Bansal did not describe the acute injury that claimant sustained on 
November 19, 2021. Instead, Dr. Bansal described the left ring trigger finger injury as, 
“[T]he cumulative mechanism of injury of repetitively gripping and lifting heavy objects, 
as well as frequent use of a jackhammer, is consistent with his left ring trigger finger, 
and the need for surgery.” (Ex. 1, p. 12)   
 
While Dr. Bansal's report does briefly allude to the claimant slipping and falling 
on his hand, it intertwines this reference with a description of the left hand pain as a 
continuation of the November 20, 2019, left arm injury within the same paragraph. (See 
Exhibit 1, page 8)  Furthermore, Dr. Bansal's report seems to conflate the November 19, 
2021, date of injury with the date when the claimant underwent a left trigger finger 
release. (See Ex. 1, p. 8) (“He continued to have pain in his hand, and underwent a 
trigger finger release at the end of November 2021.”)  It is possible Dr. Bansal meant to 
convey the trigger finger release occurred at the end of November 2022; however, such 
an interpretation would still not result in a coherent opinion.   
 
Although Dr. Bansal did not specifically address the November 19, 2021, injury, 
he nevertheless assigned impairment to the left ring finger and small finger. (Ex. 1, p. 
11)  He assigned 6 percent impairment to the ring finger and 3 percent impairment to 
the small finger. (Id.)  He then converted these ratings to 1 percent hand impairment. 
(Id.) 
 
Claimant asserts Dr. Cook’s impairment rating is not credible as it was assigned 
prior to the November 29, 2022, left trigger finger release.  While claimant’s assertion is 
correct, the same can be said of Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating.  Dr. Cook performed 
the left trigger finger release on November 29, 2022. (JE5, p. 52)  Although Dr. Bansal 
produced his report on March 13, 2023, he conducted his physical examination of 
claimant on November 17, 2022. (Ex. 1, p. 1)  While Dr. Bansal's report makes 
reference to the November 29, 2022, procedure, there is no indication that Dr. Bansal 
reexamined the claimant following the November 29, 2022, procedure.  This raises 
legitimate questions regarding the range of motion measurements Dr. Bansal relied 
upon to formulate his impairment rating. 
 
Given the noted issues with both impairment assessments, I decline the 
opportunity to adopt either impairment rating. Instead, I find claimant provided 
insufficient evidence to establish the November 19, 2021, injury is a cause of permanent 
disability. 
 

BARACH V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 5 
 
As mentioned, claimant is also alleging he sustained a cumulative injury to his 
right arm on or about January 1, 2020.  
 
On November 20, 2019, Barach was tasked with loading a particular manhole 
cover into a vehicle with his supervisor. (JE2, p. 10)  After locating the manhole cover, 
Barach picked it up with both hands and carried it to his vehicle.  While performing this 
activity, Barach felt a burning sensation in his left elbow. (Id.)  Barach reported the injury 
to his supervisor but did not immediately seek medical treatment. (Id.)  Importantly, the 
claimant is not requesting that the undersigned address the left elbow injury sustained 
on November 20, 2019, within the scope of this proceeding.     
Barach first presented for medical care for his left elbow on January 2, 2020. 
(See Ex. 1, p. 2; Ex. B, p. 2)  While the medical records are not in evidence, Dr. 
Bansal’s IME report provides a summary of some of the medical treatment claimant 
received for his left elbow. (See Ex. 1, pp. 2-8; see also Ex. B, pp. 2-4)  Conservative 
treatment was recommended, which included physical therapy, ice packs, and activity 
restrictions. (See Ex. 1, p. 2; Ex. B, p. 2)  There is no evidence claimant reported right 
elbow pain at this initial visit.   
When conservative measures failed, claimant sought a second opinion from Dr. 
Cook.  Dr. Cook believed that claimant most likely had a partially torn distal biceps 
tendon and recommended surgery to address the same. (See JE2, p. 10)  The surgery 
was performed on July 27, 2020. (See Ex. 1, p.3)   
 
According to a medical records summary in evidence, claimant first reported right 
elbow pain on March 9, 2020. (See Ex. B, p. 3)  However, the medical record is not in 
evidence.  In any event, claimant did not formally request medical treatment for his right 
elbow until September 10, 2020. (See Ex. B, p. 4)   
Defendants directed claimant to UnityPoint Health Des Moines Occupational 
Medicine where he saw Jon Yankey, M.D. (See JE2, p. 10)  Dr. Yankey first evaluated 
claimant on September 22, 2020. (JE2, p. 10)  After detailing his course of treatment 
following the November 20, 2019, left elbow injury, claimant reported a gradual onset of 
right elbow pain that presented in February or March 2020. (Id.)  The record provides, 
“[T]he patient claims that his right elbow pain is the result of his injury on 11/20/2019.” 
(JE2, p. 11)  Barach asserted that he reported his right elbow pain to a provider at 
Occupational Medicine in February or March 2020.  He further asserted that he reported 
his right elbow pain to his physical therapist and to Dr. Cook. (JE2, p. 11)  Barach did 
not submit medical records to substantiate these claims.   
Dr. Yankey assessed right elbow pain, but noted a diagnosis was not clear at the 
time. (JE2, p. 12)  Dr. Yankey opined that claimant’s right elbow examination was 
objectively negative, and further diagnostic evaluation would be necessary before he 
could address causation.  As such, Dr. Yankey recommended an MRI of the right 
elbow. (Id.)   
Defendants scheduled claimant for a right arm MRI on October 1, 2020, and 
October 19, 2020, but claimant cancelled both appointments. (JE2, p. 18)  On October 
21, 2020, claimant told a representative with the defendant insurer that his right arm 

BARACH V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 6 
 
was feeling better, and he did not want to pursue treatment for the same. (Id.)  He did 
not present for or request any medical care for his right elbow between October 21, 
2020, and May 3, 2021. 
Barach returned to Dr. Yankey on May 4, 2021. (JE2, p. 13) Although claimant 
reported persistent right elbow pain since the November 20, 2019, work injury, he also 
described a recent, acute increase in pain.  Claimant reported that he developed pain in 
his right elbow when he attempted to lift a “mop” on May 3, 2021. (Id.)  The “mop” 
claimant is referring to is a device used to level and smooth out cement. (See id.)  
Claimant believes the mop weighs between 10 and 15 pounds. (See JE2, p. 13)  Upon 
lifting the mop, claimant’s right elbow pain significantly increased. (Id.)  X-rays obtained 
of the right elbow revealed no evidence of fracture, dislocation, or other bony 
abnormality. (JE2, p. 14)  Dr. Yankey again opined that the cause of claimant’s right 
elbow pain was still not clear and recommended an MRI for further evaluation. (Id.) 
The May 18, 2021, MRI revealed minimal adjacent soft tissue edema at the 
biceps insertion consistent with a mild strain. (See JE2, p. 15) 
Dr. Yankey discussed the findings of the MRI report with claimant on May 24, 
2021. (JE2, p. 15)  He advised claimant that there was no evidence of either a structural 
soft tissue injury or a structural bone injury. (Id.)  He further advised claimant that he did 
not believe the right elbow pain was causally related to the reported work injury on 
November 20, 2019. (Id.)  According to Dr. Yankey’s medical record, claimant became 
very upset and angry during the discussion.  The record provides, “In the exam room, 
he verbally used a profanity directed at me.  Consequently, the office visit was then 
ended immediately and abruptly.” (Id.)  According to claimant, the two “had a couple of 
words back and forth” after Dr. Yankey told him his injury was not work-related.  
Claimant believes he called Dr. Yankey an “ass” before electing to walk out of his office. 
(Hr. Tr., pp. 19-20) 
A similar verbal altercation occurred between claimant and Dr. Han in March 
2022.  While collecting a verbal history from claimant, Dr. Han asked claimant about his 
recent physical therapy sessions.  Believing claimant provided a hesitated response, Dr. 
Han inquired further about physical therapy.  According to the medical record, claimant 
started using profanity, stating “let’s just get to the fucking reason why I am here.” (JE4, 
p. 30)  Dr. Han told claimant he would be released from care if he continued to use 
profanity.  Claimant became “very aggressive and combative.”  Claimant allegedly 
approached Dr. Han and told him he was a “fucking prick.” (JE4, p. 31)  Dr. Han advised 
claimant he was released from care and instructed him to leave the office. (Id.) 
Claimant testified to his version of events at the evidentiary hearing.  According 
to claimant, Dr. Han asked him, “Do you like your physical therapist?” (Hr. Tr., p. 21)  
When claimant responded, “She’s okay,” Dr. Han sat up in his chair and “started going 
on a rant of why would I say she’s okay[.]” (Id.)  Claimant replied with a series of his 
own questions, such as, “What do you mean do I like her? Am I attracted to her? Do I 
think I’m getting good medical treatment? What do you mean?” (Id.)  Finally, claimant 
asserts he told Dr. Han he was there to talk about his hand, not his physical therapist. 
(Id.)  From there, an argument ensued, and claimant confirmed that Dr. Han told him not 

BARACH V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 7 
 
to use profanity in his office.  However, according to claimant, Dr. Han told him, “Don’t 
you fucking say fuck in my fucking office again. Do you fucking understand me?” (Hr. 
Tr., p. 22) 
Claimant makes several other claims regarding Dr. Han’s behavior during 
appointments.  He asserts that when he asked Dr. Han questions, Dr. Han would reply, 
“That’s one of the dumbest things anybody has ever asked me.” (Hr. Tr., p. 22)  
Additionally, claimant asserts that during his examinations, Dr. Han would only touch 
the tip of his finger before stating, “There’s nothing wrong with you.” (Id.) 
Megan Frizzell, a physician extender who attended the appointment in question, 
provided a recorded statement in this case. (JE4, pp. 33-36)  Ms. Frizzell confirmed the 
altercation began when Dr. Han asked claimant about physical therapy. (JE4, p. 34)  
Ms. Frizzell confirmed claimant responded with profanity noting, “he wanted to get to the 
effing reason why he was there and that he didn’t want to play games.” (Id.)  According 
to Ms. Frizzell, “Dr. Han told the patient that he didn’t appreciate the language and said 
that if it continued that way, he was gonna [sic] be released from his care as he does 
not tolerate that behavior and the patient stood up and approached Dr. Han, uh, in 
aggressive behavior and he was asked to leave the office.” (Id.)  Ms. Frizzell added that 
the claimant was “up in his face.” (Id.)  Ms. Frizzell also confirmed that Dr. Han used 
profanity and asked the claimant if he was going to hit him. (JE4, pp. 34-35) 
Claimant concedes that he overreacted in the above situations; however, he 
notes his reactions were consistent with his diagnosed mental health issues.  Mental 
health conditions can understandably impact behavior and interactions.  While it is 
important to acknowledge claimant’s mental health conditions as potential factors 
contributing to his verbal altercations with Dr. Han and Dr. Yankey, the veracity of the 
allegations made against Dr. Han and Dr. Yankey must be evaluated independently, 
based on available evidence and objective assessments.  Claimant asserts the 
statements made by Dr. Han and Dr. Yankey during these verbal altercations diminish 
their overall credibility.  I do not reach the same conclusion.   
Claimant relies upon the expert medical opinion of Dr. Bansal to establish 
causation for the right arm injury.  In his report, Dr. Bansal opines that claimant injured 
his right arm in early 2020 from the cumulative performance of his job duties. (Ex. 1, pp. 
8, 12)  However, Dr. Bansal’s understanding of the January 1, 2020, work injury is not in 
line with claimant’s rendition of events.  During his testimony, Barach asserted his belief 
that the onset of right elbow symptoms was linked to his inability to utilize his left arm 
effectively following the November 20, 2019, injury.  He specifically contended that his 
engagement in light duty tasks, such as using his right arm exclusively to sweep the 
floor and scoop up piles of debris, directly contributed to the development of his right 
elbow injury. (Hr. Tr., pp. 15-16)  In his post-hearing brief, Barach further asserts that he 
was overcompensating with his right arm. (Claimant’s Brief, p. 2)   
At no point does Dr. Bansal’s report discuss claimant sustaining an injury as a 
result of overcompensation.  To reconcile the two opinions, claimant’s post-hearing brief 
provides, “Not only did the heavy manual labor performed by the Claimant on a daily 
basis prior to his January 1, 2020 injury contribute to his right elbow condition, but 

BARACH V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 8 
 
working one-handed duty while recovering from left distal bicep repair surgery further 
aggravated his condition.” (Claimant’s Brief, p. 8)  Importantly, claimant’s testimony was 
that his right elbow pain was aggravated by his light duty work in February or March 
2020, well before he underwent the left distal bicep repair surgery in July 2020. (Hr. Tr., 
p. 15) 
Dr. Yankey addressed causation of the alleged right elbow injury in a letter dated 
May 28, 2021.  According to Dr. Yankey’s review of the medical records, claimant 
presented for a total of 17 appointments throughout January and February 2020.  The 
medical records for those visits do not document any complaints of right elbow pain. 
(See Ex. B, p. 4)  Dr. Yankey asserts the claimant first reported right elbow pain on 
March 9, 2020. (See Ex. B, p. 4) This was the only documented instance between 
November 20, 2019, and September 22, 2020, that claimant reported right elbow pain.  
Ultimately, Dr. Yankey opined that claimant’s right elbow pain is not causally 
related to an acute injury on November 20, 2019. (Ex. B, p. 5)  He further opined 
claimant’s right elbow pain was not caused by claimant overcompensating with his right 
arm due to the restrictions placed on his left elbow following the November 20, 2019, 
work injury. (Id.)  Dr. Yankey added that using a broom to sweep does not require 
significant force and does not rise to the level of intensity that would result in a 
significant injury to the claimant’s right elbow. (Id.) 
Claimant challenges the credibility of Dr. Han and Dr. Yankey.  Claimant’s 
contention is rooted in previous instances where both medical professionals purportedly 
faced issues related to patient communication, rudeness, and misrepresentation of 
events.  Additionally, claimant raises concerns about the logical soundness of Dr. 
Yankey’s past opinions, which were rejected by this agency.  Claimant is attempting to 
draw parallels between unrelated situations to support his argument.  In the matter at 
hand, claimant fails to provide any substantial evidence that Dr. Han and Dr. Yankey 
exhibited similar behavior or provided illogical opinions.  Claimant has failed to establish 
a valid basis for questioning the credibility of these medical professionals in the present 
case. 
 
After reviewing the competing medical opinions, I find the causation opinion of 
Dr. Yankey to be more thorough and convincing than the causation opinion of Dr. 
Bansal. Unlike Dr. Bansal, Dr. Yankey specifically addressed claimant’s allegations of 
overcompensation.  Dr. Yankey also had the benefit of physically examining claimant’s 
right elbow on a number of occasions.  I do not find claimant’s allegations regarding his 
discussions with Dr. Yankey to be credible.   Therefore, I find that claimant failed to 
prove by a preponderance of the evidence that he sustained a right elbow injury that 
arose out of and in the course of his employment.   
 
All other disputed issues with respect to the alleged January 1, 2020, work injury 
are rendered moot. 
 
Costs will be addressed in the Conclusions of Law section. 
 

BARACH V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 9 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995). An 
injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the injury 
and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309. The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke's Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
 
In this case, I found claimant provided insufficient evidence to establish the 
November 19, 2021, injury is a cause of permanent disability.  Accordingly, I conclude 
that claimant failed to prove entitlement to an award of permanent disability benefits for 
the November 19, 2021, work injury. 
 
As for the alleged January 1, 2020, work injury, I found the opinions of Dr. 
Yankey to be the most credible and convincing.  Relying upon his medical opinions, I 

BARACH V. CITY OF DES MOINES 
Page 10 
 
found that claimant failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that he 
sustained a right arm injury that arose out of and in the course of his employment.  
Having made this finding, I conclude that claimant failed to prove entitlement to an 
award of temporary or permanent disability benefits. 
 
The final disputed issue is whether costs should be assessed against either 
party. Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency. Iowa Code section 86.40. 
Exercising the agency's discretion, I conclude that neither party's costs should be 
assessed in this case. Rather, all parties should bear their own costs. 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Claimant takes nothing. 
 
All parties shall pay their own costs. 
 
Signed and filed this __12th __ day of October, 2023. 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Christopher Spaulding (via WCES) 
John Haraldson (via WCES) 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
