Case Number: 23009765.01
Case Title:  PESKA, DARRELL V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL, LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Peska Darrell - 23009765.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DARRELL PESKA, 
  : 
 
FILE NO. 23009765.01 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
  A R B I T R A T I O N 
 
 
  :                           
GRAPHIC PACKAGING 
  : 
 
      D E C I S I O N 
INTERNATIONAL, LLC, 
  : 
 
 
  :                               
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                                 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
LIBERTY INSURANCE CORPORATION, : 
HEAD NOTE NOS:  1402.30, 2208,  
 
 
  :              2209, 2401, 2402, 2802, 2907, 3001 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Darrell Peska, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against Graphic Packaging 
International, LLC, as the employer and Liberty Insurance Corporation, as the insurance 
carrier. This case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on July 16, 
2024.  Pursuant to an order from the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this 
case was heard via videoconference using Zoom.  
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no findings or decisions on factual or legal issues relative to the 
parties’ stipulations will be made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their 
stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 2, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 4, as well as Defendants Exhibits A through P. Claimant testified on his own 
behalf. Debra Peska testified on Claimant’s behalf.  Paris Curry-Wilder testified on 
defendants’ behalf.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration 
hearing.  The case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on September 9, 
2024. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Mar-10  10:32:19     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

PESKA V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL, LLC 
Page 2 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the course of 
employment, on June 2, 2023; 
 
2. Whether the claim is barred for failure to give timely notice of the injury; 
 
3. Whether the claim is barred as an untimely claim; 
 
4. Whether the June 2, 2023, work injury caused permanent disability and, if so, 
the extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits; 
 
5. Claimant’s gross earnings at the time of the alleged work injury; 
 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care; 
 
7. Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Darrell Peska, claimant, was a 67-year-old individual on the date of hearing. 
(Hearing Transcript, page 32) He graduated from high school in 1975.  Mr. Peska began 
his career at Tama Paperboard on August 11, 1975, embarking on what would become 
an impressive 47-year career with a single employer. (Exhibit J, p. 76)  The employer, 
Tama Paperboard, specialized in manufacturing recycled paperboard for consumer 
product and the food and beverage industries.  Graphic Packaging International 
acquired the Tama Paperboard facility in February 2023. (See Hr. Tr., p. 61)  Shortly 
thereafter, it was announced that the Tama Paperboard facility would be closing its 
doors. (Hr. Tr., p. 69)  The last day of operations was June 2, 2023. (Id.) 
Mr. Peska asserts that he sustained hearing loss, both nonoccupational and 
occupational, as a result of his work at Graphic Packaging International and its 
predecessors.  Specifically, Mr. Peska asserts he is entitled to benefits for occupational 
hearing loss pursuant to Iowa Code Chapter 85B and high frequency hearing loss 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(s)(1).  Over the course of his 47-year career, 
Mr. Peska performed a number of different jobs. (Ex. P, Deposition pp. 10-11)  These 
jobs included operating an electric saw to make pallets, driving a forklift to haul paper, 
and mixing clay to be used as a coating in paper production. (See id.)  Mr. Peska 
testified that he was exposed to significant noise in all positions. (Ex. P, Depo. pp. 13-
14) 
Defendants concede that claimant sustained a compensable occupational 
hearing loss claim; however, they dispute whether claimant’s hearing loss in the high 

PESKA V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL, LLC 
Page 3 
frequencies is separately compensable under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(s)(1).  
Defendants also contend that claimant failed to provide timely notice of his high 
frequency hearing loss and that his claim is barred by the statute of limitations. 
Mr. Peska asserts the date of injury for the high frequency hearing loss claim is 
June 2, 2023.  He argues, “Iowa Code assigns a different date of occurrence for 
occupational hearing loss, and the same date should be assigned to high frequency 
hearing loss under Iowa Code § [85.34(2)(s)(1)].”  No additional argument was provided 
on this point.  Alternatively, Mr. Peska asserts the discovery rule tolled the statute of 
limitations and notice requirements of the statutes. 
Realistically, there does not appear to be a dispute as to whether Mr. Peska 
sustained high frequency hearing loss as a result of his employment at Tama 
Paperboard.  Rather, the dispute appears to be whether the same is compensable.  In 
any event, I find that Mr. Peska developed hearing loss, including high frequency 
hearing loss, as a result of excessive noise exposure at Tama Paperboard.   
Defendants introduced documentation of the noise testing performed at the Tama 
plant, which demonstrated significant noise exposures occurring throughout the plant. 
(Ex. O, pp. 136-151)  Mr. Peska did not use hearing protection early in his career.  He 
started wearing hearing protection when it became mandatory in the 1990s. (Hr. Tr., p. 
40)  It does not appear as though Mr. Peska had other significant noise exposures 
throughout his life. (Hr. Tr., p. 58) 
The Tama Paperboard facility performed annual hearing tests on Mr. Peska.  Mr. 
Peska believes he underwent a hearing test every year he worked for defendants. (Ex. 
P, Depo. p. 17)  The hearing test results were admitted into evidence. (Joint Exhibit 1, 
pages 1-47)  According to Mr. Peska, Tama Paperboard provided him with the results of 
his hearing tests; however, Mr. Peska asserts no one explained the results to him. (Hr. 
Tr., pp. 34-35)  Mr. Peska testified he reviewed and kept all of the test results. (Hr. Tr., p. 
43)   
Starting in December 2004, Mr. Peska’s test results showed significant loss of 
hearing in the frequencies from 4000 Hz and higher. (JE1, p. 2) Notification letters sent 
to Mr. Peska clearly document severe hearing loss in frequencies of 4000 kHz and 
above. (JE1, pp. 24-25)  On December 1, 2004, Mr. Peska was notified that he had 
experienced an OSHA Standard Threshold Shift (STS) in both ears, which is a 10dB or 
greater shift in hearing. (JE1, p. 23)  According to Mr. Peska, such a shift prompted the 
defendant employer to send him to Wolfe Ear, Nose, and Throat (ENT) Clinic for further 
evaluation. (Hr. Tr., p. 35) 
On March 16, 2005, Michael Hill, M.D., of Wolfe ENT Clinic evaluated Mr. Peska. 
(JE 2, pp. 48-49)  Hearing tests conducted on December 28, 2004, and March 16, 2005, 
revealed a 5.73 percent hearing loss. (JE2, p. 51)  Dr. Hill opined that Mr. Peska had 
symmetrical high frequency sensorineural hearing loss with 92 percent speech 

PESKA V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL, LLC 
Page 4 
discrimination in both ears. (JE2, p. 48)  He recommended that Mr. Peska work in an 
environment under 95 dB with hearing protection to preserve his hearing. (Id.) 
At hearing, Mr. Peska testified that Dr. Hill told him that he would benefit from the 
use of hearing aids. (Hr. Tr., pp. 35-36)  Mr. Peska testified he did not obtain hearing 
aids on his own, however, because he believed Tama Paperboard should have paid for 
them. (Hr. Tr., pp. 55-56)  This testimony suggests that the claimant attributed his 
hearing issues and the need for hearing aids to his employment with Tama Paperboard 
in 2005.    
Debra Peska was called to testify on her husband’s behalf. (Hr. Tr., p. 24)  Mr. 
and Mrs. Peska have been married for over 42 years. (Id.)  According to Ms. Peska, Mr. 
Peska has had difficulties with hearing loss for as long as they have been married; 
however, his hearing loss has become noticeably worse over the past 15 years. (Hr. Tr., 
p. 28)  According to Ms. Peska, Mr. Peska has difficulty hearing the television, his 
telephone, and the doorbell. (Hr. Tr., pp. 25-26)  He also has a hard time communicating 
in social settings. (Hr. Tr., p. 27) 
After the Tama Paperboard facility closed, Mr. Peska obtained a part-time job as 
a janitor for Kwik Star. (Ex. P, Depo. pp. 35-36)  He concedes that his hearing loss does 
not limit his ability to function or work. (Ex. P, Depo. p. 38)  In addition to his part-time 
income, Mr. Peska receives social security retirement benefits. (Ex. P, Depo. pp. 36-37)  
Mr. Peska does not appear to have the desire or intention to return to full-time 
employment at this time. 
Audiologist Richard Tyler, Ph.D. conducted a telephone interview of Mr. Peska on 
October 25, 2023.  In addition to the interview, Dr. Tyler reviewed claimant’s medical 
records and hearing tests.  He authored a detailed report on October 23, 2023.1  Dr. 
Tyler explained that claimant's hearing loss is mostly at the higher frequencies and that 
the percentage of hearing loss calculated within the frequencies permitted by Iowa 
Code section 85B.4(3) may not fully quantify claimant's hearing impairment.  Utilizing 
his own methodology, which includes the frequencies of 4000, 6000, and 8000 Hz in the 
calculation, Dr. Tyler opined that claimant had age-corrected high frequency binaural 
hearing loss of 87 percent. (Ex. 1, p. 7)  While I appreciate the explanation provided by 
Dr. Tyler, I do not find the high frequency impairment rating to be convincing or 
compliant with the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition.  As for the methodology provided by the AMA Guides, Dr. Tyler assessed 41.3 
percent bilateral hearing loss. (Ex. 1, p. 6)   
Defendants sought an independent medical examination to be performed by 
Timothy Simplot, M.D. on March 18, 2024. (See Exhibit A)  Dr. Simplot assessed 
claimant with bilateral sensorineural hearing loss and tinnitus. (Ex. A, p. 3)  Utilizing the 
                                                 
1 There is an apparent inconsistency in Dr. Tyler’s IME report, w hich is dated October 23, 2023, but states that the interview  of Mr. 
Peska occurred on October 25, 2023.  It is unclear w hether one or both of these dates is a typographical error, or w hen the report 
w as actually finalized. 
 

PESKA V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL, LLC 
Page 5 
Iowa Workers’ Compensation Guidelines and audiometric testing, Dr. Simplot opined 
that claimant had age-corrected hearing loss of 46.8% in the left ear, 52.1% in the right 
ear, and a binaural hearing loss of 47.7%. (Ex. A, p. 4)  Dr. Simplot further opined that 
based on claimant’s level of complaints, an additional 5% rating for tinnitus would be 
appropriate. (Id.)  Dr. Simplot opined that claimant would benefit from the use of hearing 
aids. (Id.)   
Claimant was not operating under any work restrictions related to his hearing 
loss when the Tama Paperboard facility closed.  Claimant has not made any assertions 
regarding an inability to perform work because of his hearing loss.  Nevertheless, Dr. 
Tyler provided claimant should not work around loud noise, in a situation where the 
noise levels are unpredictable, in dangerous situations where accurate concentration is 
required, or in situations that are stressful. (Ex. 1, p. 9)  In comparison, Dr. Simplot 
opined that claimant did not require any job restrictions or accommodations for his 
hearing loss and tinnitus. (Ex. A, p. 4) 
As part of his IME report, Dr. Simplot addressed the opinions of Dr. Tyler. (Ex. A, 
p. 5)  Dr. Simplot agreed with Dr. Tyler’s assertion regarding the impact of high 
frequency hearing loss.  That being said, he explained that their opinions are 
inconsequential as the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Guidelines for the calculation of 
age-corrected hearing loss does not consider high frequency hearing loss. (Id.)  Dr. 
Simplot concluded his report by noting claimant is not a candidate for cochlear implants 
at this time. (Id.) 
Dr. Simplot expanded upon his opinions regarding high frequency hearing loss in 
a June 8, 2024, letter to defense counsel. (Ex. A, pp. 13-14)  He explained, 
The AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment 5th Edition, 
which has been the standard for evaluating hearing impairment does not 
provide an impairment rating for hearing loss in the 4000, 6000, and 8000 
Hz frequencies.  Therefore, high frequency hearing loss is not ratable 
under The AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment 5th 
Edition and is not included in the formula in Iowa Code 85B.9 for 
occupational hearing loss. 
(Ex. A, p. 13) 
As mentioned, Mr. Peska asserts he is entitled to permanent partial disability 
benefits under both Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(s)(1) and Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(s)(2).  Defendants concede that Mr. Peska sustained an injury, which arose out 
of and in the course of employment, on June 2, 2023; however, defendants contend 
claimant’s claim for benefits is limited to occupational hearing loss under Iowa Code 
Chapter 85B.  Defendants assert claimant’s claim for high frequency hearing loss would 
have a manifestation date well before June 2, 2023, and, as such, the claim would be 
barred for lack of timely notice and as an untimely claim.   

PESKA V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL, LLC 
Page 6 
With respect to defendants’ notice defense, I find the defendant employer had 
actual knowledge of claimant’s high frequency hearing loss.  The employer required 
annual hearing tests, and the test results in evidence clearly establish a shift in 
claimant's hearing levels.  When claimant experienced a Standard Threshold Shift in 
both ears, the defendant employer sent him for further treatment.  Following said 
treatment, a representative of the defendant employer sent claimant a letter regarding 
his work restrictions. (Ex. J, p. 80)  The defendant employer, and its predecessors, had 
actual knowledge of claimant’s hearing loss, high frequency hearing loss, and tinnitus. 
With respect to defendants' statute of limitations defense, I find that Mr. Peska 
knew he had hearing loss, including high frequency hearing loss, and its relation to his 
employment by at least March 16, 2005. 
Mr. Peska relies on the discovery rule to toll the statute of limitations and asserts 
he was not told he had work-related hearing loss until he reviewed Dr. Tyler’s IME report 
on or about October 23, 2023.  Mr. Peska’s post-hearing brief states, “Darrell was told 
as late as April 11, 2005, he did not have any hearing impairment.” However, this 
assertion is not consistent with the contents of the April 11, 2005, medical record. In 
fact, the letter from that date supports the undersigned’s conclusion that Mr. Peska was 
aware of his hearing loss and its relation to his employment by at least March 16, 2005. 
The letter begins, “Dear Mr. Peska: Here is the information you requested regarding a 
percentage of hearing loss.” (JE2, p. 51) (emphasis added) The letter then discloses 
that, based on hearing tests conducted on December 28, 2004, and March 16, 2005, 
claimant had a 5.73% hearing loss.  
While the April 11, 2005, letter does reference 0% hearing loss, this calculation 
pertains specifically to a February 3, 1993, hearing test—not to his more recent 
evaluations. Additionally, the letter notes that there was no baseline test from Tama 
Paperboard to determine Mr. Peska’s current percentage of loss. (Id.) Given these facts, 
Mr. Peska’s assertion is not supported by the medical record, and I find it to be not 
credible.  
Mr. Peska underwent annual hearing tests at Tama Paperboard. He conceded 
that he received and reviewed the results of each test.  Since 2004, his test results have 
documented severe high frequency hearing loss.  As a result of his test results, Mr. 
Peska was sent to the Wolfe ENT Clinic for further evaluation.  The evidentiary record 
establishes that Dr. Hill advised him of his hearing loss, including the high frequency 
hearing loss, and its relationship to his work on or about March 16, 2005.   
In addition, Mr. Peska made a number of statements that suggest he attributed 
his hearing issues to his employment with Tama Paperboard well before the plant 
closed its doors.  As mentioned, Mr. Peska testified that he knew he needed hearing 
aids in 2005 but did not obtain them, believing his employer should cover the costs 
associated with the same. (Hr. Tr., pp. 55-56)  During his deposition, Mr. Peska testified 
that he has experienced ringing in his ears for approximately 25 years. (Ex. P, Depo. p. 

PESKA V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL, LLC 
Page 7 
24)  He further testified that he reported said ringing in his ears to his safety director 
“multiple times,” beginning in 2000. (Ex. P, Depo. pp. 25, 29)  Lastly, Mr. Peska was 
asked whether he believed his hearing issues were related to the noise exposure from 
his work at Tama Paperboard. He responded, “Yes.” Defense counsel then inquired 
whether he had always held that belief, to which Mr. Peska again answered, “Yes. I 
mean …” (Ex. P, Depo. p. 19) 
By March 16, 2005, as a reasonable person, Mr. Peska should have understood 
that he had hearing loss, including high frequency hearing loss, and ringing in his ears, 
that the conditions were caused by excessive noise exposure at Tama Paperboard, and 
that the conditions were significant.  I find that Mr. Peska knew more than two years 
before the filing of his original notice and petition on June 2, 2023, that he had high 
frequency hearing loss and ringing in his ears, that the conditions were caused by work, 
and that the conditions were potentially compensable.  Enough information existed to 
alert a reasonable person of the need to investigate.   
Turning to the extent of permanent impairment due to occupational hearing loss, I 
note that Dr. Tyler and Dr. Simplot were the only experts to assess impairment.  Both 
experts factored in claimant’s age, and both experts provided an impairment rating 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85B.  While the impairment assessments are similar, Dr. 
Simplot’s rating considered more recent testing than the testing available to Dr. Tyler.  
As such, Dr. Simplot’s rating is adopted for purposes of assessing permanency.   
The parties dispute the rate at which Mr. Peska’s weekly benefits should be paid.  
Review of the parties' respective positions on this issue reveals the primary dispute is 
the inclusion of various bonuses in the average weekly wage calculation. The defendant 
employer's rate calculation results in an average weekly rate of $1,133.17, and a weekly 
workers' compensation benefit rate of $745.81. (Ex. L, p. 108) Mr. Peska's rate 
calculation results in an average weekly rate of $1,624.09, and a weekly workers' 
compensation benefit rate of $1,036.14. (Ex. 3, p. 35) 
Graphic Packaging established a retention bonus program for hourly employees 
affected by the plant closure. (Hr. Tr., p. 62)  Mr. Peska’s rate calculation includes the 
incentive bonuses, while the defendants’ does not. (Ex. K)  First, the program included a 
monthly $500 “production” incentive based on attendance, production, and quality. (Id.)  
Employees did not have to meet the attendance, production, and quality targets to 
receive the incentive for the months of February and March 2023. (Hr. Tr., p. 67)  Mr. 
Peska received retention bonuses on April 21, 2023, May 19, 2023, and July 14, 2023. 
(Ex. 3, pp. 35, 40, 43, 45)  Second, employees could earn a separate retention bonus of 
$1,000 for each month worked, accruing until the closure date.  The sole condition for 
receiving the additional retention bonus was remaining employed through the plant’s 
final day of operation. (Hr. Tr., p. 63)  The incentives were designed to ensure sufficient 
staffing to maintain operations until the plant’s closure. (Hr. Tr., p. 62) 

PESKA V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL, LLC 
Page 8 
In addition, Mr. Peska received a “Gross Up” payment of $688.74 on April 28, 
2023. (Ex. 3, p. 35)  According to Ms. Wilder, the “gross up” payment was a one-time 
lump sum given to employees to account for missed company 401(k) contribution 
matches during the transition period after Graphic Packaging acquired the plant.  More 
specifically, from February to March, employees were still paid by their former employer, 
Greif, and did not officially transition to Graphic Packaging's payroll until April 2023.  
Despite this, Graphic Packaging honored the employees' prior 401(k) contributions and 
calculated a lump sum payment based on the assumed contributions for the period from 
January to March. The gross-up amount represented the company’s matching 
contribution, ensuring employees were made whole for the missed employer match 
during that transition period. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 65-66)  Graphic Packaging’s matching 
contribution to Mr. Peska’s 401k plan is not considered weekly earnings. 
 
The abovementioned bonuses were not intended to be regular or recurring; 
rather, they were part of a program put in place at a small number of plants that were 
being closed to ensure sufficient staffing.  I find these bonuses were irregular bonuses 
and they should be excluded from the rate calculation.  Therefore, I accept defendants’ 
rate calculation and find claimant's weekly compensation rate to be $745.81. 
Claimant is seeking alternate medical care in the form of hearing aids.  Both 
expert opinions establish that claimant could benefit from bilateral hearing aids.  Dr. 
Tyler recommends replacement of those devices every four to five years.  Dr. Tyler also 
mentions the possibility that claimant is a candidate for cochlear implants in the future; 
however, claimant testified he is not interested in such a procedure at this time. (Hr. Tr., 
p. 57)  According to the evidentiary record, defendants have already authorized 
claimant’s request for hearing aids.  Nevertheless, defendants will be ordered to provide 
the same. 
Claimant brought a successful petition in arbitration. Therefore, costs will be 
assessed in the Conclusions of Law section. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between 
the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309. The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 

PESKA V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL, LLC 
Page 9 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
 
Defendants concede that claimant sustained a compensable occupational 
hearing loss claim; however, they dispute whether claimant’s hearing loss in the high 
frequencies is separately compensable under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(s)(1).   
 
Realistically, there does not appear to be a dispute as to whether Mr. Peska 
sustained high frequency hearing loss as a result of his employment at Tama 
Paperboard.  Rather, the dispute appears to be whether the same is compensable.  In 
any event, I find that Mr. Peska developed hearing loss, including high frequency 
hearing loss, as a result of excessive noise exposure at Tama Paperboard.   
 
Defendants assert that Mr. Peska failed to give timely notice of his injuries and 
that his high frequency hearing loss claim is barred pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.23.  Iowa Code section 85.23 requires an employee to give notice of the occurrence 
of an injury to the employer within 90 days from the date of the occurrence, unless the 
employer has actual knowledge of the occurrence of the injury. 
The purpose of the 90-day notice or actual knowledge requirement is to give the 
employer an opportunity to timely investigate the facts surrounding the injury. The actual 
knowledge alternative to notice is met when the employer, as a reasonably 
conscientious manager, is alerted to the possibility of a potential compensation claim 
through information which makes the employer aware that the injury occurred and that it 
may be work related. Dillinger v. City of Sioux City, 368 N.W.2d 176 (Iowa 1985); 
Robinson v. Department of Transp., 296 N.W.2d 809 (Iowa 1980). 
Failure to give notice is an affirmative defense which the employer must prove by 
a preponderance of the evidence. DeLong v. Highway Commission, 229 Iowa 700, 295 
N.W. 91 (1940). 

PESKA V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL, LLC 
Page 10 
The first injury alleged is an occupational hearing loss.  By statute, claimant's 
hearing loss claim did not ripen until he separated from his employment or noisy work 
environment. Iowa Code section 85B.8.  In this instance, the employer required claimant 
to submit to annual hearing testing throughout his employment. Those hearing tests 
demonstrated obvious shifts in claimants' level of hearing and obvious hearing loss. The 
employer had actual knowledge of claimant's hearing loss by the date the plant closed. I 
conclude that the defendants' notice defense fails with respect to the occupational 
hearing loss claim.  For the same reason, I conclude that the defendants' notice defense 
fails with respect to the high frequency hearing loss claim. 
Defendants next assert Mr. Peska did not timely file his high frequency hearing 
loss claim and it is barred by the statute of limitations.  In order to address defendants’ 
defense, I must first determine the proper injury date for the high frequency hearing loss 
condition. 
Mr. Peska asserts the date of injury for the high frequency hearing loss claim is 
June 2, 2023.  He argues, “Iowa Code assigns a different date of occurrence for 
occupational hearing loss, and the same date should be assigned to high frequency 
hearing loss under Iowa Code § [85.34(2)(s)(1)].”  No additional argument was provided 
on this point.  I do not find claimant’s argument persuasive.  Instead, I find the high 
frequency hearing loss condition was cumulative in nature.   
When the injury develops gradually over time, the cumulative injury rule applies. 
The date of injury for cumulative injury purposes is the date on which the disability 
manifests. Manifestation is best characterized as that date on which both the fact of 
injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant's employment would be 
plainly apparent to a reasonable person. The date of manifestation inherently is a fact-
based determination. The fact-finder is entitled to substantial latitude in making this 
determination and may consider a variety of factors, none of which is necessarily 
dispositive in establishing a manifestation date. Among others, the factors may include 
missing work when the condition prevents performing the job, or receiving significant 
medical care for the condition.  
The evidentiary record establishes that claimant was advised about his hearing 
loss, including the high frequency hearing loss, and its relationship to his work by Dr. Hill 
in 2005.  I find claimant’s cumulative injury manifested on March 16, 2005.  On this 
date, as a reasonable person, Mr. Peska should have understood that he had hearing 
loss, including high frequency hearing loss, and that the conditions were caused by 
excessive noise exposure at Tama Paperboard.   
Mr. Peska relies on the discovery rule to toll the statute of limitations and asserts 
he was not told he had work-related hearing loss until he reviewed Dr. Tyler’s IME report 
on or about October 23, 2023.   
Iowa Code requires an employee to bring an original proceeding for benefits 
within two years from the date of the occurrence of the injury if the employer has paid 

PESKA V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL, LLC 
Page 11 
the employee no weekly indemnity benefits for the claimed injury. Iowa Code § 85.26(1). 
If the employer has paid the employee weekly benefits on account of the claimed injury, 
however, the employee must bring an original proceeding within three years from the 
date of last payment of weekly compensation benefits. Id.  
That the employee failed to bring a proceeding within the required time period is 
an affirmative defense which the employer must plead and prove by a preponderance of 
the evidence. See Dart v. Sheller-Globe Corp., II Iowa Industrial Comm'r Rep. 99 (App. 
1982). 
Under the interpretation of the discovery rule before the 2017 statutory 
amendments, the time period both for giving notice and filing a claim did not begin to 
run until the employee understood the nature, seriousness, and probable compensable 
character of the injury.  In 2017, the legislature added the following definitional sentence 
to sections 85.23 and 85.26(1): “For the purposes of this section, ‘date of the 
occurrence of the injury’ means the date that the employee knew or should have known 
that the injury was work-related.” 
The Iowa Supreme Court clarified the application of Iowa Code section 85.26 in 
Tweeten v. Tweeten, 999 N.W.2d 270, 281 (Iowa 2023).  The decision provides,  
The general assembly has chosen to limit the discovery rule to knowledge 
that an injury is work-related, not to knowledge of the compensable nature 
of the injury as we had previously recognized. Continuing to apply our prior 
common law discovery rule to further toll the limitation period until the 
employee is also aware of the permanent adverse impact of an injury would 
add words to the statute that the general assembly did not—something we 
cannot do. 
Id. at 282.  As such, the statute of limitations does not begin to run until the employee, 
as a reasonable person, knows or should know that the cumulative injury condition is 
work-related, without regard to whether the injury is also serious enough to be 
compensable. Id. at 282; Tyler v. Tyson Fresh Meats, Inc., 4 N.W.3d 721 (Iowa Ct. App. 
2024). 
Although Mr. Peska claims he did not know he had sustained high frequency 
hearing loss until he met with Dr. Tyler, I found that he knew or should have known that 
the high frequency hearing loss was serious on or before March 16, 2005.  At the very 
least, Mr. Peska as on inquiry notice to investigate his injury and claim.  He did not file 
his original notice and petition until July 25, 2023.  I conclude that the statute of 
limitations began running on his high frequency hearing loss claim by at least March 
2005 and expired long before his petition was filed.  Therefore, I conclude that Iowa 
Code section 85.26(1) bars the high frequency hearing loss claim. 
Regardless of the undersigned’s finding that Iowa Code section 85.26(1) bars the 
high frequency hearing loss claim, I note that claimant’s claim for high frequency 

PESKA V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL, LLC 
Page 12 
hearing loss would fail due to the lack of an impairment rating consistent with the AMA 
Guides, Fifth Edition.   
According to Iowa Code section 85.34(2), functional impairment is “the extent of 
loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be determined by use of the guides to 
the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the workers' compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to 
chapter 17A.”   
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) (2017) further provides: 
[W]hen determining functional disability and not loss of earning capacity, the 
extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be determined 
solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, 
published by the American medical association, as adopted by the workers' 
compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. 
 
The only impairment rating in evidence for claimant’s high frequency hearing loss 
is the 87 percent impairment rating, which comes from claimant’s expert, Dr. Tyler.  Dr. 
Tyler rated claimant’s impairment for the high frequency hearing loss using his own 
personal methodology and scale for permanent impairment.  This Agency has long held 
that Dr. Tyler’s personal rating system is not credible and it should not be the basis for 
rating permanent impairment. See Martin v. MidAmerican Energy, File No. 5055340 
(App. Dec. February 16, 2018); Ament v. Quaker Oats Co., File Nos. 5044299, 5044298 
(App. Dec. March 17, 2016).  The methods used by Dr. Tyler do not appear to have 
been validated, adopted by any medical or occupational health boards, or subjected to 
peer review.  I find Dr. Tyler’s impairment rating in this case is not credible.   
 
In addition, there is no separate rating that can be offered under the AMA Guides 
for high frequency loss.  Under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(s)(1), the hearing loss claim 
is only compensated for the functional loss, and that loss must be determined in 
accordance with the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  The undersigned cannot utilize agency 
expertise to derive an impairment rating or lay testimony to determine a permanent 
disability. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x).  Dr. Tyler’s rating does not conform to the AMA 
Guides and likewise cannot support an award of benefits. 
 
In this case, the claimant has undoubtedly sustained permanent sensorineural 
hearing loss in the high frequencies due to workplace noise exposure.  While the loss is 
work-related, it does not meet the statutory definition of occupation hearing loss 
because it falls outside the frequencies specified in the Iowa Code.  As such, the claim 
is considered under the broader category of work-related hearing loss.  However, 
because the Iowa Code requires the determination of functional impairment in 
scheduled claims to be based solely on the AMA Guides, and those guidelines do not 
provide impairment ratings for high frequency hearing loss, I am unable to award 
benefits. 

PESKA V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL, LLC 
Page 13 
I now turn to Mr. Peska’s claim for both weekly and medical benefits related to 
his occupational hearing loss. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
Under Iowa Code section 85B.4(3), “occupational hearing loss” is defined as that 
portion of permanent sensorineural loss that exceeds an average hearing level of 25 
decibels at the frequencies of 500, 1000, 2000 and 3000 Hz when arising out of and in 
the course of employment caused by excessive noise exposure.  “Excessive noise 
exposure” is defined as exposure to sound capable of producing occupational hearing 
loss. Iowa Code section 85B.4(1).  
Iowa Code section 85B.5 provides a table establishing presumptive “excessive 
noise exposure” at various decibel levels tied to duration of exposure; for example, 8 
hours per day at 90 dBA. There is no presumptive excessive noise exposure at levels 
below 90 dBA. The longest duration identified in the table is 8 hours. The table in 
section 85B.5, is not the minimum standard defining an excessive noise level in section 
85B.4(2). The table in section 85B.5 lists noise level times and intensities which, if met, 
will be presumptively excessive noise levels of which the employer must inform the 
employee. See Muscatine County v. Morrison, 409 N.W.2d 685 (Iowa 1987). 
Dr. Tyler and Dr. Simplot were the only two experts to calculate an impairment 
rating.  Both experts factored in claimant’s age, and both experts provided an 
impairment rating pursuant to Iowa Code section 85B.  While the impairment 
assessments are similar, Dr. Simplot’s rating considered more recent testing than the 
testing available to Dr. Tyler.  As such, I adopted Dr. Simplot’s rating for purposes of 
assessing permanency.   
Occupational hearing loss is compensated as a percentage of 175 weeks by use 
of a formula set forth in Iowa Code section 85B.9.  Having accepted Dr. Simplot’s 
assessment showing claimant has 47.7 percent age-corrected binaural hearing loss, I 
find claimant is entitled to 83.475 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  
Benefits shall commence on June 2, 2023.  
The next issue to be decided is the rate at which Mr. Peska’s weekly benefits 
should be paid.  The defendant employer's rate calculation results in an average weekly 
rate of $1,133.17, and a weekly workers' compensation benefit rate of $745.81. (Ex. L, 
p. 108) Mr. Peska's rate calculation results in an average weekly rate of $1,624.09, and 
a weekly workers' compensation benefit rate of $1,036.14. (Ex. 3, p. 35) 

PESKA V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL, LLC 
Page 14 
Iowa Code section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly earnings 
of the employee at the time of the injury. On the date of injury, claimant was working as 
an hourly employee. The correct section to apply is 85.36(6). 
If the employee is paid on a daily or hourly basis or by output, weekly earnings 
are computed by dividing by 13 the earnings over the 13-week period immediately 
preceding the injury. Iowa Code section 85.36(6). In calculating gross weekly earnings 
over the previous 13 weeks, weeks should be excluded from the calculation which are 
not representative of hours typically or customarily worked during a typical or customary 
full week of work, not whether a particular absence from work was anticipated. 
Exclusion of weeks during an expected plant shutdown was appropriate. Jacobson 
Transp. Co. v. Harris, 778 N.W.2d 192 (Iowa 2010); Griffin Pipe Products Co. v. 
Guarino, 663 N.W.2d 862 (Iowa 2003). 
The parties disagree over the extent to which Mr. Peska’s bonuses should be 
included in the computation of claimant’s compensation rate.  First, it must be 
determined whether the bonuses are regular. 
Irregular bonuses are not included in “gross earnings” for purposes of calculating 
the workers’ compensation rate.  Whether a bonus is “regular” is determined on a case-
by-case basis and is dependent upon a variety of factors. These factors include how 
often the bonus is received, how consistently it has been paid to the employee over the 
course of his or her employment, whether it is subject to a condition precedent, whether 
it is voluntarily paid, and whether it had vested at the time of the injury. See Noel v. 
Rolscreen Co., 475 N.W.2d 666 (Iowa 1991) The Iowa Supreme Court has suggested 
that these factors are neither an exclusive nor exhaustive list. Burton v. Hilltop Care Ctr., 
813 N.W.2d 250, 264-65 (Iowa 2012) 
Graphic Packaging established a retention bonus program for hourly employees 
affected by the plant closure. (Hr. Tr., p. 62)  The program included a $500 “production” 
incentive that was paid on a monthly basis.  The amount of the incentive did not 
change, but whether the incentive was awarded depended on attendance, production, 
and quality. (Id.)  Employees could also earn a separate retention bonus of $1,000 for 
each month worked, accruing until the closure date.  The sole condition for receiving 
this bonus was remaining employed through the plant’s final day of operation. (Hr. Tr., p. 
63)  According to defendants, the incentives were designed to ensure sufficient staffing 
to maintain operations until the plant’s closure. (Hr. Tr., p. 62) 
From a general standpoint, the production incentive bonus shares several 
qualities of a regular bonus.  The bonus was paid on a consistent, predictable schedule, 
it was loosely tied to measurable performance criteria within the limited timeframe of the 
plant closure, and it vested during the period of employment rather than being 
contingent on a future event.   

PESKA V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL, LLC 
Page 15 
In comparison, the monthly retention bonus is more likely than not an irregular 
bonus.  The bonus was tied exclusively to a one-time event – plant closure – and did 
not vest unless and until claimant remained employed through the final day of operation.    
The fact that these bonuses were temporary and tied specifically to the plant 
closure suggests they are irregular rather than regular.  While the bonuses were 
consistent during a limited period, they were not an ongoing part of the employee’s 
compensation history during his 47-year tenure.  The temporary and situational nature 
of the incentive program distinguishes these bonuses from a typical “regular” bonus.  I 
conclude that the bonuses claimant was paid should not be included in the calculation 
of claimant's weekly rate,  
Given the parties’ stipulation as to claimant’s married status and entitlement to 
three exemptions, average gross weekly earnings of $1,133.17 per week yields a 
weekly compensation rate of $745.81 according to the published Workers' 
Compensation Manual for a date of injury on June 2, 2023. Permanent Partial Disability 
benefits shall be paid at this rate. 
Defendants also assert a claim for credit for overpayment of benefits.  
Defendants volunteered weekly benefits at the weekly rate of $753.90.  Through this 
decision, the defendants will need to pay permanent partial disability benefits at the rate 
of $745.81.  Defendants are entitled to a credit for all permanent partial disability 
benefits paid to date.  There is no evidence they have overpaid benefits at this time.  I 
find no basis for a credit for overpayment of benefits but conclude that the defendants 
should be given credit for all permanent disability benefits actually paid to claimant, 
including their early payments and overpayment of the weekly rate. 
Claimant also seeks alternate medical care pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27.  
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has 
the right to choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly 
and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience 
to the employee. If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the 
care offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury. If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
Both expert opinions establish that claimant could benefit from bilateral hearing 
aids.  Dr. Tyler recommends replacement of those devices every four to five years.  Dr. 
Tyler also mentions the possibility that claimant is a candidate for cochlear implants in 
the future; however, claimant testified he is not interested in such a procedure at this 

PESKA V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL, LLC 
Page 16 
time. (Hr. Tr., p. 57)  According to the evidentiary record, defendants have already 
authorized claimant’s request for hearing aids.  Nevertheless, I find defendants shall 
designate an appropriate provider to evaluate claimant for hearing aids, and defendants 
shall be responsible for payment of devices recommended by the provider. 
In the hearing report, Mr. Peska asserted a claim for reimbursement of his 
independent medical evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.  Although his 
post-hearing brief only addresses the IME report as a cost, I will nevertheless address 
claimant’s alleged entitlement to reimbursement under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendant is responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination. See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not ultimately prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify 
for reimbursement under section 85.39. See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa Ct. App. 2008). 
However, claimant must establish the pre-requisites of Iowa Code section 85.39 
to establish entitlement to reimbursement.  “An employer ... is not obligated to pay for 
an evaluation obtained by an employee outside the statutory process.” Des Moines Area 
Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 844 (Iowa 2015). 
In this case, claimant obtained an evaluation by Dr. Tyler, which provided an 
impairment rating.  Defendants did not obtain an evaluation or permanent impairment 
rating from a physician of its choosing prior to Dr. Tyler's evaluation.  As such, claimant 
cannot recover the cost of Dr. Tyler’s IME under section 85.39.  However, as will be 
discussed momentarily, the cost of Dr. Tyler’s IME report is recoverable from defendants 
as a taxable cost under rule 876-4.33. 
The final disputed issue is whether costs should be assessed against either 
party. Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency. Iowa Code section 86.40. In 
this case, claimant recovered permanent partial disability benefits and future medical 
care. Exercising the agency's discretion, I conclude it is appropriate to assess claimant's 
costs in some amount. 
Claimant identifies his requested costs in Claimant’s Exhibit 4.  The first cost is 
not controversial and is a request for reimbursement of the cost ($125.00) for claimant's 

PESKA V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL, LLC 
Page 17 
filing fees. This is clearly a permitted cost pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7) and is assessed 
against defendants. 
The second cost request asserted by claimant is for reimbursement of the 
service fees associated with the Original Notice and Petition ($8.53).  This is a permitted 
cost pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(3) and is assessed against defendants. 
The third cost request asserted by claimant is for reimbursement of the 
deposition transcript ($100.00).  The deposition transcript is a reasonable cost and 
assessed pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(2). 
The next cost requested is reimbursement of Dr. Tyler’s IME charges.  Dr. Tyler 
charged $2,000.00 for reviewing documents and interviewing claimant.  He then 
charged $1,275.00 for writing his report. (Ex. 4, p. 48)  I find that Dr. Tyler’s charges are 
reasonable and that he charged $1,275.00 for preparation of his report in lieu of offering 
testimony in this case.  Pursuant to Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. 
Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, (Iowa 2015), only that portion of Dr. Tyler's charges relating to 
preparation of his report are taxable under 876 IAC 4.33(6). Accordingly, I conclude that 
defendants should be assessed $1,275.00 of Dr. Tyler's charges as a cost pursuant to 
876 IAC 4.33(6). 
Lastly, claimant seeks reimbursement for the costs associated with Dr. Tyler’s 
July 1, 2024, report ($385.00).  This is a permitted cost pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(6) and 
is assessed against defendants. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay claimant eighty-three and 19/40 (83.475) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits commencing on June 2, 2023.  Weekly benefits are 
payable at the weekly rate of seven hundred forty-five and 81/100 dollars ($745.81). 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. 
Defendants shall receive credit for all weekly benefits paid to date. 
Defendants shall promptly select and authorize a medical provider to provide 
claimant additional treatment for his occupational hearing loss, including bilateral 
hearing aids.  Defendants shall retain the right to select and authorize a medical 
provider of their choosing to provide the above ordered medical care provided 
defendants authorize this care promptly. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of one thousand eight 
hundred ninety-three and 53/100 dollars ($1,893.53). 

PESKA V. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL, LLC 
Page 18 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this __10TH __ day of March, 2025. 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Casey Steadman 
 (via WCES) 
Stephen Spencer 
 (via WCES) 
Christopher Spencer (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
