Case Number: 24700707.01
Case Title:  WASHPUN, DEANGELO V. PROCTER & GAMBLE DISTRIBUTING, LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Washpun Deangelo-24700707.01m.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
DEANGELO WASHPUN, 
No. 24700707.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
PROCTER & GAMBLE DISTRIBUTING, 
LLC, 
ALTERNATE CARE DECISION 
 
Employer, 
OLD REPUBLIC INSURANCE 
COMPANY, 
Headnote:  2701 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
I.  
STATEMEN T OF TH E C AS E. 
On September 5, 2024, Deangelo Washpun applied for alternate care under 
Iowa Code section 85.27 and Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.48. The 
defendants, employer Procter & Gamble Distributing, LLC and insurance carrier Old 
Republic Insurance Company, did not file an answer. Instead, they responded to the 
petition on the record during the hearing under rule 876—4.48(12). 
The undersigned presided over a telephone alternate care hearing on September 
17, 2024, which was recorded. The audio recording constitutes the official record of the 
proceeding under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.48(12). Washpun participated 
personally and through attorney Nicholas K. Cooling. The defendants participated 
through attorney Terri C. Davis. Sue Prahl, a manager who supervised Jodi Plaster, the 
claims adjuster assigned to Washpun’s workers’ compensation claim at the time of 
hearing, served as representative for Old Republic. 
II.  
ISSU E . 
The issue under consideration is whether Washpun is entitled to alternate care in 
the form of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine. 
III .  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T . 
The evidentiary record consists of: 
 Claimant’s Exhibit 1;  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Sep-17  13:09:00     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

WASHPUN V. PROCTER & GAMBLE DISTRIBUTING, LLC 
Page 2 
 
 Defendants’ Exhibits A through B; and 
 Hearing testimony by Prahl. 
After careful consideration of the evidence the undersigned enters the following findings 
of fact. 
Washpun sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of his employment 
with Procter & Gamble to his back on May 2, 2023. The defendants accepted liability for 
the work injury and furnished care under Iowa Code section 85.27. The defendants 
chose Brad Heithoff, M.D., at the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC) as a 
treating physician. Washpun underwent a computed tomography (CT) scan that showed 
a contusion to the back. Dr. Heithoff released him from care on May 8, 2023. 
(Testimony) 
In October, Washpun returned to see Dr. Heithoff, who prescribed physical 
therapy. Washpun only attended a few of the prescribed 12 appointments. Athletico 
released Washpun from care for noncompliance because he did not show up for 
appointments. (Testimony) 
In April or May of 2024, Washpun moved to Las Vegas, Nevada. Plaster 
consulted with Prahl and the Old Republic Las Vegas office to schedule an 
appointment. However, they did not contact any healthcare providers to get an 
appointment scheduled before Washpun moved back to Iowa. (Testimony)  
After learning Washpun moved back to Iowa, the defendants scheduled an 
appointment for him to see a doctor in this state on June 11, 2024. But on June 3, 2024, 
Washpun informed the defendants that he had moved to New Jersey. The defendants 
responded by arranging care with an occupational medicine specialist in New Jersey. 
Washpun attended the appointment, which resulted in a referral to a spine specialist. 
(Testimony)  
On June 26, 2024, Washpun attended an appointment at Comprehensive Spine 
Care with Nomaan Ashraf, M.D. In the records from the appointment, Dr. Ashraf notes 
in pertinent part, “Complex consideration was given to interpret medical issues with this 
patient. Multiple prior treatment records from other clinicians were reviewed, and 
diagnostic testing was interpreted.” It is unclear based on the current record what 
medical records Dr. Ashraf reviewed before the appointment. During Prahl’s hearing 
testimony, she could neither confirm nor deny that the defendants provided Dr. Ashraf 
with medical records in advance of the appointment—though she conceded she 
assumes the defendants provided medical records documenting Washpun’s past care 
for the work injury. (Ex. B; Testimony) 
In the records stemming from that appointment, Dr. Ashraf notes Washpun “was 
managed with 15 or 16 sessions of physical therapy which he states was not beneficial 
to him.” This note is factually incorrect. Dr. Heithoff prescribed physical therapy but 
Washpun only attended a few of the appointments before he stopped showing up and 

WASHPUN V. PROCTER & GAMBLE DISTRIBUTING, LLC 
Page 3 
 
Athletico released him from care for his chronic absenteeism. Thus, it appears more 
likely than not that Dr. Ashraf had an inaccurate understanding of Washpun’s history of 
care even if the record does not allow for a finding as to the source of this inaccurate 
understanding. (Ex. B; Testimony) 
Dr. Ashraf examined Washpun and noted, “Pain is localized to the left lower 
lumbosacral spine” with “no paraspinal muscle spasm” and “[n]o neurologic deficits in 
the lower extremities.” Dr. Ashraf ordered x-rays that showed “minor spondylosis and 
the potential congenital abnormality at L5-S1.” Under “Plan,” Dr. Ashraf opined: 
[Washpun] is now 1 year after a fall off of a ladder complaining of right-
sided back pain without radiculopathy. He has received appropriate 
nonsurgical care including rest, medication management and physical 
therapy for what likely is a soft tissue contusion. Given his persistent 
subjective complaints, I would recommended obtaining a lumbar spine 
MRI to see if there is any objective evidence of injury. 
(Ex. B) 
At hearing, the defendants argued that Dr. Ashraf’s opinion that an MRI is the 
appropriate next step in care is undermined by his incorrect understanding of 
Washpun’s medical history. But the defendants took no steps to either inform Dr. Ashraf 
that his opinion was at least in part based on an inaccurate understanding of Washpun’s 
treatment history with respect to physical therapy. Nor did they seek an examination by 
another doctor. Instead, they authorized and arranged for the prescribed MRI on July 8, 
2024. (Ex. B; Testimony) 
Washpun did not attend the appointment and gave no advance notice that he 
would not attend. This led to an email exchange between claimant’s counsel and 
Plaster, the claims adjuster, about whether Washpun had abandoned care. Claimant’s 
counsel informed Plaster Washpun had not abandoned care. Plaster then asked if the 
defendants needed to reschedule the MRI. Ultimately, claimant’s counsel informed her 
that Washpun had moved from New Jersey back to Iowa. (Ex. 1)  
After the defendants learned that Washpun had moved back to Iowa, they 
arranged for care with Christopher Iverson, M.D., at UIHC. After arranging for care with 
Dr. Iverson, the defendants rescinded their authorization of the MRI ordered by Dr. 
Ashraf and have refused to schedule an MRI in Iowa. Prahl testified that the defendants 
had not attempted to schedule an MRI in Iowa. Instead, the defendants operated under 
the assumption that they needed a prescription for an MRI from a doctor in the area. 
There is an insufficient basis in the record from which to conclude there is any 
requirement that an MRI be prescribed by a treating physician in the local area for it to 
be authorized and performed in Iowa. (Testimony) 
The facts in the current case are unique. It is rare for a workers’ compensation 
claimant to move from state to state in such a short period of time. As the record shows, 
this creates practical difficulties in scheduling care for a work injury.  

WASHPUN V. PROCTER & GAMBLE DISTRIBUTING, LLC 
Page 4 
 
At hearing, the defendants argue that Dr. Ashraf’s opinion is undermined by his 
incorrect belief that Washpun had gone through physical therapy without benefit. The 
record does establish that this belief is incorrect. But the defendants did not take any 
action after learning of Dr. Ashraf’s incorrect understanding of Washpun’s treatment 
history. Instead, they scheduled the MRI in New Jersey and offered to reschedule it 
after Washpun failed to show up for the MRI without notice. Based on the evidence, it is 
more likely than not that the reason the defendants refused to schedule an MRI in Iowa 
was the change in location and provider. 
At hearing, Prahl gave credible testimony that the defendants have refused to 
authorize and schedule the MRI based on an assumption—that a physician in the local 
area must have prescribed it—and not a medical opinion. There is no indication that Dr. 
Ashraf altered his opinion on whether to prescribe an MRI after learning his belief about 
the exhaustion of physical therapy was inaccurate. Moreover, there is no indication in 
the record that Dr. Iverson, the most recent and current authorized treating physician 
chosen by the defendants, opined that an MRI was unnecessary. So, the record shows 
a spine specialist recommended an MRI to see if it showed any objective signs of injury 
and the defendants decided to rescind their previously provided authorization of the MRI 
based on an assumption. This is unreasonable because an insurance carrier cannot 
substitute an assumption for the judgment of a treating physician and rescind previously 
authorized care without medical support for doing so.  
IV.  
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW. 
Iowa Code section 85.27 requires an employer to furnish care related to an 
employee’s a work injury. Such care “must be offered promptly and be reasonably 
suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.” Iowa Code 
§ 85.27(4). The legislature saw fit to pair this responsibility with the right to choose care. 
Id.; see also Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 436 (Iowa 1997). 
“If the employer chooses the care, the employer shall hold the employee harmless for 
the cost of care until the employer notifies the employee that the employer is no longer 
authorizing all or any part of the care and the reason for the change in authorization.” 
Id.; Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, 771 (Iowa 2016). 
However, an employer’s right to choose care is not absolute under the statute. 
See id.; Ramirez-Trujillo, 878 N.W.2d at 769. An employee dissatisfied with employer-
furnished care (or lack thereof) has the right to seek an alternative. See id.; see also 
Iowa Admin. Code r. 876—4.48. A dissatisfied employee must first share the 
employee’s discontent with the employer. Id.; Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. 
Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 204 (Iowa 2010). If the parties cannot reach an agreement on 
care, the employee may apply to the commissioner for alternate care. Id.; see also Iowa 
Admin. Code r. 876—4.48. And after an informal hearing, “the commissioner may, upon 
. . . reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care.” Id. 
The dispositive question in an alternate care case is whether the employer-
furnished care is reasonable. Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 124 (Iowa 
1995). “Reasonableness, of course, is a question of fact.” Reynolds, 562 at 436 (citing 

WASHPUN V. PROCTER & GAMBLE DISTRIBUTING, LLC 
Page 5 
 
Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123). As the party seeking relief in the form of alternate care, the 
employee bears the burden of proving that the authorized care in question is 
unreasonable. Id. Because “the employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the 
question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” an injured employee’s dissatisfaction 
with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough to satisfy the employee’s 
burden of proof. Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124. 
As found above, this case presents unique facts. The defendants have 
encountered practical difficulties arranging care for Washpun because of multiple 
changes in residences spanning multiple states. Nonetheless, the record shows that the 
most recent authorized care provider in New Jersey prescribed an MRI and the 
defendants authorized and scheduled such before rescinding the authorization after 
Washpun was a no-call, no-show due to yet another move, back to Iowa, where the 
defendants have diligently arranged for care with Dr. Iverson. Despite this diligence, 
there is an insufficient basis in the record to find their rescission of authorization of the 
MRI and refusal to attempt to schedule an MRI in Iowa is reasonable since it was based 
on an assumption and not a medical opinion. Put otherwise, an insurance carrier’s 
assumption does not trump the prescription of an authorized treating physician. 
Because the most recent authorized treating physician prescribed the MRI after 
Washpun’s most recent appointment and no other physician has opined it is 
unnecessary, the refusal to attempt to schedule the MRI in this case is unreasonable. 
V. 
OR D ER . 
Under the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) Washpun’s application for alternate care is GRANTED. 
 
2) The defendants shall promptly authorize and schedule an MRI of the lumbar 
spine in accordance with Dr. Ashraf’s recommendation and without undue 
inconvenience to Washpun. 
The Iowa workers’ compensation commissioner issued an order delegating 
authority to deputy workers’ compensation commissioners, such as the undersigned, to 
issue final agency decisions on applications for alternate care. That order is attached to 
the notice of hearing issued in this case. Due to the order of delegation, there is no 
intra-agency appeal of this decision to the commissioner, only judicial review in an 
appropriate district court under the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Iowa Code 
chapter 17A.  
 
 
 
 

WASHPUN V. PROCTER & GAMBLE DISTRIBUTING, LLC 
Page 6 
 
Signed and filed this 17th day of September, 2024. 
 
 
 
BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
Served via the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES): 
Nicholas K. Cooling, Attorney for Claimant 
Terri C. Davis, Attorney for Defendants 
 
 
