Case Number: 22700142.01
Case Title:  KOUDELKA, LINDA V. WINNEBAGO INDUSTRIES, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Koudelka Linda-22700142.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
LINDA KOUDELKA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
   File No. 22700142.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 
WINNEBAGO INDUSTRIES, INC., 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
OLD REPUBLIC INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
            Head Note No:  1402.30 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Linda Koudelka, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers' 
compensation benefits from defendants Winnebago Industries, employer, and Old 
Republic Insurance Company, insurer.  The hearing occurred before the undersigned 
on August 9, 2023, via Zoom. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  In the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of those 
stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision, 
and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties' stipulations will be raised or 
discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 5; Claimant's Exhibits 
1 through 14; and Defendants' Exhibits A through H. Claimant testified on her own 
behalf.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing.  The 
case was considered fully submitted upon receipt of the parties' briefs on September 15, 
2023. 
ISSUES 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury on October 5, 2020, which arose 
out of and in the course of employment; 
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a 
period of recovery and, if so, the extent; 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Feb-27  08:02:14     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

KOUDELKA V. WINNEBAGO INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 2 
 
3. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability and, if so, 
the extent; 
4. The commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any are awarded; 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to the payment of medical expenses; 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an independent 
medical examination under Iowa Code section 85.39; 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care under Iowa Code 
section 85.27; and 
8. Costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
The instant case revolves around an alleged injury occurring on October 5, 2020.  
The claimant at the center of this case is Linda Koudelka.  Her reported injuries pertain 
to her bilateral wrists.  At the time of the evidentiary hearing that brought forth this claim, 
Ms. Koudelka was 56 years old. (Hearing Transcript, page 11)   
 
Ms. Koudelka’s medical history is relevant for bilateral wrist complaints dating 
back to at least 2002. (Joint Exhibit 2, page 1)  In September 2002, claimant reported 
numbness and tingling in the fingers of both hands. (Id.)  Her symptoms presented at 
night while sleeping, performing work functions, talking on the phone, and driving. (Id.)  
Nerve conduction tests revealed findings suggestive of compromised median motor and 
sensory nerves at or around the wrists and assessed claimant with bilateral carpal 
tunnel syndrome. (Id.)   
 
One month later, claimant presented to Thomas DeBartolo, M.D. for an 
evaluation of bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. (JE4, p. 1)  She described a sense of 
numbness and tingling in both hands that had gradually developed over the previous 
year. (Id.)  Claimant reported that she decided to seek treatment when she started to 
notice the numbness was waking her up from her sleep and present while driving or 
holding a magazine. (Id.)   
Claimant received a cock-up wrist splint for her left wrist, which was more 
symptomatic at the time. (JE4, p. 3)  After using the wrist splint for a month, claimant 
reported a dramatic improvement in symptoms. (JE4, p. 4)  Claimant was able to 
perform her work tasks without numbness or tingling. (Id.)  In fact, she noted that she 
only experienced tingling when she was not working. (Id.)  She received a cock-up splint 
for the right wrist and was released from treatment. (Id.)   
 
On April 24, 2018, claimant presented to her primary care provider and reported 
worsening bilateral hand pain over the past several months. (JE3, p. 1)  The report 
provides, “Her hands basically hurt all day and they get worse as the day progresses.  

KOUDELKA V. WINNEBAGO INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 3 
 
She does report that she tends to drop things but easier than she used too.” (Id.)  She 
also reported bilateral hand paresthesia and the need to shake her hands out at night 
even with the use of wrist splints. (Id.)  The report notes that an EMG done in 2011 
returned normal. (Id.)  On examination, claimant had negative Tinel’s and Phalen’s 
tests. (Id.)  Because of this, the provider questioned whether claimant’s symptoms could 
be stemming from her upper neck and shoulder. (Id.) 
Ms. Koudelka started working for the defendant employer on December 21, 
1998. (Defendants’ Exhibit B, page 17)  At the start of her employment, Ms. Koudelka’s 
job duties consisted of sanding doors with an orbital sander. (Id.)  She then performed 
hinging and handling for 15 years before moving into production in the fall of 2018. (See 
Hr. Tr., p. 23; Ex. B, p. 20)  In production, Ms. Koudelka performed office work, sorted 
production orders, placed stickers on orders, and bagged items for shipping. (Hr. Tr., p. 
28) 
 
At the time of the alleged injury, Ms. Koudelka had recently returned to a position 
that involved sanding doors and spraying them with stains, sealers, and a topcoat. (Ex. 
B, p. 17; Hr. Tr., p. 22)  She was working 10-hour shifts, Monday through Friday. (Ex. B, 
p. 18)  Ms. Koudelka testified that she only used her right hand when operating the air 
gun to spray. (Hr. Tr., p. 23) 
On the alleged date of injury, Ms. Koudelka was sanding when her right hand 
went numb and swelled up. (Ex. B, p. 22)  She reported the injury to Arleen Lievrouw, 
her team lead, on October 5, 2020. (Hr. Tr., p. 28)  Ms. Koudelka testified she reported 
her pain to Ms. Lievrouw “almost every day.” (Id.)  According to Ms. Koudelka, Ms. 
Lievrouw told her, “I don’t know what to tell you.” (Hr. Tr., p. 29)  Ms. Koudelka did not 
seek medical treatment on her own until November 2020. 
 
Claimant presented to Joanne Starr, ARNP, of Floyd County Medical Center on 
November 4, 2020. (JE3, p. 2)  She reported bilateral hand pain, right more than left.  
She described waking up in the middle of the night with burning pain and a pins and 
needles sensation on an almost nightly basis. (Id.)  Ms. Starr’s notes provide, “I think at 
this point in time she needs to talk with her supervisor about pursuing treatment or 
evaluation but that needs to be discussed on the basis of work comp.” (Id.)  Ms. Starr 
assessed right hand paresthesia with possible carpal tunnel and restricted claimant 
from working more than eight hours per day. (JE3, p. 3) 
 
The defendants eventually scheduled claimant for an evaluation with Timothy 
Gibbons, M.D. (JE4, p. 5)  Dr. Gibbons assessed bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and 
ordered nerve conduction velocity studies on both wrists. (JE4, p. 6)  The results of the 
studies were consistent with bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. (See JE4, p. 10) 
 
Dr. Gibbons, in response to a letter from defendants, opined that Ms. Koudelka’s 
carpal tunnel syndrome was not causally related to her employment at Winnebago 
Industries. (Ex. A, p. 15)  He believed her employment activities resulted in a temporary 
agitation of a pre-existing condition. (Id.)  In reaching this conclusion, Dr. Gibbons 
utilized the American Medical Association Guides to the Evaluation of Disease and 
Injury Causation. (Id.) 

KOUDELKA V. WINNEBAGO INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 4 
 
 
Following receipt of Dr. Gibbons’ causation opinion, defendants denied 
compensability for claimant’s alleged injury.  The claim was formally denied via written 
correspondence dated May 20, 2021. (Claimant’s Exhibit 9, page 1) 
 
Ms. Starr subsequently provided claimant with a referral to orthopedics for her 
bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. (JE3, p. 6)  Robert Bartelt, M.D. conducted an 
orthopedic evaluation of claimant and recommended surgery on August 4, 2021. (JE1, 
p. 2)  
 
Dr. Bartelt performed a right carpal tunnel release on August 31, 2021, and a left 
carpal tunnel release on September 14, 2021. (JE5, pp. 1, 3)  Dr. Bartelt took claimant 
off work from August 31, 2021, through October 12, 2021. (JE1, p. 5)  He then released 
claimant to return to work on October 25, 2021. (JE1, p. 12)  Claimant felt her condition 
was improved with surgery; however, she believed her right wrist trailed the left in terms 
of improvement. (JE1, p. 10)  Dr. Bartelt restricted claimant from sanding. (JE1, p. 12) 
 
On February 3, 2022, claimant reported her left hand felt normal; however, her 
right hand continued to feel weak, with ongoing numbness and tingling. (JE1, p. 17)  
She further reported that aside from sanding, she was still able to complete her normal 
job duties. (Id.)  Claimant was happy with her progress and acknowledged that her right 
hand symptoms were better than they were before surgery. (Id.)   
 
Unfortunately, claimant continued to report right wrist symptoms and diminished 
use of her right hand in July 2022. (JE3, p. 9)  Ms. Starr prescribed gabapentin and 
encouraged claimant to return to her orthopedic surgeon. (Id.)   
 
In the fall of 2022, claimant developed a trigger finger on her right ring finger. 
(JE3, p. 11)  Following some conservative treatment, including a cortisone injection, 
Richard Rattay, M.D. performed a right trigger finger release and excision, as well as a 
proximal interphalangeal joint manipulation to improve extension. (JE4, p. 24)  The 
surgery occurred on February 10, 2023. (Id.) 
 
Dr. Rattay released claimant to return to work on February 27, 2023. (JE5, p. 34)  
At the time, claimant was having difficulty regaining motion and function in her right ring 
finger.  Dr. Rattay told claimant these symptoms could be permanent. (Id.)   
 
A few months after Dr. Bartelt released her to return to work, claimant sought an 
independent medical evaluation with Farid Manshadi, M.D. (Ex. 1, p. 1)  Dr. Manshadi 
opined that claimant sustained bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome as a result of her work 
activities at Winnebago. (Ex. 1, p. 3)  Utilizing the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, Dr. 
Manshadi assessed 13 percent right upper extremity impairment and 1 percent left 
upper extremity impairment. (Ex. 1, p. 4)  After combining the impairment ratings, Dr. 
Manshadi assessed claimant with 8 percent whole person impairment. 
 
Defendants produced claimant’s medical records and Dr. Manshadi’s report to 
Dr. Gibbons for review. (See Ex. A, p. 6)  Dr. Gibbons continued to believe claimant’s 
bilateral carpal tunnel was not causally related to her employment with defendants, and 
her employment did not materially aggravate her carpal tunnel syndrome. (Ex. A, p. 6)  
Dr. Gibbons noted that claimant had multiple non-occupational risk factors that were 

KOUDELKA V. WINNEBAGO INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 5 
 
strong evidence of causation, including her age, gender, obesity, biopsychological 
factors, and genetic predisposition for carpal tunnel syndrome. (Id.)  He further noted 
that vibration is considered a risk factor with low evidence associated with it.  He 
believed the non-occupational risk factors overwhelmingly outweighed the occupational 
risk factors. (Id.)   
 
Dr. Gibbons confirmed his opinions in a February 14, 2023 correspondence. (Ex. 
A, p. 1)  
 
Claimant presented for a second IME with Dr. Manshadi on April 19, 2023. (Ex. 
3, p. 1)  For this examination, Dr. Manshadi focused on claimant’s right trigger finger.  
He opined the right trigger finger was a result of claimant’s work activities at 
Winnebago. (Ex. 3, p. 3)  He assessed an additional 5 percent right upper extremity 
impairment and combined the same with the impairment ratings from his initial 
evaluation.  In total, Dr. Manshadi assessed 11 percent whole person impairment. (Ex. 
3, p. 4)   
 
At defendants’ request, claimant presented for an independent medical 
examination with Benjamin Paulson, M.D. on June 28, 2023. (Ex. H, p. 62)  Like Dr. 
Gibbons, Dr. Paulson relied on the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Disease and Injury 
Causation to find claimant’s work was not a contributing factor to her carpal tunnel 
syndrome. (Ex. H, pp. 65-66)  He opined that the vibration from the sander was a low 
risk factor for the development of carpal tunnel syndrome. (Ex. H, p. 66)  He further 
opined that claimant’s right trigger finger was likely idiopathic in nature or related to 
other conditions. (Id.)  Regardless of causation, Dr. Paulson assessed 10 percent right 
upper extremity impairment and 1 percent left upper extremity impairment for the 
bilateral carpal tunnel condition. (Ex. H, p. 68)  He assigned an additional 5 percent right 
upper extremity impairment for the trigger finger condition. (Id.)  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue for determination is whether claimant sustained an injury on 
October 5, 2020, which arose out of and in the course of her employment. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 

KOUDELKA V. WINNEBAGO INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 6 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke's Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 
2001); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
When the injury develops gradually over time, the cumulative injury rule applies.  
The date of injury for cumulative injury purposes is the date on which the disability 
manifests.  Manifestation is best characterized as that date on which both the fact of 
injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant's employment would be 
plainly apparent to a reasonable person.  The date of manifestation inherently is a fact-
based determination.  The fact-finder is entitled to substantial latitude in making this 
determination and may consider a variety of factors, none of which is necessarily 
dispositive in establishing a manifestation date.  Among others, the factors may include 
missing work when the condition prevents performing the job, or receiving significant 
medical care for the condition.  Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284 (Iowa 2001); Oscar 
Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 483 N.W.2d 824 (Iowa 1992); McKeever Custom 
Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956).  If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961). 
Claimant argues she sustained a cumulative injury to her bilateral upper 
extremities related to her work duties for the defendant-employer.  Her job duties 
consisted of sanding and spraying doors, which required the use of vibratory tools.  
Claimant testified she mainly used her right hand to sand; however, she occasionally 
switched hands to give her right hand a break.  A few weeks into her new position, 

KOUDELKA V. WINNEBAGO INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 7 
 
claimant developed numbness in her bilateral hands.  Claimant subsequently received 
care from Ms. Starr, Dr. Gibbons, Dr. Bartelt, and Dr. Rattay.   
In cases involving alleged cumulative work injuries, medical opinions on 
causation of the conditions at issue become of paramount importance. Therefore, the 
opinions of each of the medical providers must be considered, bearing attention to the 
consistency, accuracy, and breadth of information relied upon, as well as consistency of 
those opinions with established legal principles. 
Defendants rely upon the expert medical opinions of Dr. Gibbons and Dr. 
Paulson.  Following the alleged work injury, defendants directed claimant’s care to Dr. 
Gibbons.  Dr. Gibbons analyzed claimant’s EMGs and found the results consistent with 
bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome.  He subsequently recommended claimant undergo 
carpal tunnel releases and attempted to schedule claimant for the same.  Dr. Gibbons 
sought workers’ compensations’ approval for the surgeries on May 5, 2021. (JE4, p. 15)  
Two days later, defendants sought a causation opinion from Dr. Gibbons. (See Ex. A, p. 
15)  On May 18, 2021, Dr. Gibbons opined claimant’s carpal tunnel diagnosis was not 
causally related to her work for Winnebago Industries. 
Although he only treated claimant for a brief period of time, Dr. Gibbons is the 
only treating physician to address causation.  Initially, Dr. Gibbons did not offer 
significant analysis to support his conclusion.  He did not consider the specific 
circumstances surrounding the claimant’s alleged injury.  Instead, Dr. Gibbons relied on 
the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Disease and Injury Causation. (Ex. A, p. 15)  After 
comparing claimant’s risk factors, he concluded the non-occupational risk factors 
outweighed the occupational risk factors.   
Dr. Gibbons expounded on his causation opinion in his August 28, 2022, report.  
In the updated report, Dr. Gibbons explained claimant’s occupational risk factors and 
noted the vibratory nature of the sander is considered a risk factor with low evidence 
associated with it.  Dr. Gibbons further noted that the medical records reference 
claimant developing symptoms with sedentary activities, such as driving, writing, and 
sleeping.  With this in mind, Dr. Gibbons opined the use of a sander did not significantly 
aggravate claimant’s pre-existing carpal tunnel syndrome. (Ex. A, p. 6)     
Dr. Paulson, an orthopedic hand surgeon, agreed with Dr. Gibbons on causation. 
(Ex. H, pp. 65-66)   
The only physician to find in favor of claimant on causation is Dr. Manshadi.  In 
contested cases featuring multiple expert opinions on causation, a robust analysis is 
imperative to establish a clear and coherent understanding of the casual link between 
an alleged injury and its effects.  While it is somewhat troubling Drs. Gibbons and 
Paulson rely quite heavily on the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Disease and Injury 
Causation, Dr. Manshadi did not offer significant analysis of his rationale or provide 
medical support for his conclusions regarding causation.  He did not discuss claimant’s 
specific job duties at Winnebago.  Moreover, neither claimant nor Dr. Manshadi 
produced any research or medical literature to refute the claims of Dr. Gibbons and Dr. 
Paulson, or the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Disease and Injury Causation. 

KOUDELKA V. WINNEBAGO INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 8 
 
When I compare the respective credentials of the competing experts, I note that 
all three experts are highly trained professionals who can offer valuable insights into 
claimant’s condition.  Orthopedic hand surgeons, like Dr. Paulson, have specialized 
training in diagnosing and treating conditions affecting the hands and upper extremities.  
They have extensive knowledge of the anatomy and function of the hand and wrist.  
While physical medicine and rehabilitation physicians, like Dr. Manshadi, are skilled in 
managing a wide range of musculoskeletal and neurological conditions, their expertise 
is not as specialized as that of orthopedic hand surgeons.  In this instance, I find the 
credentials and expertise of Dr. Gibbons and Dr. Paulson to be more pertinent than Dr. 
Manshadi’s as a physical medicine and rehabilitation physician.       
Ultimately, it is determined that the opinions of Dr. Gibbons and Dr. Paulson are 
entitled to greater weight than the opinions expressed by Dr. Manshadi.  Having 
reached this finding, it is determined that claimant failed to carry her burden of proving 
she sustained an injury on or about October 5, 2020, that arose out of and in the course 
of her employment.   
Having determined claimant failed to prove the October 5, 2020, work injury 
materially aggravated her pre-existing bilateral wrist condition or accelerated her need 
for surgical intervention, I find the remaining issues are moot.  Ms. Koudelka is not 
entitled to an award of benefits in this case. 
Lastly, claimant seeks an assessment of her costs. Costs are assessed at the 
discretion of the agency. Iowa Code section 85.40.  Claimant did not establish 
entitlement to workers' compensation benefits.  Therefore, I conclude the parties shall 
pay their own costs.  
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant takes nothing. 
The parties shall each bear their own costs. 
Signed and filed this _27th _ day of February, 2024. 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Joshua Moon (via WCES) 
Lindsey Mills (via WCES) 

KOUDELKA V. WINNEBAGO INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 9 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday.  
