Case Number: 5067997.01
Case Title:  BOBHOLZ, DEBBIE V. GENUINE PARTS COMPANY DBA NAPA AUTO PARTS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Bobholz Debbie-5067997.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DEBBIE BOBHOLZ, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                        File No. 5067997.01 
GENUINE PARTS COMPANY d/b/a 
  : 
NAPA, 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SAFETY NATIONAL CASUALTY CORP. : 
 
 
  :        Head Note Nos.:  1100, 1402, 1801,  
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
       1803, 2500, 4000 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant Debbie Bobholz filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from defendants Genuine Parts Company d/b/a NAPA, 
employer, and Safety National Casualty Corporation, insurer. The hearing occurred 
before the undersigned on March 29, 2021, via CourtCall video conference.  
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  In the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of those 
stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision, 
and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or 
discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record consists of: Joint Exhibits 1 through 11, Claimant’s 
Exhibits 1 through 6, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through K. Claimant testified on his 
own behalf. Patrick Wills and Shelby Fries also testified. The evidentiary record was 
closed at the end of the hearing, and the case was considered fully submitted upon 
receipt of the parties’ briefs on April 16, 2021. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of her 
employment on February 27, 2019.  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Jun-16  09:53:07     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BOBHOLZ V. NAPA AUTO PARTS 
Page 2 
2. If claimant sustained a work-related injury, whether that injury was a cause of 
temporary disability and/or permanent disability. 
 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits.  
 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for payment of medical expenses. 
 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for her independent medical 
examination (IME). 
 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to a cost assessment. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant testified that on February 27, 2019, she was leaving defendant-
employer’s building after clocking out when she slipped and fell on the sidewalk. 
(Hearing Transcript, p. 14) She testified she landed on her left side but was unsure how 
or if she broke her fall: “My guess is, is that when I did fall, I mean, it’s just normal you 
would try to put your arms out to try to break your fall.” (Tr., pp. 14-15)  
At the time of her alleged fall, claimant was with her co-worker Samantha Wilson. 
(Tr., p. 15) Ms. Wilson got the attention of a supervisor, Patrick Wills (referred to as “PJ” 
by claimant at hearing), who asked both claimant and Ms. Wilson to complete written 
statements that evening. (Tr., pp. 15-16)  
The written statement from claimant indicates she fell on her “left leg” and makes 
no mention of her left shoulder. (Claimant’s Exhibit 3, p. 16) The written statement from 
Ms. Wilson makes no mention of how claimant landed, but it indicates claimant told Ms. 
Wilson “her leg hurt.” (Cl. Ex 3, p. 18)  
Mr. Wills testified he does not believe claimant slipped and fell in any capacity. 
(Tr., pp. 75) He testified she told him she fell on her left knee but was rubbing her right 
knee. (Tr., pp. 75-75) He also suggested claimant made up the claim in response to 
being admonished for poor performance earlier in the day. (Tr., p. 75) 
Though Mr. Wills testified he was unable to find the spot on which claimant 
allegedly slipped, he acknowledged he had been throwing down sand on the area all 
day “to just make sure nobody slipped and fell” given the conditions of “compacted 
snow.” (Tr., pp. 81, 84) 
After completing her written statement, claimant was instructed to go home. (Tr., 
p. 17) 
 
 

BOBHOLZ V. NAPA AUTO PARTS 
Page 3 
Claimant testified the next morning her “whole left side hurt,” including her 
shoulder, hip, leg and ribs. (Tr., p. 18)  Claimant notified her supervisor, Zach, that she 
was still hurting, and together they completed an “Incident Investigation Form.” (Tr., pp. 
18-19) The portion of the form filled out by Zach indicates claimant injured the right side 
of her body, while the portion of the form completed by claimant indicates her left side 
was injured. (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 20-21; Tr., pp. 18-20) A “Point of Injury Report” completed on 
the same day as the Incident Investigation Form states claimant injured the left side of 
her body. (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 23-24) It also specifically indicates claimant was experiencing 
numbness and pain in her left shoulder. (Cl. Ex 4, p. 24) 
Defendants sent claimant to an urgent care clinic and the notes indicate claimant 
complained of pain in her left shoulder, left hip, and left leg. (Joint Exhibit 3, p. 18) X-
rays were taken, all of which were negative, and claimant was given work restrictions 
and instructed to follow up if she did not improve. (Tr., p. 22; JE 3, pp. 19-22) 
Claimant testified all of her symptoms resolved but for her left shoulder 
complaints. (Tr., p. 22) As a result, she returned to the clinic and was evaluated by 
William Peterson, M.D., on March 13, 2019. Dr. Peterson ordered an MRI to rule out 
rotator cuff injury and continued claimant’s work restrictions. (JE 3, pp. 25-26) 
On March 21, 2019, before an MRI was completed, defendants’ third-party 
administrator sent claimant a letter stating the following: “Our investigation, which has 
been completed, indicates you did not sustain a compensable injury within the meaning 
of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. Specifically, the occurrence of the alleged 
incident is disputed.” (Defendants’ Ex. F, p. 24)  
Claimant testified she was never notified of the basis of defendants’ dispute, nor 
was she ever contacted by defendant-insurer to provide a statement. (Tr., pp. 24-25)  
The next day claimant was informed by her supervisor and a human resources 
representative, Shelby Fries, that defendant-employer could no longer accommodate 
her work restrictions. (Tr., pp. 23-24) 
It is defendants’ position that claimant is not a credible witness and her testimony 
about her slip and fall cannot be relied upon. More specifically, defendants assert 
claimant fabricated a slip and fall because she was upset with defendant-employer for 
criticizing her work performance. I acknowledge the discrepancies in claimant’s 
testimony as highlighted in defendants’ post-hearing brief; however, with respect to the 
fall itself, claimant’s description of the incident has been consistent. Claimant told Mr. 
Wills she fell on her left side, her written statement indicates she fell on her left side, her 
portion of the Incident Investigation Form indicates she fell on her left side, the Point of 
Injury Report states she fell on her left side, and she reported both to the urgent care 
clinic and Dr. Peterson that she fell on her left side.  
I also acknowledge Mr. Wills was unable to identify the specific slick spot on 
which claimant said she fell, but he admitted putting sand down in the area all day given 

BOBHOLZ V. NAPA AUTO PARTS 
Page 4 
the snow-packed conditions. His actions indicate he was concerned that the surface 
could be slick and may cause a slip and fall. In other words, the snow-packed 
conditions—even with salt—are much less suspicious than had claimant alleged a slip 
and fall on a day without inclement weather. 
I likewise acknowledge Ms. Fries’ testimony that she “notice[d] a pattern in 
absences in correlation with correction action and/or denied time-off requests.” (Tr., p. 
90) Again, however, this does not explain claimant’s consistent testimony regarding the 
slip and fall itself.  
Thus, while claimant’s testimony was not without its discrepancies (as will be 
discussed below), I find her descriptions and testimony regarding the slip and fall to be 
consistent and credible. There is simply insufficient evidence to support defendants’ 
position that claimant completely fabricated the incident. I therefore find claimant 
sustained a work-related slip and fall on February 27, 2019. 
I likewise find defendants failed to conduct a reasonable investigation into 
claimant’s claim. Claimant was never contacted by defendant-insurer prior to the denial 
of the claim, and it is unclear what was done to investigate except to take Mr. Wills’ 
belief that claimant fabricated the incident and Zach’s report that she fell on her right 
side at face value. 
In light of defendants’ denial of her claim, claimant began seeking medical 
treatment for her left shoulder on her own. (Tr., p. 25) She returned to Dr. Peterson on 
March 29, 2019, and he again recommended an MRI after he noted claimant 
“appear[ed] to be developing some signs of a frozen shoulder.”  (JE 3, p. 36) He also 
renewed claimant’s restrictions through June 29, 2019. (JE 3, p. 37) 
Claimant completed the MRI, which revealed supra and infraspinatus tendinosis 
with no rotator cuff tear. (JE 4) After reviewing the MRI, Dr. Peterson recommended 
pain relievers, physical therapy and possible steroid injections for claimant’s ongoing 
pain. (JE 3, p. 41) He informed claimant that “most cases of frozen shoulder do improve 
eventually.” (JE 3, p. 41) 
Claimant initiated physical therapy and tried an injection. (JE 3, p. 51; JE 5) 
Though claimant testified neither were helpful, the notes from Dr. Peterson’s records 
indicate claimant reported improvement in both her pain and range of motion. (Tr., pp. 
25-26; JE 3, p. 53) However, because claimant had not returned to baseline, Dr. 
Peterson recommended continued physical therapy. (JE 3, p. 56) He also extended 
claimant’s restrictions through July 22, 2019. (JE 3, p. 57)  
When claimant returned to Dr. Peterson on July 18, 2019, her range of motion 
had “basically returned to normal,” though she continued to experience weakness and 
pain. (JE 3, p. 61) As a result, Dr. Peterson recommended an orthopedic surgery 
evaluation and continued physical therapy. (JE 3, p. 61) Importantly, however, Dr. 

BOBHOLZ V. NAPA AUTO PARTS 
Page 5 
Peterson did not renew claimant’s work restrictions. I therefore find claimant did not 
have ongoing work restrictions after July 22, 2020. 
Claimant then transferred her care to Jason Stanford, D.O., after she relocated to 
a different city. (Tr., p. 27) She was first evaluated by Dr. Stanford on November 7, 
2019, at which time Dr. Stanford performed another steroid injection. (JE 7, pp. 107-
108) When claimant reported only brief improvement from the injection, Dr. Stanford 
recommended another MRI. (JE 7, p. 109) 
In the interim, claimant continued physical therapy. At her first appointment, on 
November 27, 2019, claimant reported “all pain went away” after her injection and that 
“she can now do pretty much what she wants, motion is good.” (JE 9, p. 114) At her 
next session on December 11, 2019, claimant told the therapist she “loaded and 
unloaded several loads of wood without incident” but “just feels weak after not using her 
arm much for several months.” (JE 9, p. 119) Unfortunately, claimant reported 
increasing pain and problems with her range of motion in the sessions that followed. (JE 
9, pp. 122, 124) On December 23, 2019, her flexion was measured at 110 degrees and 
her abduction was measured at 105 degrees. (JE 9, p. 124) Due to her flare in 
symptoms, the therapist recommended a pause in therapy until claimant could follow up 
with Dr. Stanford. (JE 9, p. 125) 
That follow up occurred on January 22, 2020, after claimant completed her MRI. 
The MRI revealed mild supraspinatus and moderate infraspinatus tendinosis without a 
tear; global labral degeneration with a mildly displaced anteroinferior tear; intra-articular 
long head of the biceps tendinosis with suspected partial thickness longitudinal split 
tear; and “nonspecific findings which can be seen with adhesive capsulitis in the 
appropriate clinical setting.” (JE 8, pp. 112-113)  
Dr. Stanford confirmed with claimant that the MRI showed “no signs of rotator 
cuff tear” but that claimant did “have some degeneration of her glenoid labrum.” (JE 7, 
p. 111) Dr. Stanford suspected this degeneration was the source of claimant’s ongoing 
symptoms. (JE 7, p. 111) He performed another injection but noted he did “not see any 
indications for surgical intervention.” (JE 7, p. 111) Claimant did not return to Dr. 
Stanford or any other physician for treatment to the left shoulder after the January 22, 
2020 appointment. (Tr., p. 27) At no point during claimant’s care with Dr. Stanford did 
he impose any work restrictions.  
Dr. Stanford issued an opinion letter on February 19, 2020 in which he confirmed 
that “the MRI shows degenerative findings but does not show any evidence of acute 
traumatic injury.” He indicated he did “not anticipate any permanent partial impairment 
or any permanent work restrictions.” (Def. Ex. I) 
Claimant was seen by Sunil Bansal, M.D., on June 24, 2020 for purposes of an 
IME. Dr. Bansal diagnosed claimant with left shoulder rotator cuff tendinopathy, labral 
tear, and left biceps tendinosis. He offered the following opinion regarding causation: 
“This mechanism of falling with forceful direct impact to the shoulder, coupled with a 

BOBHOLZ V. NAPA AUTO PARTS 
Page 6 
clinical presentation of immediate left shoulder pain, is consistent with her rotator cuff, 
labral, and biceps pathology.” (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 8-9) He assigned an eight percent upper 
extremity impairment for range of motion deficits in claimant’s left shoulder. (Cl. Ex. 1, 
pp. 7, 10) 
Notably, there is no credible evidence that claimant sustained a “direct impact” to 
her shoulder. While she testified she fell on her left side, she was unsure how or if she 
used her arms to break her fall. Furthermore, in her written statement, which was 
completed within minutes of her fall, claimant specifically indicated that she fell on her 
left leg—not her left shoulder.  
Dr. Bansal’s opinion also fails to take into consideration the degenerative nature 
of claimant’s conditions. As noted both in the MRI findings and Dr. Stanford’s opinion 
letter, the MRI revealed degenerative findings but no evidence of acute traumatic injury. 
Dr. Bansal did not discuss whether claimant’s slip and fall could have aggravated or 
accelerated these degenerative conditions; his opinion provides that the sip and fall 
caused them outright. Again, this is inconsistent with both the MRI report itself and Dr. 
Stanford’s reading and interpretation of the report. 
Also notable is the change in claimant’s range of motion in the months before 
and after her IME. At her last physical therapy appointment on December 23, 2019, 
claimant’s range of motion was significantly more limited than during her IME roughly 
six months later. (JE 9, p. 124 (flexion measured at 110 degrees and abduction at 105 
degrees); Cl. Ex. 1, p. 7 (flexion measured at 170, 168 and 171 degrees and abduction 
measured at 158, 158 and 160 degrees)). Then, during her well-woman appointment in 
November of 2020, roughly five months after her IME, she had “normal” range of motion 
and strength during her musculoskeletal exam. (JE 10, p. 132) While the physical 
therapist and Dr. Bansal undoubtedly took more accurate and definitive measurements 
than the provider at the well-woman exam, this improvement is contrary to claimant’s 
testimony that she has “very poor range of motion” in her shoulder. (Tr., pp. 27-28, 57) 
Thus, considering the notations in the well-woman exam and claimant’s unreliable 
testimony, there is some question as to whether claimant had permanent range of 
motion deficits or whether any such deficits had resolved. 
Given the flaws of Dr. Bansal’s report and the unreliability of the evidence 
regarding the permanency of claimant’s range of motion deficits, I am not persuaded by 
Dr. Bansal’s opinion that claimant sustained any permanent impairment as a result of 
her work-related injury to her left shoulder. I therefore find insufficient evidence that 
claimant’s work-related injury caused any permanent disability.  
Instead, I find claimant sustained a work-related injury on February 27, 2019 that 
resulted in a period of temporary disability. I find claimant’s work-related injury 
necessitated medical treatment through January 22, 2020, at which time Dr. Stanford 
indicated that claimant’s ongoing condition was related to her degenerative condition. 
 

BOBHOLZ V. NAPA AUTO PARTS 
Page 7 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
In this case, I found claimant’s testimony and descriptions of her alleged slip and 
fall on February 27, 2019 to be consistent and credible. Though there are other 
inconsistences and discrepancies in claimant’s testimony, she consistently reported 
slipping on a slick spot and falling on her left side. As a result, I found sufficient 
evidence that claimant’s slip and fall occurred. I therefore conclude claimant satisfied 
her burden to prove she sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of her 
employment. 
Claimant is seeking both permanency and temporary benefits as a result of her 
work-related injury to her left shoulder.  
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 

BOBHOLZ V. NAPA AUTO PARTS 
Page 8 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
I turn first to claimant’s claim for permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits. Due 
to the flaws of Dr. Bansal’s report, coupled with the lack of credible testimony regarding 
claimant’s ongoing range of motion deficits (on which Dr. Bansal’s impairment ratings 
were based), I found insufficient evidence that claimant sustained any permanent 
impairment to her left shoulder. I therefore conclude claimant failed to satisfy her burden 
to prove she sustained any permanent disability as a result of her February 27, 2019 
work injury.  
Claimant is seeking temporary benefits from March 22, 2019, the day she was 
told defendant-employer could no longer accommodate her restrictions, through 
January 22, 2020, which was her last appointment with Dr. Stanford. As correctly noted 
by defendants, however, claimant’s most recent restrictions extended only through July 
22, 2019. Dr. Peterson did not renew these restrictions when he last saw claimant on 
July 18, 2019. While Dr. Peterson at that appointment recommended an orthopedic 
surgery evaluation, he made no mention of the need for ongoing restrictions. Dr. 
Stanford likewise never assigned any work restrictions during his treatment of claimant. 
As a result, I found there was no evidence that claimant had work restrictions after July 
22, 2019. 
When an injured worker has been unable to work during a period of recuperation 
from an injury that did not produce permanent disability, the worker is entitled to 
temporary total disability benefits during the time the worker is disabled by the injury.  
Those benefits are payable until the employee has returned to work, or is medically 
capable of returning to work substantially similar to the work performed at the time of 
injury.  Iowa Code § 85.33(1).  
In this case, I found claimant had no active work restrictions after July 22, 2019, 
meaning claimant was medically capable of returning to substantially similar work after 
that date. I therefore conclude claimant satisfied her burden to prove she is entitled to 
temporary total disability (TTD) benefits from March 22, 2019 through July 22, 2019. 
Claimant is seeking penalty benefits for defendants’ failure to pay any permanent 
or temporary disability benefits in this case.  
In Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 (Iowa 1996), and 
Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996), the supreme court 
explained Iowa Code section 86.13 as follows: 
Based on the plain language of section 86.13, we hold an 
employee is entitled to penalty benefits if there has been a delay in 
payment unless the employer proves a reasonable cause or excuse.  A 
reasonable cause or excuse exists if either (1) the delay was necessary 

BOBHOLZ V. NAPA AUTO PARTS 
Page 9 
for the insurer to investigate the claim or (2) the employer had a 
reasonable basis to contest the employee’s entitlement to benefits.  A 
“reasonable basis” for denial of the claim exists if the claim is “fairly 
debatable.” 
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
The court explained further in Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 
(Iowa 1996): 
(1) If the employer has a reason for the delay and conveys that 
reason to the employee contemporaneously with the beginning of the 
delay, no penalty will be imposed if the reason is of such character that a 
reasonable fact-finder could conclude that it is a "reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse" under Iowa Code section 86.13.  In that case, we will 
defer to the decision of the commissioner.  See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d 
at 260 (substantial evidence found to support commissioner’s finding of 
legitimate reason for delay pending receipt of medical report); Robbennolt, 
555 N.W.2d at 236. 
(2) If no reason is given for the delay or if the “reason” is not one 
that a reasonable fact-finder could accept, we will hold that no such cause 
or excuse exists and remand to the commissioner for the sole purpose of 
assessing penalties under section 86.13.  See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 
261. 
(3) Reasonable causes or excuses include (a) a delay for the 
employer to investigate the claim, Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260; 
Kiesecker v. Webster City Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d at 109, 111 (Iowa 
1995); or (b) the employer had a reasonable basis to contest the 
claimthe “fairly debatable” basis for delay.  See Christensen, 554 
N.W.2d at 260 (holding two-month delay to obtain employer’s own medical 
report reasonable under the circumstances).  
(4) For the purpose of applying section 86.13, the benefits that are 
underpaid as well as late-paid benefits are subject to penalties, unless the 
employer establishes reasonable and probable cause or excuse.  
Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 237 (underpayment resulting from application 
of wrong wage base; in absence of excuse, commissioner required to 
apply penalty). 
If we were to construe [section 86.13] to permit the 
avoidance of penalty if any amount of compensation benefits 
are paid, the purpose of the penalty statute would be 
frustrated.  For these reasons, we conclude section 86.13 is 

BOBHOLZ V. NAPA AUTO PARTS 
Page 10 
applicable when payment of compensation is not timely . . . 
or when the full amount of compensation is not paid. 
Id. 
(5) For purposes of determining whether there has been a delay, 
payments are “made” when (a) the check addressed to a claimant is 
mailed (Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 236; Kiesecker, 528 N.W.2d at 112), 
or (b) the check is delivered personally to the claimant by the employer or 
its workers’ compensation insurer.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 235.   
(6) In determining the amount of penalty, the commissioner is to 
consider factors such as the length of the delay, the number of delays, the 
information available to the employer regarding the employee’s injury and 
wages, and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 
N.W.2d at 238. 
(7) An employer’s bare assertion that a claim is “fairly debatable” 
does not make it so.  A fair reading of Christensen and Robbennolt, 
makes it clear that the employer must assert facts upon which the 
commissioner could reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.”  
See Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
Meyers, 557 N.W.2d at 504-505. 
When an employee’s claim for benefits is fairly debatable based on a good faith 
dispute over the employee’s factual or legal entitlement to benefits, an award of penalty 
benefits is not appropriate under the statute.  Whether the issue was fairly debatable 
turns on whether there was a disputed factual dispute that, if resolved in favor of the 
employer, would have supported the employer's denial of compensability.  Gilbert v. 
USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001). 
For the reasons explained above, I found defendants failed to conduct a 
reasonable investigation into claimant’s claim prior to their denial. There was no 
reasonable basis for their denial at the time they issued their denial letter to claimant, 
nor did defendants ever provide additional communication about the basis for their 
dispute. I therefore conclude penalty benefits are appropriate. 
Defendants owe roughly 17 weeks of TTD benefits. I conclude a penalty in the 
amount of $4,000.00 is appropriate. This represents roughly 50 percent of the benefits 
owed but denied. 
With respect to medical expenses, it was not until January 22, 2020 that Dr. 
Stanford indicated claimant’s ongoing complaints were due to her degenerative 
condition. As a result, I found claimant’s required medical treatment for her work-related 
injury through January 22, 2020, at which time her complaints were no longer causally 
related to her slip and fall. I therefore conclude claimant established her entitlement to 

BOBHOLZ V. NAPA AUTO PARTS 
Page 11 
reimbursement for medical expenses related to her left shoulder through January 22, 
2020, as set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 5. See Iowa Code § 85.27. 
Claimant also seeks reimbursement for her IME and various costs.  
Iowa Code section 85.39 provides that defendants’ obligation to reimburse 
claimant for an IME occurs “[i]f an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by 
a physician retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low.” In this case, Dr. Stanford opined in a letter dated February 19, 2020 that he did 
not anticipate any permanent partial impairment. This evaluation triggered claimant’s 
right to pursue an IME at defendants’ expense, which claimant did in June of 2020. 
Because I determined claimant sustained a compensable injury, I therefore conclude 
claimant established her entitlement to reimbursement for Dr. Bansal’s IME. See Iowa 
Code § 85.39(2). 
Claimant also seeks reimbursement for her filing fee and service of her petition. 
(Cl. Ex. 6) Assessment of costs is a discretionary function of this agency.  Iowa Code § 
86.40.  Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner or 
workers’ compensation commissioner hearing the case.  876 IAC 4.33. Claimant was 
successful in portions of her claim. As such, I find a taxation of costs is appropriate in 
this case. I tax defendants the costs of claimant’s filing fee and service fee in the 
amount of $113.80. 876 IAC 4.33(3), (7). 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay claimant temporary total disability (TTD) benefits from 
March 22, 2019 through July 22, 2019 at the stipulated rate of four hundred eighty-
seven and 42/100 dollars ($487.42). 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. 
Defendants are entitled to a credit as set forth in the stipulation in the hearing 
report.  
Defendants shall pay penalty benefits in the amount of four thousand and 00/100 
dollars ($4,000.00). 
Defendants shall pay directly, reimburse claimant for any out-of-pocket 
expenses, or otherwise satisfy and hold claimant harmless for the past medical 
expenses detailed in Claimant’s Exhibit 5 through January 22, 2020. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant the costs of Dr. Bansal’s IME. 

BOBHOLZ V. NAPA AUTO PARTS 
Page 12 
Pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33, defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the 
amount of one hundred thirteen and 80/100 dollars ($113.80). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7.    
Signed and filed this __16th  __ day of June, 2021. 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         STEPHANIE J. COPLEY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
David Drake (via WCES) 
Aaron Oliver (via WCES) 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the 
next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
