Case Number: 23005630.01
Case Title:  HECKMAN, DONALD V. FIVES INC/2ND INJ-FUND
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Heckman Donald - 23005630.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
DONALD HECKMAN, 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
 
 
 
  : 
 
FILE NO. 23005630.01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  : 
Vs. 
 
 
 
 
 
  :  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  : 
 
 A R B I T R A T I O N 
FIVES, INC.  
 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
 
 
 
  : 
 
      D E C I S I O N 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  : 
QBE/GENERAL CASUALTY OF  
  : 
WISCONSIN, 
 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier,  
 
  : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  : 
And 
 
 
 
 
 
  : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  : 
HEADNOTES: 2301, 2303 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  : 
 
Defendants.  
 
 
  : 
 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Donald Heckman, filed a petition in arbitration for workers’ 
compensation benefits against Fives, Inc., QBE/General Casualty of Wisconsin, and the 
Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  The undersigned heard this case on September 27, 2024, 
in Des Moines, Iowa.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing.  On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.   
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 7, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 12, Defendants’ Exhibits A through J, and Second Injury Fund of Iowa’s 
Exhibits AA through DD.  Claimant testified on his own behalf.  Defendants called 
Darren Zinecker.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration 
hearing.   
The undersigned requested post-hearing briefs.  All parties filed their post-
hearing briefs on November 15, 2024, at which time the case was deemed fully 
submitted to the undersigned.   
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-May-14  11:34:54     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HECKMAN V. FIVES, INC. AND SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has personal and 
subject matter jurisdiction over this matter; 
2. Extent of permanent partial disability; 
3. Claimant’s gross earnings on the date of injury; 
4. Claimant’s exemption status on the date of injury;  
5. Whether claimant is entitled to the payment of medical expenses;  
6. Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits under Iowa Code section 86.13, 
and, if so, how much; 
7. Whether claimant sustained a compensable loss to the right arm on January 13, 
2022, for purposes of Second Injury Fund of Iowa benefits; and  
8. Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
In this case, the undersigned must decide whether a traveling technician injured 
outside of Iowa is entitled to workers’ compensation benefits under Iowa Code section 
85.71.  The parties appear to agree the contract of hire was made in Iowa.  The key 
questions in this case are whether the employer has a place of business in Iowa, 
whether the claimant regularly works in Iowa, and whether the contract of hire is for 
employment outside the United States. 
The claimant at the center of this case is Donald Heckman.  Mr. Heckman, an 
Iowa resident, was 62 years of age at the time of the evidentiary hearing.  (Hearing 
Transcript, page 17).  His testimony is largely consistent with the evidentiary record.  
His demeanor at the evidentiary hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt the 
veracity of his testimony.  As such, I find Mr. Heckman credible. 
Fives Giddings & Lewis (Fives) is an international company with several offices 
and business locations throughout the world.  In the United States, Fives has physical 
locations in Washington, California, Illinois, Wisconsin, Michigan, Ohio, Kentucky, and 
Maryland. (Ex. I, p. 1)  The Fives service group that employs Mr. Heckman operates out 
of Fond du Lac, Wisconsin and Hebron, Kentucky.  Fives does not maintain any 
physical business location in the state of Iowa. (Hr. Tr., p. 87) 

HECKMAN V. FIVES, INC. AND SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
Mr. Heckman is an Installation and Service Technician for Fives.  As a 
technician, Mr. Heckman is expected to install, demonstrate, qualify, repair, and/or alter 
Fives machines and equipment in customer facilities throughout the United States and 
abroad. (Exhibit 8, p. 31)   
Mr. Heckman was initially hired by Fives under contract in 2012. (Hr. Tr., p. 72)  
He later received a formal offer of employment on February 6, 2013. (Ex. A, p. 2)  The 
evidentiary record is thin as it relates to the hiring process; however, it is documented 
that Mr. Heckman underwent a drug screening at the Fives location in Fond du Lac, 
Wisconsin as part of the pre-employment process in 2013. (Hr. Tr., p. 49; see Ex. A, p. 
2)   
Mr. Heckman briefly left his employment with Fives in 2021 to pursue other 
career opportunities with John Deere in Davenport, Iowa. (Hr. Tr., pp. 20-21)  He 
worked for John Deere for approximately five months before returning to Fives. (Hr. Tr., 
p. 21)  Mr. Heckman entered into a new contractual relationship with Fives on or about 
November 29, 2021. (Exhibit 7, p. 30)  The November 29, 2021, offer letter does not 
request that Mr. Heckman present for a pre-employment physical and drug-screening 
like the February 6, 2013, offer letter. (Ex. A, pp. 1-2)  He accepted the offer of 
employment from his home in Clarence, Iowa. (Hr. Tr., pp. 22-23)   
Mr. Heckman receives his work assignments via e-mail from Fives’ office in 
Hebron, Kentucky.  Typically, Mr. Heckman receives the work assignments while at his 
home in Iowa.  However, his actual work as an installation and service technician 
occurs on-site throughout the United States and abroad.  Mr. Heckman is required to 
have a valid driver’s license and the ability to obtain a passport. (Ex. 8, p. 32)  
Domestically it does not appear that Mr. Heckman performs work in any one state more 
than another.  He is not given priority for assignments in Iowa simply because he 
resides there.  Mr. Heckman testified that he worked in Iowa for periods of time in 2023 
and 2024. (Hr. Tr., pp. 27-28)  There is no evidence to suggest Mr. Heckman worked for 
the defendant employer in Iowa in 2021 or 2022.  Internationally, Mr. Heckman 
estimated that he has spent “a few years” working abroad for Fives, including 
assignments in Norway, Russia, China, Taiwan, Brazil, Israel, France, Scotland, 
England, and Mexico. (Hr. Tr., p. 28) 
After receiving an assignment, Mr. Heckman is responsible for coordinating his 
travel arrangements.  For domestic installations, he is typically on-site for two weeks.  
For international installations, he is usually away for one month.  For service and repair 
work, Mr. Heckman is typically away for one week.  After completing an assignment, he 
generally returns home to Iowa, completes his paperwork and time entries, and – 
assuming he has received another assignment – makes his own travel arrangements. 
(Hr. Tr., pp. 23-26)   
In addition to his regular job duties, Mr. Heckman is required to attend annual in-
person safety trainings in Fond du Lac, Wisconsin. (Hr. Tr., pp. 49-51)  Fives does not 
conduct any in-person safety trainings in Iowa.  If any training does not require in-

HECKMAN V. FIVES, INC. AND SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
person attendance, Mr. Heckman is permitted to complete it virtually, including from his 
home in Iowa. (Hr. Tr., p. 91)   
Mr. Heckman is managed by Darren Zinecker from the Fives’ office in Fond du 
Lac, Wisconsin.  Mr. Zinecker supervises approximately 28 technicians located 
throughout Wisconsin, Illinois, Ohio, Michigan, Kansas, Texas, Oklahoma, and Florida. 
(Hr. Tr., p. 95)  According to Mr. Zinecker, technicians are paid from port to port and 
while physically working on-site. (Hr. Tr., p. 88)  They are also compensated for being 
on-call if no work is available. (Id.)  Mr. Zinecker confirmed that technicians have 
discretion as to when they complete their service reports, paperwork, and travel 
accommodations. (Hr. Tr., p. 89) 
Following his rehiring, Mr. Heckman performed service work at a customer’s 
plant in Illinois for four days before being assigned to an installation project in 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin on December 8, 2021.  On January 13, 2022, Mr. Heckman 
sustained a stipulated right wrist injury while working in Wisconsin. (Ex. 5, p. 26)  He 
was diagnosed with a right distal radius comminuted fracture.  Andrew Navarrete, M.D. 
performed an initial open reduction and internal fixation of the facture with a dorsal wrist 
bridge plate on the date of injury.  Five weeks later, Dr. Navarette removed the bridge 
plate and screws. (JE6, pp. 104-107)  Dr. Navarrete released Mr. Heckman to return to 
full duty work on August 28, 2022, and placed him at maximum medical improvement 
(MMI) on November 28, 2022. (JE6, p. 138-139)   
Defendants scheduled Mr. Heckman for an independent medical examination 
(IME) with James White, M.D.  The appointment was scheduled to occur on November 
2, 2023. (Exhibit D, p. 5)  However, claimant’s counsel advised defendants that his 
client would not attend the November 2, 2023, IME appointment.   
Mr. Heckman ultimately presented for an IME with Thomas Ebinger, M.D. on 
March 10, 2023. (See JE7)  On examination, Mr. Heckman demonstrated persistent 
stiffness and pain of the wrist. (JE7, p. 143)  He reported significant pain in his wrist 
when attempting to throw a ball, turn a screwdriver, or open a jar. (JE7, p. 141)  It is 
noted that Mr. Heckman was developing posttraumatic osteoarthritis. (Id.)  Dr. Ebinger 
agreed with Dr. Navarette that Mr. Heckman had reached MMI.  He opined that an MMI 
date of November 28, 2022, was reasonable. (JE7, p. 144)  Pursuant to the AMA 
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, Dr. Ebinger assigned 
18 percent right upper extremity impairment for loss of range of motion. (Id.)  He opined 
that no formal restrictions were necessary. (Id.) 
Between his rehire date of November 29, 2021, and the January 13, 2022, work 
injury, Mr. Heckman did not perform any work in the state of Iowa.  The parties appear 
to agree that he has performed work at the John Deere plant in Davenport, Iowa, during 
his employment; however, it is unclear exactly when this work took place. (See Hr. Tr., 
pp. 28-29)  Mr. Heckman testified he was assigned to jobs in Iowa in 2023 and 2024; 
however, there is no evidence to substantiate these claims or confirm the dates in which 
he worked in Iowa. (Hr. Tr., p. 28)  He further testified that he has installed several 
machines at the John Deere plant in Davenport, Iowa, and each machine takes him “a 

HECKMAN V. FIVES, INC. AND SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
couple months” to install. (Id.)  Mr. Heckman’s estimate is inconsistent with his previous 
testimony that it only takes two weeks to perform a domestic installation. (See Hr. Tr., p. 
25) 
Mr. Heckman is asserting a claim for benefits from the Second Injury Fund of 
Iowa.  In this regard, the parties stipulate that Mr. Heckman sustained a prior qualifying 
loss to the left leg on October 19, 2016, while working for Fives in Burlington, Vermont. 
(Hearing Report; Hr. Tr., p. 19)  He was diagnosed with a complete tear of the anterior 
cruciate ligament and a medial meniscus tear. (See JE4, p. 13)  He underwent left knee 
surgery on December 28, 2016, and returned to full duty work on January 3, 2017. (JE4, 
p. 21)  He has not had any treatment on his left knee since that time. (Hr. Tr., p. 77)   He 
testified that he was paid permanent partial disability benefits based on a weekly benefit 
rate of $1,020.73 and a ten percent functional permanent impairment rating. (Hr. Tr., p. 
20) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue for determination is whether the Iowa Workers' Compensation 
Commissioner has subject matter jurisdiction over this case pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.71. When lack of jurisdiction is placed at issue, claimants have the burden of 
proof to sustain the requisite jurisdiction.  LaRose v. Curoe, 343 N.W.2d 153 (Iowa 
1983). 
Iowa Code section 85.71 governs the commissioner's subject matter jurisdiction 
over workers' compensation claims based on injuries sustained outside the state of 
Iowa. See Heartland Express, Inc. v. Terry, 631 N.W.2d 260, 265 (Iowa 2001); 
Henriksen v. Younglove Constr., 540 N.W.2d 254, 256 (Iowa 1995). 
Iowa Code section 85.71 states: 
1. If an employee, while working outside the territorial limits of this state, 
suffers an injury on account of which the employee, or in the event of death, 
the employee's dependents, would have been entitled to the benefits 
provided by this chapter had such injury occurred within this state, such 
employee, or in the event of death resulting from such injury, the employee's 
dependents, shall be entitled to the benefits provided by this chapter, if at 
the time of such injury any of the following is applicable: 
a. The employer has a place of business in this state and the employee 
regularly works at or from that place of business. 
b. The employee is working under a contract of hire made in this state and 
the employee regularly works in this state. 
c. The employee is working under a contract of hire made in this state and 
sustains an injury for which no remedy is available under the workers' 
compensation laws of another state. 

HECKMAN V. FIVES, INC. AND SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
d. The employee is working under a contract of hire made in this state for 
employment outside the United States. 
e. The employer has a place of business in Iowa, and the employee is 
working under a contract of hire which provides that the employee's 
workers' compensation claims be governed by Iowa law. 
2. This section shall be construed to confer personal jurisdiction over an 
employee or employer to whom this section is applicable. 
Claimant argues jurisdiction over this claim is conferred to claimant pursuant to 
section 85.71(1)(a), section 85.71(1)(b), and section 85.71(1)(d).  All defendants 
contend jurisdiction does not properly rest with the commissioner.   
With respect to section 85.71(1)(a), claimant asserts his home office constitutes 
a “place of business in this state.”  To the undersigned’s knowledge, this subsection has 
not been interpreted by the Iowa appellate courts since its revision in 2017.  The Court 
of Appeals declined the opportunity to interpret this specific subsection in Niday v. 
Roehl Transport, Inc., 934 N.W.2d 29 (Iowa Ct. App. 2019), because it determined 
Niday met the criteria in subsection (b). 
Claimant’s argument solely rests on the fact that he is domiciled in Iowa, traveled 
from and returned to his home in Iowa, and regularly performed administrative duties at 
his home in Iowa.  I find that the subsection requires more.  The administrative work 
performed by Mr. Heckman was not required to be performed at his home.  The 
paperwork and time entries could be completed immediately after finishing an 
assignment, while traveling, at his home, or at any other location where he would 
choose to perform the tasks remotely.  Mr. Heckman did not perform any other core 
work activities in his home or elsewhere.  Catching up on work at home or completing 
administrative tasks at home that could be completed anywhere remotely is an 
insufficient basis to find that Mr. Heckman’s home was a place of business.  As stated 
by a former commissioner in Seaman, et. al. v. Burgess Health Center, File No. 
5031994 (App. Dec. November 12, 2013), “In an increasingly mobile, technological 
environment the workplace cannot be found to be every location that an employee has 
occasion to temporarily observe an email, take a phone call, or sit down with a laptop to 
catch up on small tasks best left for the office or other workplace.”  Therefore, based on 
the record in this case, I find that Fives, Inc. did not have a place of business in Iowa. 
Claimant may still establish jurisdiction if he can show that he was employed by a 
contract for hire made in Iowa and he regularly works in the state of Iowa. Iowa Code 
section 85.71(1)(b).  I accept claimant’s testimony that he accepted the defendant 
employer’s offer at his home in Iowa.  As such, I find Mr. Heckman was employed by a 
contract for hire made in Iowa.  Therefore, I must determine whether Mr. Heckman 
“regularly worked” in Iowa.   
The Iowa Supreme Court has previously provided that jurisdiction should be 
established by something more than the limited employment-related contact a transitory 

HECKMAN V. FIVES, INC. AND SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
employee would have with a state in which his employment is not principally localized.  
The Court has similarly provided that the term “regularly” within Iowa Code sec. 85.71 
implies “a consistent presence in Iowa, aligning with the customary work habits or 
procedures of the employee, rather than meeting an objective threshold of time spent.” 
Annett Holdings, Inc. v. Allen, 738 N.W.2d 647, 648 (Iowa Ct. App. 2007)  In Allen, the 
Court supported the agency's interpretation that an employee “regularly works” in Iowa if 
it is usual or customary for them to work out of an Iowa terminal, pick up loads, or 
transport within Iowa.  There must be a business-related necessity for the work to be 
performed within the state, rather than jurisdiction being conferred solely because the 
Claimant resides in the state and the employer permits the claimant to perform certain 
administrative tasks from the convenience of their home.  Claimant’s performance of 
administrative duties at his home in Iowa does not equate to regularly working in the 
state.  While Mr. Heckman completes some administrative tasks from his home in Iowa, 
these duties are incidental to his primary role and are insufficient to establish that he 
“regularly works” in the state. 
Alternatively, Mr. Heckman asserts he has regularly worked at the John Deere 
plant in Davenport, Iowa, throughout his career with Fives.   
Defendants assert the relevant time period for determining whether the claimant 
regularly worked in Iowa begins on the date of hire and ends on the date of injury.  In 
other words, defendants assert the relevant time period in this case is November 29, 
2021, through January 13, 2022.  In support of their argument, defendants cite to 
Brockman v. Dun-Par Engineered Forms Co., File No. 5026766 (Arb. Dec. June 12, 
2009).  I do not find defendants’ argument persuasive.  The deputy commissioner that 
drafted the Brockman decision – and the interim commissioner who wrote the appeal 
decision – provided limited analysis on the issue.  Several factors in this case support 
adopting a broader timeframe.  Mr. Heckman’s job duties did not materially change after 
his brief hiatus.  He remained an installation and service technician working under the 
same expectations, which included traveling throughout the U.S. and internationally.  In 
the context of a long-standing employment relationship, such as Mr. Heckman’s, the 
time he spent working for a different employer is minor.  Furthermore, the rehiring 
occurred without a new pre-employment physical or drug screening, which suggests the 
employer did not require a full re-initiation of the employment relationship. 
There is no set formula for determining whether an employee regularly works 
within Iowa.  The determinative issue is not on how much time is spent in this state 
compared to other states, but whether sufficient time was spent in this state to find that 
claimant regularly, usually or customarily worked in this state. 
At hearing, Mr. Heckman estimated that he has worked in Iowa for a total of nine 
to twelve months during his entire tenure with Fives, which began in 2013.  However, 
there are no time logs, work orders, or personnel records in evidence to corroborate Mr. 
Heckman’s estimate.  Mr. Heckman did not perform any work in Iowa in either 2021 or 
2022.  He testified that he performed work in Iowa in 2023 and 2024; however, he did 
not provide any specific dates. Based on his testimony, domestic service and repair 
work typically takes one week and domestic installations typically take two weeks.   

HECKMAN V. FIVES, INC. AND SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
When viewed over the course of more than a decade of employment, sporadic 
assignments totaling less than one year of work in Iowa do no demonstrate a regular, 
usual, or customary presence in the state.  Instead, Mr. Heckman’s work history with 
Fives reflects a national and international travel-based role, with no evidence that Iowa 
served as a usual or customary location for his work.  Under these circumstances, the 
record does not support a finding that Mr. Heckman regularly worked in Iowa.  
With respect to subsection (d), claimant asserts he works under a contract for 
employment outside of the United States.  Subsection (d) provides injured workers with 
a means for recovering benefits for injuries sustained outside of the United States when 
they would otherwise have no recourse for recovery of benefits.  In this case, Mr. 
Heckman sustained an injury in the state of Wisconsin.  I find subsection (d) of Iowa 
Code section 85.71 does not apply to confer subject matter jurisdiction over the 
Claimant’s January 13, 2022 date of injury. 
I conclude there is no basis under Iowa Code section 85.71 to support the 
undersigned’s exercise of judicial authority over this claim.  Based on the conclusion 
that the Iowa Workers' Compensation Commissioner does not have subject matter 
jurisdiction of this claim no other issues need to be discussed. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant takes nothing and his petition is dismissed. 
Signed and filed this 14th day of May, 2025. 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Andrew Bribriesco  (via WCES) 
Kathryn Johnson  
(via WCES) 
Sarah Timko  
(via WCES) 
 
 
 

HECKMAN V. FIVES, INC. AND SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Avenue, Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will 
be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
