Case Number: 21700457.01
Case Title:  QUINTANILLA, RUBELINDA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Quintanilla Rubelinda-21700457.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
RUBELINDA QUINTANILLA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
File No.  21700457.01 
 
Claimant, 
  :                   
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                  
WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC., 
  : 
 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
      Headnotes: 1801, 2501, 2907 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Claimant Rubelinda Quintanilla filed a petition in arbitration on May 10, 2021, 
alleging she sustained injuries to her neck, bilateral shoulders, back, and hip, while 
working for Defendant Wells Enterprises (“Wells”).  Wells filed an answer on May 18, 
2021. 
 
An arbitration hearing was held via Zoom video conference on April 28, 2022.  
Attorney Judy Freking represented Quintanilla.  Quintanilla appeared and testified.  
Perla Alarcon-Flory provided Spanish interpretation services during the hearing.  
Attorney Steven Durick represented Wells.  David Calhoun appeared and testified on 
behalf of Wells.  Joint Exhibits (“JE”) 1 through 3, and Exhibits 1 through 11 and A 
through G were admitted into the record.  The record was held open through June 3, 
2022, for the receipt of post-hearing briefs.  The briefs were received and the record 
was closed. 
 
At the start of the hearing the parties submitted a Hearing Report, listing 
stipulations and issues to be decided.  Wells waived all affirmative defenses.  The 
Hearing Report Order was approved and filed at the conclusion of the hearing. 
STIPULATIONS 
 
1. 
An employer-employee relationship existed between Wells and Quintanilla 
at the time of the alleged injury. 
 
2. 
Quintanilla sustained injuries, which arose out of and in the course of her 
employment with Wells on February 22, 2021. 
 
3. 
Although entitlement to temporary benefits cannot be stipulated, 
Quintanilla was off work from May 4, 2021, through April 19, 2022. 
 
4. 
At the time of the alleged injury Quintanilla’s gross earnings were 
$1,252.00 per week, she was single, and entitled to one exemption, and the parties 
believe the weekly rate is $750.81. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Jul-05  15:37:45     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

QUINTANILLA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 2 
 
 
5. 
Prior to the hearing Quintanilla was paid the compensation set forth in 
Exhibit 7. 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
Is the alleged injury a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery? 
 
2. 
Is Quintanilla entitled to temporary total disability, temporary partial 
disability, or healing period benefits from May 4, 2021, through April 19, 2022? 
 
3. 
Did Quintanilla refuse suitable work through her termination? 
 
4. 
Is Quintanilla entitled to payment of medical expenses? 
 
5. 
Should penalty benefits be assessed against defendant? 
 
6. 
Should costs be assessed against either party? 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
Quintanilla lives alone in Le Mars. (Transcript, page 7; Exhibits 1, p. 4; G, pp. 43-
44)  At the time of the hearing she was 56. (Tr., p. 7) 
 
Quintanilla commenced employment with Wells on March 24, 1996. (Exs. 2, p. 
15; G, p. 45)  Quintanilla worked for Wells for 25 years until her termination in 2021. 
(Tr., p. 7)   
On February 22, 2021, Quintanilla was working on the Hoyer wrapper packing 
boxes when one of the guards became loose and struck her on the side of the shoulder. 
(JE 2, p. 5; Exs. 2, p. 22; G, p. 48)  Quintanilla initially received treatment through the 
company nurses at Wells. (Ex. G, p. 49)   
On March 23, 2021, Wells offered Quintanilla a restricted duty assignment of no 
lifting over 10 pounds with one to two hours of bending, squatting, and twisting, and 
occasional gripping, pinching, pushing, pulling, and reaching above her shoulder. (Ex. 3, 
p. 23)  Quintanilla accepted the temporary work on March 24, 2021. (Ex. 3, p. 23; Tr., p. 
11)  Quintanilla testified she continued to work her normal duties on the Hoyer after 
receiving work restrictions. (Tr., p. 11)   
On May 3, 2021, Wells terminated Quintanilla for violating the work rules. (Exs. 2, 
p. 15; 5)  Wells noted Quintanilla had no disciplinary action on file within the last 12 
months. (Ex. 5, p. 26)  Quintanilla testified during her entire 25-year career she had not 
been disciplined before her termination. (Tr., p. 37)   
According to the termination paperwork, “[o]n 4/29/21 it was brought up to the 
supervisor that Rubelinda was yelling and grabbed Erika Morales by the arm.” (Ex. 5, p. 
26)  Wells documented Quintanilla admitted she touched Morales by the arm and she 
was talking loud to her, and after talking to two other witnesses “it is believed Rubelinda 
did yell and grab Erika by the arm,” which is a violation of “Company Policy 601.” (Ex. 5, 
p. 26)  The termination paperwork is not signed by Quintanilla and notes she was not 

QUINTANILLA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 3 
 
present. (Ex. 5)  Wells called Quintanilla and informed her she had been terminated. 
(Tr., p. 35)  
The Wells Employee Handbook provides under 601 Employee Conduct and 
Work Rules that “[c]onduct that results in disciplinary action, up to and including 
termination of employment includes, but is not limited to” . . . “Fighting or threatening 
violence in the workplace . . .Discourtesy to a fellow employee, visitor, or customer. . . 
Violation of personnel policies.” (Ex. F, pp. 38-39) 
Quintanilla testified she did not grab her coworker. (Tr., p. 17)  Quintanilla 
reported Erika Morales came looking for her while she was working on the production 
line and started confronting her about things in Spanish. (Tr., pp. 17-18)  Quintanilla 
testified Morales confronted her for saying she was taking long breaks and Quintanilla 
denied saying anything like that. (Tr., p. 19)  Quintanilla’s counsel inquired and she 
responded: 
Q. 
Okay.  So Wells alleges that when she came to confront you, that 
you somehow grabbed her arm; is that correct? 
A. 
No.  No, I only touched her and I said, “Hold on.  Tell me who told 
you that.” 
Q. 
Okay.  So Erica [sic] had some drama that she brought to your line 
when you were working and that is the basis of your termination 
from Wells? 
A. 
That is correct. 
(Tr., p. 19)  At the time of her termination, Quintanilla continued to have restrictions and 
she did not have surgery until several months later. (Tr., p. 20)  
Quintanilla testified she did not yell at Morales and that Exhibit 5, which 
documents she yelled at Morales is incorrect. (Tr., pp. 30-31)  Quintanilla admitted she 
touched her only. (Tr., p. 31)  On cross-examination, Quintanilla responded, as follows: 
Q. 
So you did make physical contact with Erica [sic] Morales during 
that physical contact, correct? 
A. 
The contact – I only touched her. 
Q. 
Okay.  So you dispute that you grabbed her? 
A. 
I touched her.  I didn’t hit her. 
(Tr., p. 31)  
 
Calhoun is the director of corporate risk management for Wells. (Tr., p. 40)  
Calhoun testified he did not have any personal involvement in Quintanilla’s 
termination. (Tr., p. 42)  Calhoun reported that but for her termination, Wells 
could have accommodated Quintanilla’s restrictions. (Tr., pp. 43-47)   

QUINTANILLA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 4 
 
On May 4, 2021, Quintanilla attended an appointment with Rodney Cassens, 
M.D. (JE 1, p. 1)  Dr. Cassens examined Quintanilla, assessed her with bilateral 
shoulder contusions and strains, and a lumbar strain, and ordered physical therapy. (JE 
1, p. 1)  Dr. Cassens found Quintanilla could perform regular duty work for two hours 
per day and imposed restrictions for the remainder of the day of occasional bending, 
squatting, twisting, pulling, reaching, gripping, and pinching, and no lifting over 10 
pounds. (JE 1, p. 1)   
Quintanilla returned to Dr. Cassens on May 18, 2021, reporting her overall pain 
had improved, but complaining of intermittent, sharp pain radiating to her shoulders 
bilaterally that is more severe on the right than the left. (JE 1, p. 2)  Dr. Cassens 
assessed Quintanilla with a bilateral rotator cuff strain/contusion, more severe on the 
right than the left, and a stable lumbar strain. (JE 1, p. 2)  Dr. Cassens continued 
Quintanilla’s physical therapy, recommended right shoulder magnetic resonance 
imaging, and imposed restrictions of no lifting over 10 pounds, occasional bending, 
squatting, twisting, gripping, pinching, pushing, pulling, and reaching. (JE 1, p. 2)  
On June 11, 2021, Quintanilla attended a follow-up appointment with Dr. 
Cassens, reporting her lumbar strain pain had improved, but she was continuing to 
experience intermittent, severe right shoulder pain. (JE 1, p. 3)  Dr. Cassens noted the 
right shoulder magnetic resonance imaging revealed a partial tearing of the 
supraspinatus and infraspinatus tendons of the right rotator cuff. (JE 1, p. 3)  Dr. 
Cassens assessed Quintanilla with a tear of the right shoulder rotator cuff and resolved 
lumbar strain, found she had reached maximum medical improvement for her lumbar 
strain, continued her restrictions, and referred her to orthopedics for evaluation and 
treatment of her right rotator cuff tear. (JE 1, p. 3)   
Quintanilla attended an appointment with Ryan Meis, M.D., an orthopedic 
surgeon on July 7, 2021, regarding her right shoulder pain. (JE 2, p. 5)  Quintanilla 
reported she had worked for Wells for 25 years, but she had recently been terminated. 
(JE 2, p. 5)  Quintanilla complained of pain in both shoulders and neck, reporting she 
experiences pain that goes down her arm and sometimes has some hand pain and low 
back pain, and that she has some numbness and tingling on occasion. (JE 2, p. 5)  Dr. 
Meis examined Quintanilla and reviewed her imaging, noting “[i]t is difficult to see her 
rotator cuff attachment site posteriorly and she may in fact have at least a partial 
thickness tear of her supraspinatus and infraspinatus,” but he could not say with any 
certainty that she has a full thickness tear. (JE 2, p. 6)  Dr. Meis assessed Quintanilla 
with chronic right shoulder pain, opined she is not an ideal surgical candidate, 
recommended and performed a corticosteroid injection, and recommended a home 
exercise program with over-the-counter medications and topical agents. (JE 2, pp. 6-7)   
On August 4, 2021, Quintanilla returned to Dr. Meis, reporting she had some 
improvement. (JE 2, p. 8)  Dr. Meis found her range of motion was better and 
Quintanilla reported having less pain and she was sleeping better, but she was still 
experiencing pain reaching away from her body. (JE 2, p. 8)  Dr. Meis assessed 
Quintanilla with chronic right shoulder pain, imposed restrictions of no lifting over 10 
pounds, no overhead lifting, and occasional pushing and pulling. (JE 2, p. 8)   

QUINTANILLA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
After her termination, Quintanilla applied for unemployment insurance benefits. 
(Ex. 6)  Iowa Workforce Development denied her claim on August 6, 2021, because its 
records indicated she was discharged from work on May 3, 2021, for violation of a 
known company rule. (Ex. 6, p. 29)   
 
Quintanilla attended an appointment with Dr. Meis on September 8, 2021, 
complaining of bilateral shoulder pain. (JE 2, p. 11)  Quintanilla relayed her right 
shoulder had reached a steady point, but it was not normal, and while her right shoulder 
pain was worse for a while, her left shoulder pain was the same as her right shoulder 
pain, noting her pain is worse with activity and better with rest. (JE 2, p. 11)  Quintanilla 
complained of occasional achiness and stabbing pain in her shoulder, difficulty sleeping 
due to the pain, and difficulty reaching away from her body. (JE 2, p. 11)  Dr. Meis 
assessed Quintanilla with bilateral shoulder pain, recommended left shoulder magnetic 
resonance imaging, and continued her restrictions. (JE 2, p. 12)   
 
On October 13, 2021, Quintanilla attended a follow-up appointment with Dr. 
Meis. (JE 2, p. 16) Dr. Meis noted magnetic resonance imaging revealed a large full 
thickness rotator cuff tear, partial biceps tendon tear, labral tear, and findings consistent 
with impingement. (JE 2, p. 16)  Quintanilla complained of stabbing pain in her left 
shoulder, localized to the rotator cuff insertion, and stated she would like to move 
forward with surgery. (JE 2, p. 16)  Dr. Meis listed an impression of a large, full-
thickness rotator cuff tear, impingement, and possible biceps tendinitis, morbid obesity, 
and hypertension, and recommended a left shoulder arthroscopy, subacromial 
decompression, possible biceps tenotomy, and rotator cuff repair. (JE 2, p. 17)   
 
Quintanilla underwent a left shoulder arthroscopy with arthroscopic rotator cuff 
repair, subacromial decompression, extensive debridement, biceps tenotomy, and 
subacromial decompression on October 21, 2021. (JE 3, pp. 32, 35) 
 
On November 8, 2021, Wells’s counsel sent an e-mail to Quintanilla’s counsel 
stating, 
[i]t is my understanding that your client has been released back to light 
duty work at Wells.  It has been confirmed that but for your client’s 
previous termination from Wells (for an altercation with a co-worker) they 
would have been able to accommodate such light duty restrictions.  
Therefore, under Reynolds v. HyVee, please accept this email 
correspondence as notice that your client’s benefits are being terminated 
as of 11/4/21 under ICA 85.33. 
(Ex. C, p. 34)   
 
Quintanilla returned to Dr. Meis’s office following surgery and she was examined 
by Nichole Friessen, PA-C, on December 1, 2021. (JE 2, p. 23)  Quintanilla reported 
she thought her range of motion was improving and she did not have significant pain. 
(JE 2, p. 23)  Friessen cautioned Quintanilla about doing too much too soon, told her 
not to use her left upper extremity, and ordered her to continue physical therapy and her 
home exercise program. (JE 2, p. 23)  

QUINTANILLA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
On January 19, 2022, Quintanilla attended an appointment with Dr. Meis, 
reporting she was doing well and that her pain was controlled. (JE 2, p. 27)  Dr. Meis 
examined Quintanilla, found she could elevate to 155 degrees with assistance, 
documented Quintanilla was doing a nice job managing her rehabilitation with a very 
large tear, ordered additional physical therapy, and imposed restrictions of light duty 
work with no lifting over 10 pounds. (JE 2, p. 27)   
 
Quintanilla returned to Dr. Meis on March 9, 2022, regarding her left shoulder. 
(JE 2, p. 29)  Dr. Meis examined Quintanilla, listed an impression of status post left 
shoulder rotator cuff repair making improvements, and right shoulder impingement and 
partial thickness rotator cuff tear, imposed restrictions of no lifting over 10 pounds, no 
overhead lifting, and occasional pushing, and pulling, and recommended conservative 
care for her right shoulder. (JE 2, p. 30)   
 
Quintanilla testified on April 20, 2022, Wells sent her to a new physician and her 
restrictions were lifted for the first time since the work injury. (Tr., p. 20)  While 
Quintanilla has not worked since Wells terminated her employment, she testified she 
has not refused any light duty work since her work injury. (Tr., p. 23)   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
I. 
Temporary Benefits 
Iowa Code section 85.33 (2021) governs temporary disability benefits, and Iowa 
Code section 85.34 governs healing period and permanent disability benefits.  Dunlap v. 
Action Warehouse, 824 N.W.2d 545, 556 (Iowa Ct. App. 2012).   
An employee has a temporary partial disability when because of the employee’s 
medical condition, “it is medically indicated that the employee is not capable of returning 
to employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of the injury, but is able to perform other work consistent with the 
employee’s disability.”  Iowa Code § 85.33(2).  Temporary partial disability benefits are 
payable, in lieu of temporary total disability and healing period benefits, due to the 
reduction in earning ability as a result of the employee’s temporary partial disability, and 
“shall not be considered benefits payable to an employee, upon termination of 
temporary partial or temporary total disability, the healing period, or permanent partial 
disability, because the employee is not able to secure work paying weekly earnings 
equal to the employee’s weekly earnings at the time of the injury.”  Id.   
As a general rule, “temporary total disability compensation benefits and healing-
period compensation benefits refer to the same condition.”  Clark v. Vicorp Rest., Inc., 
696 N.W.2d 596, 604 (Iowa 2005).  The purpose of temporary total disability benefits 
and healing period benefits is to “partially reimburse the employee for the loss of 
earnings” during a period of recovery from the condition.  Id.  The appropriate type of 
benefit depends on whether or not the employee has a permanent disability.  Dunlap, 
824 N.W.2d at 556.   
Temporary total, temporary partial, and healing period benefits can be interrupted 
or intermittent.  Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986); Stourac-Floyd v. MDF 

QUINTANILLA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 7 
 
Endeavors, File No. 5053328 (App. Sept. 11, 2018); Stevens v. Eastern Star Masonic 
Home, File No. 5049776 (App. Dec. Mar. 14, 2018).   
Quintanilla seeks temporary disability benefits from May 4, 2021, through April 
19, 2022.  The parties stipulated Quintanilla was off work for this period of time.  Wells 
avers Quintanilla is not entitled to temporary benefits because she refused suitable work 
through her termination because Wells could have accommodated her temporary 
restrictions.   
Refusal of suitable work has been an affirmative defense in workers’ 
compensation cases in Iowa for many years.  In 2017, the Iowa Legislature codified the 
affirmative defense and imposed additional requirements on the parties that were not 
required under the common law.   
Iowa Code section 85.33(3) now provides: 
   a. 
If an employee is temporarily, partially disabled and the employer 
for whom the employee was working at the time of injury offers to the 
employee suitable work consistent with the employee’s disability the 
employee shall accept the suitable work, and be compensated with 
temporary partial benefits.  If the employer offers the employee suitable 
work and the employee refuses to accept the suitable work offered by the 
employer, the employee shall not be compensated with temporary partial, 
temporary total, or healing period benefits during the period of the refusal. 
Work offered at the employer’s principal place of business or established 
place of operation where the employee has previously worked is 
presumed to be geographically suitable for an employee whose duties 
involve travel away from the employer’s principal place of business or 
established place of operation more than fifty percent of the time.  If 
suitable work is not offered by the employer for whom the employee was 
working at the time of the injury and the employee who is temporarily, 
partially disabled elects to perform work with a different employer, the 
employee shall be compensated with temporary partial benefits. 
   b. 
The employer shall communicate an offer of temporary work to the 
employee in writing, including details of lodging, meals, and transportation, 
and shall communicate to the employee that if the employee refuses the 
offer of temporary work, the employee shall communicate the refusal and 
the reason for the refusal to the employer in writing and that during the 
period of the refusal the employee will not be compensated with temporary 
partial, temporary total, or healing period benefits, unless the work refused 
is not suitable.  If the employee refuses the offer of temporary work on the 
grounds that the work is not suitable, the employee shall communicate the 
refusal, along with the reason for the refusal, to the employer in writing at 
the time the offer of work is refused.  Failure to communicate the reason 
for the refusal in this manner precludes the employee from raising 
suitability of the work as the reason for the refusal until such time as the 
reason for the refusal is communicated in writing to the employer. 

QUINTANILLA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 8 
 
Thus, the statute precludes an employee who refuses suitable work offered by the 
employer, consistent with the employee’s disability, from receiving temporary or healing 
period benefits during the period of refusal.  Id.; Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 
N.W.2d 512, 520 (Iowa 2012).  The employer bears the burden of providing the 
affirmative defense.  Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care Ctr., 780 N.W.2d 549, 559 (Iowa 
2010).   
The issue of whether an employer has offered suitable work is ordinarily an issue 
for the trier of fact.  Neal, 814 N.W.2d at 518.  The Iowa Supreme Court has held under 
the express wording of the statute, the offered work must be “‘suitable’ and ‘consistent 
with the employee’s disability’ before the employee’s refusal to accept such work will 
disqualify [the employee] from receiving temporary partial, temporary total, and healing 
period benefits.”  Id. at 519.   
 
Quintanilla alleges the offer of work made by Wells was not suitable because the 
work assignment Wells provided in writing that she accepted was not actually provided 
to her.  After Wells provided the suitable work offer, Quintanilla accepted the offer and 
she worked for Wells until Wells terminated her employment.  Quintanilla did not resign 
stating the work was not suitable.  I do not find her argument has merit. 
 
For misconduct to disqualify an employee from compensation, the misconduct 
must be tantamount to a refusal of suitable work.  Reynolds v. Hy-Vee, Inc., 2017 WL 
5176028, File No. 5046203 (Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’n Oct. 31, 2017).  
“Termination by itself is not sufficient grounds to disqualify an employee from temporary 
benefits under Iowa Code section 85.33(3).”  Gully v. Liguria Foods, Inc., 202 WL 
599659, File No. 5063429 (Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’n Jan. 30, 2020) (internal 
citations omitted).  The Commissioner has held  
[t]he misconduct must be serious and the type of conduct that would 
cause any employer to terminate any employee.  The misconduct must 
have a serious adverse impact on the employer.  The misconduct must be 
more than the type of inconsequential misconduct that employers typically 
overlook or tolerate.  An employee working with restrictions is not entitled 
to act with impunity toward the employer and the employer’s interests.  
Nevertheless, not every act of misconduct justifies disqualifying an 
employee from workers’ compensation benefits even though the employer 
may be justified in taking disciplinary action. 
Reynolds, 2017 WL 5176028 at *2 (internal citations omitted) (finding misconduct of 
stealing items from the employer was tantamount to a refusal to perform light duty work 
because the conduct was serious and the type of conduct that would reasonably cause 
an employer to terminate any employee). 
 
I do not find Wells has established Quintanilla engaged in disqualifying 
misconduct.  See Cameron v. Pacifica Health Servs., 2021 WL 3609608, File No. 
5063931 (Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’n Jan. 21, 2021) (finding while claimant was 
angry, agitated, yelled, and accused an employee of lying, which was inappropriate and 
demonstrated poor judgment, claimant did not engage in the type of conduct that is 
tantamount to a refusal of suitable work and claimant was not disqualified from receiving 

QUINTANILLA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 9 
 
benefits).  Quintanilla denied she yelled at her coworker and grabbed her arm.  No 
witnesses to the incident testified at hearing regarding the incident other than 
Quintanilla.  Quintanilla had an unblemished record of 25 years of employment with 
Wells prior to the incident.  I do not find Quintanilla engaged in the type of conduct that 
is tantamount to a refusal of suitable work.  Quintanilla continued to have temporary 
restrictions through April 19, 2022. (Tr., p. 20)  I find she is entitled to temporary total 
disability benefits from May 4, 2021, through April 19, 2022, at the stipulated weekly 
rate of $750.81. 
II. 
Penalty Benefits 
 
Quintanilla alleges Wells should be assessed penalty benefits because Wells did 
not actually provide her with an assignment within her restrictions and then terminated 
her employment without performing a legitimate and reasonable investigation into the 
incident that lead to her termination.  Wells avers no penalty benefits should be 
assessed because it had a reasonable or probable excuse for refusing to pay her 
temporary benefits. 
Iowa Code section 86.13 governs compensation payments.  Under the statute’s 
plain language, if there is a delay in payment absent “a reasonable or probable cause or 
excuse,” the employee is entitled to penalty benefits, of up to fifty percent of the amount 
of benefits that were denied, delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse.  Iowa Code § 86.13(4); see also Christensen v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 
554 N.W.2d 254, 260 (Iowa 1996) (citing earlier version of the statute).  “The application 
of the penalty provision does not turn on the length of the delay in making the correct 
compensation payment.”  Robbennolt v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229, 236 
(Iowa 1996).  If a delay occurs without a reasonable excuse, the commissioner is 
required to award penalty benefits in some amount to the employee.  Id.   
The statute requires the employer or insurance company to conduct a 
“reasonable investigation and evaluation” into whether benefits are owed to the 
employee, the results of the investigation and evaluation must be the “actual basis” 
relied on by the employer or insurance company to deny, delay, or terminate benefits, 
and the employer or insurance company must contemporaneously convey the basis for 
the denial, delay, or termination of benefits to the employee at the time of the denial, 
delay, or termination of benefits.  Iowa Code § 86.13(4).  An employer may establish a 
“reasonable cause or excuse” if “the delay was necessary for the insurer to investigate 
the claim,” or if “the employer had a reasonable basis to contest the employee’s 
entitlement to benefits.”  Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260.  “A ‘reasonable basis’ for 
denial of the claim exists if the claim is ‘fairly debatable.’”  Burton v. Hilltop Care Ctr., 
813 N.W.2d 250, 267 (Iowa 2012).  “Whether a claim is ‘fairly debatable’ can generally 
be determined by the court as a matter of law.”  Id.  The issue is whether the employer 
had a reasonable basis to believe no benefits were owed to the claimant.  Id.  “If there 
was no reasonable basis for the employer to have denied the employee's benefits, then 
the court must ‘determine if the defendant knew, or should have known, that the basis 
for denying the employee's claim was unreasonable.’”  Id. 

QUINTANILLA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 10 
 
Benefits must be paid beginning on the 11th day after the injury, and “each week 
thereafter during the period for which compensation is payable, and if not paid when 
due,” interest will be imposed. Iowa Code § 85.30.  In Robbennolt, the Iowa Supreme 
Court noted, “[i]f the required weekly compensation is timely paid at the end of the 
compensation week, no interest will be imposed . . . . As an example, if Monday is the 
first day of the compensation week, full payment of the weekly compensation is due the 
following Monday.”  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 235.  A payment is “made” when the 
check addressed to the claimant is mailed, or personally delivered to the claimant.  
Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502, 505 (Iowa 1996) (abrogated by 
Keystone Nursing Care Ctr. v. Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 299 (Iowa 2005) (concluding the 
employer’s failure to explain to the claimant why it would not pay permanent benefits 
upon the termination of healing period benefits did not support the commissioner’s 
award of penalty benefits)). 
When considering an award of penalty benefits, the commissioner considers “the 
length of the delay, the number of the delays, the information available to the employer 
regarding the employee’s injuries and wages, and the prior penalties imposed against 
the employer under section 86.13.”  Schadendorf v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 757 N.W.2d 
330, 336 (Iowa 2008).  The purposes of the statute are to punish the employer and 
insurance company and to deter employers and insurance companies from delaying 
payments.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 237.   
 
While I did not find Wells established Quintanilla engaged in disqualifying 
conduct, I do find Wells has established it had reasonable cause for not paying 
Quintanilla temporary benefits.  However, Wells did not contemporaneously convey the 
reason it was refusing to pay Quintanilla temporary total disability benefits.  The record 
reflects it did not inform Quintanilla of the reason until November 2021, months after her 
termination. (Exs. C-D)  I find Wells should be assessed a $1,000.00 penalty to 
discourage Wells and other employers and insurance carriers from engaging in similar 
conduct in the future.   
III. 
Medical Bills 
 
Quintanilla sought to recover medical bills set forth in Exhibit 9.  In its post-
hearing brief Wells agreed to pay the medical bills.  Quintanilla did not address the 
issue in her post-hearing brief.  Wells is responsible for the medical bills set forth in 
Exhibit 9. 
IV. 
Costs 
Quintanilla seeks to recover the $145.00 cost of interpreter services from July 23, 
2021. (Ex. 10, p. 38)  Iowa Code section 86.40, provides, “[a]ll costs incurred in the 
hearing before the commissioner shall be taxed in the discretion of the commissioner.”  
Rule 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33, provides costs may be taxed by the deputy 
workers’ compensation commissioner for:  (1) the attendance of a certificated shorthand 
reporter for hearings and depositions; (2) transcription costs; (3) the cost of service of 
the original notice and subpoenas; (4) witness fees and expenses; (5) the cost of 
doctors’ and practitioner’s deposition testimony; (6) the reasonable cost of obtaining no 
more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports; (7) filing fees; and (8) the cost of 

QUINTANILLA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 11 
 
persons reviewing health service disputes.  The rule does not expressly allow for the 
recovery of the interpreter services.  I find Quintanilla is not entitled to recover the 
$145.00 cost of the interpreter services. 
ORDER 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, THAT: 
Defendant shall pay Claimant temporary total disability benefits from May 4, 
2021, through April 19, 2022, at the stipulated weekly rate of seven hundred fifty and 
81/100 dollars ($750.81). 
Defendant is entitled to a credit for all benefits paid to date.  
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with interest 
at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the 
federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two 
percent. 
Defendant shall pay claimant one thousand and 00/100 dollars ($1,000.00) in 
penalty benefits. 
Defendant is responsible for all causally connected medical bills, as stipulated in 
its post-hearing brief.   
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this ___5th ___ day of July, 2022. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           HEATHER L. PALMER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
 
Judy Freking (via WCES) 
 
Al Sturgeon (via WCES) 
 
Steven Durick (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 

QUINTANILLA V. WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC. 
Page 12 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
