Case Number: 22012061.03
Case Title:  STEWART, BROCKTON V. RUAN TRANSPORT CORPORATION
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Stewart Brockton-22012061.03m.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
BROCKTON STEWART 
 
Claimant, 
 
 
vs. 
 
RUAN TRANSPORTATION, 
 
 
File No.  22012061.03 
 
Employer, 
 
 
and 
 
 
ACE AMERICAN INSURANCE CO., 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
 
 
ALTERNATE MEDICAL CARE 
DECISION 
 
 
Head Note: 2701 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE   
This is a contested case proceeding under Iowa Code chapters 85 and 17A.  The 
expedited procedure of rule 876 IAC 4.48 is invoked by claimant, Brockton Stewart. 
Claimant appeared personally and through his attorney, Nicholas Platt.  Defendants, 
Ruan Transportation, employer, and Ace American Insurance Company, insurance 
carrier, appeared through their attorney, Christopher Scheldrup.   
The alternate medical care claim came on for hearing on June 12, 2024.  The 
proceedings were digitally recorded.  That recording constitutes the official record of this 
proceeding.  Pursuant to the Commissioner’s July 31, 2024 Order, the undersigned has 
been delegated authority to issue a final agency decision in this alternate medical care 
proceeding.  Therefore, this ruling is designated final agency action and any appeal of 
the decision would be to the Iowa District Court pursuant to Iowa Code section 17A.   
The evidentiary record consists of Claimant’s Exhibit 1, Defendants’ Exhibits A-C, 
and the arguments of counsel.  No testimony was given during the telephonic hearing.  
Prior to the hearing, the defendants filed an answer which accepted liability for the 
March 15, 2022 work injury and for the neck and right shoulder conditions for which 
claimant is seeking treatment.         
ISSUE   
The issue for resolution is whether the claimant is entitled to alternate medical 
care. 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Jun-13  08:30:37     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

STEWART V. RUAN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 2 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Defendants admit that claimant, Brockton Stewart, sustained an injury on March 
15, 2022, to his neck and right shoulder, which arose out of and in the course of his 
employment.  (Answer)  Defendants authorized and provided treatment for Stewart’s 
cervical spine and shoulder injuries.  Dr. Brett Rosenthal provided care primarily for 
Stewart’s cervical condition, including surgery.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 1)  Dr. Justin Khoriaty 
was the orthopedic specialist who provided shoulder care, including surgery.  (Def. Ex. 
A, p. 1)  The defendants also authorized pain management specialist, John Rayburn, 
M.D. to evaluate and provide care.  (Id., pp. 1-2)  Defendants have also authorized 
substantial physical therapy and other conservative care at the direction of the treating 
doctors.  (Id. at p. 2)  At the request of Stewart, defendants obtained second opinions 
regarding appropriate care from Dr. Thomas Klein and Dr. Trevor Schmitz.  (Id.)   
Defendants point out that during the independent medical examination of Dr. 
Charles Mooney and claimant’s IME doctor, Dr. John Kuhnlein, no additional medical 
care was identified.  (Id.)  Dr. Kuhnlein noted: 
Mr. Stewart stated that there were concerns of complex regional 
pain syndrome, but today’s examination is not consistent with the 
Budapest criteria for that diagnosis. 
[Mr. Stewart] is still under Dr. Klein’s active medical care.  Pain 
management techniques and activity modification will be very appropriate 
in the future.  It is doubtful that further cervical surgery would be of 
significant benefit. 
Id. 
According to the defendants, since the March 2022 work injury, Mr. Stewart has 
treated with five orthopedic surgeons or pain specialists and the care that has been 
recommended has been provided.  (Id.)  Defendants have now scheduled an 
appointment for Stewart to see Dr. Nelson on June 17, 2024.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 3; 
Id.) 
Prior to the hearing, claimant expressed a desire to have a different medical 
opinion. (Def. Ex. A, p. 1) Stewart requested an opinion from a doctor other than one 
associated with Iowa Ortho.  (Cl. Exhibit 1, p. 1; Def. Ex. B, p. 9)  Defendants 
designated Dr. Nelson (who is not associated with Iowa Ortho) as an authorized treating 
physician pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27 to evaluate Stewart and determine 
whether an alternative mode of medical care would be helpful.  “He [Dr. Nelson] was 
then authorized to provide the care, if any, that was determined medically necessary.”  
(Def. Ex. A, p. 1)  
Stewart has expressed dissatisfaction with his upcoming appointment with Dr. 
Nelson because he has concerns that the appointment is for an IME.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 3-
4)  In support of his argument, Stewart points out that Dr. Nelson’s office required a 

STEWART V. RUAN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 3 
 
prepayment similar to an IME, required Stewart to complete a 14-page questionnaire, 
and the doctor’s office referred to the appointment as an IME.  (Def. Ex. A, pp. 3-6; Cl. 
Ex. 1, p. 4)  
The only treatment records in evidence are from an April 3, 2024 appointment 
with Kevin Smith, D.O. at Iowa Ortho.  (Def. Ex. C)  Dr. Smith stated that one treatment 
option would be removal of instrumentation with fusion.  However, Dr. Smith was 
concerned that this would not make him better and it would likely be a large multilevel 
fusion.  Dr. Smith noted the plan was to see Stewart back on an as-needed basis 
because Dr. Smith did not think he can help him with another operation.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 
10)  Dr. Smith stated to get him “into the hands” of Dr. Klein. (Id.)  Defendants have 
authorized Dr. Klein.  Claimant has not expressed any desire to return to Dr. Smith. 
During the alternate care hearing Stewart requested that defendants be ordered 
to authorize him to be seen at DMOS by a spine surgeon.   
A review of the evidence in this case demonstrates that there are not any 
treatment recommendations from a medical provider that defendants have failed to 
authorize.  The only treatment recommendation in evidence is a note from Dr. Smith 
stating that Stewart should see Dr. Klein.  Defendants have authorized treatment with 
Dr. Klein.   
In the present case, Stewart desires to have the defendants authorize an 
examination with a doctor at DMOS.  Despite the fact that there is no such treatment 
recommendation from a medical provider in this case, defendants have authorized and 
scheduled an appointment for Stewart.  As noted above, defendants have authorized 
Stewart to see Dr. Nelson pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27.  I find at the time of the 
hearing, defendants clearly stated the appointment with Dr. Nelson was not pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.39.   
I find that Stewart has failed to demonstrate that the appointment with Dr. Nelson 
is unreasonable.  Additionally, I find that Stewart has failed to demonstrate that the 
appointment offered by defendants is inferior or less extensive than the appointment he 
desires with DMOS.   
REASONING AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW   
Under Iowa law, the employer is required to provide care to an injured employee 
and is permitted to choose the care.  Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 
N.W.2d 433 (Iowa 1997).   
[T]he employer is obliged to furnish reasonable services and supplies to 
treat an injured employee, and has the right to choose the care. . . .  The 
treatment must be offered promptly and be reasonably suited to treat the 
injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.  If the employee has 
reason to be dissatisfied with the care offered, the employee should 
communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if 

STEWART V. RUAN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 4 
 
requested, following which the employer and the employee may agree to 
alternate care reasonably suited to treat the injury.  If the employer and 
employee cannot agree on such alternate care, the commissioner may, 
upon application and reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow 
and order other care.   
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment – and seeking alternate care – 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable.  See Iowa 
R. App. P. 14(f)(5); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995).  
Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.  Id.  The 
employer’s obligation turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability.  Id.; 
Harned v. Farmland Foods, Inc., 331 N.W.2d 98 (Iowa 1983).  In Pirelli-Armstrong Tire 
Co., 562 N.W.2d at 433, the court approvingly quoted Bowles v. Los Lunas Schools, 
109 N.M. 100, 781 P.2d 1178 (App. 1989):   
[T]he words “reasonable” and “adequate” appear to describe the same 
standard.   
[The New Mexico rule] requires the employer to provide a certain 
standard of care and excuses the employer from any obligation to provide 
other services only if that standard is met.  We construe the terms 
"reasonable” and “adequate” as describing care that is both appropriate to 
the injury and sufficient to bring the worker to maximum recovery.   
The commissioner is justified in ordering alternate care when employer-
authorized care has not been effective and evidence shows that such care is “inferior or 
less extensive” care than other available care requested by the employee.  Long; 528 
N.W.2d at 124; Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co.; 562 N.W.2d at 437.   
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 16, 1975).   
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that claimant has failed to carry 
his burden of proof to demonstrate entitlement to alternate medical care.  While the 
undersigned recognizes claimant’s concerns about Dr. Nelson’s office referring to the 
appointment as an IME, the evidence does not show that defendants’ actions are 
unreasonable.  Defendants have a duty to provide prompt and reasonable care.  There 
is no evidence in the record which indicates that any medical provider or IME doctor has 
recommended any treatment.  Nonetheless, defendants have agreed to authorize an 
appointment with Dr. Nelson.  Claimant has failed to prove by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the appointment with Dr. Nelson is unreasonable.  Additionally, claimant 

STEWART V. RUAN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 5 
 
has failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the appointment offered by 
defendants is inferior or less extensive than the appointment he desires with DMOS.     
ORDER   
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED:   
Claimant’s petition for alternate medical care is denied.   
Signed and filed this __13th __ day of June, 2024. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Nick Platt (via WCES) 
Chris Scheldrup (via WCES) 
 
      ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
