Case Number: 20700941.01
Case Title:  BERZINS, PETER V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Berzins Peter-20700941.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
PETER BERZINS, 
  : 
 
 
  :                    File No. 20700941.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS,   : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  :      Head Note Nos.:  1402.40, 1803, 2502, 
 
Defendant. 
  :  
 
 
     2907 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Peter Berzins, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from John Deere Davenport Works, self-insured employer as 
defendant.  Hearing was held on September 2, 2021.  This case was scheduled to be 
an in-person hearing occurring in Davenport, Iowa.  However, due to the declaration of 
a pandemic in Iowa, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner ordered all 
hearings to occur via video means, using CourtCall.  Accordingly, this case proceeded 
to a live video hearing via CourtCall with all parties and the court reporter appearing 
remotely.     
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Peter Berzins was the only witness to testify live at trial.  The evidentiary record 
also includes joint exhibits JE1-JE8, claimant’s exhibits 1-2, and defendant’s exhibits A-
K.  All exhibits were received without objection.  The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the arbitration hearing.   
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on September 27, 2021, at which time 
the case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. The nature and extent of permanent partial disability, if any, that claimant 
sustained as the result of the stipulated July 1, 2019 work injury. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Jan-26  15:34:16     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BERZINS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 2 
2. Whether any mental claim is barred by Iowa Code section 85.23 for lack of 
timely notice. 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an IME pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.39. 
4. Assessment of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the record, 
finds: 
 
Claimant, Peter Berzins, filed a petition alleging injury to his right foot, body as a 
whole, broken bone and complex regional pain syndrome as the result of July 1, 2019 
work injury.  (Petition)  The employer, John Deere Davenport Works (“John Deere”) 
stipulates Mr. Berzins sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of his 
employment on July 1, 2019.  John Deere also stipulates that Mr. Berzins sustained 
fractures to the third, fourth, and fifth metatarsals in his right foot.  John Deere stipulates 
that during treatment for the right foot metatarsal fractures, Mr. Berzins briefly 
developed complex regional pain syndrome which was limited to the right foot.  John 
Deere disputes any alleged mental injury, including any alleged depression.  (Hearing 
Report)   
 
On July 1, 2019, Mr. Berzins was working as a welder at John Deere when a 
heavy metal part fell approximately six feet onto his right foot.  He was taken to the 
emergency room at UnityPoint Health.  He was diagnosed with minimally displaced 
fractures of the necks of the right third, fourth and fifth metatarsals.  The next day Mr. 
Berzins saw Andrew Bries, M.D., at ORA Orthopedics.  Dr. Bries placed Mr. Berzins in a 
short leg fiberglass cast. (JE1, pp. 8-13; JE6, p. 46; Testimony)  
 
Mr. Berzins continued to follow-up at ORA Orthopedics.  On September 4, 2019, 
he reported significant pain.  On examination of the right foot, light touch range of 
motion he had pain.  Dr. Bries also noted purple skin color changes in his foot and 
allodynia.  The doctor’s assessment included “[r]ight 3rd, 4th, and 5th metatarsal shaft 
fractures in a smoker now with hypersensitivity and allodynia secondary to the crush 
injury concern for the development of CRPS [complex regional pain syndrome]”.  Dr. 
Bries recommended physical therapy to start working on range of motion of the toes.  
He also prescribed gabapentin and amitriptyline.  He recommended aquatic therapy for 
desensitization of nerve pain.  (JE6, pp. 47-50) 
 
On October 9, 2019, Mr. Berzins returned to Dr. Bries and reported that the 
gabapentin was not helping.  Examination revealed that his right foot was very red and 
cooler than the left, positive allodynia, pain with motion, and temperature reading was 
79.6 degrees.  The doctor’s assessment was complex regional pain syndrome after a 
crush injury.  He recommended continued therapy and increased dosage of gabapentin.  
(JE6, p. 53)   

BERZINS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 3 
 
Mr. Berzins returned to ORA on October 15, 2019.  He recently had a fall at work 
and was in a lot of pain.  Dr. Bries felt that the new injury likely flared up his CRPS.  He 
recommended Mr. Berzins see Sanjay Sundar, M.D.  (JE6, p. 54) 
 
On October 21, 2019, Mr. Berzins saw Dr. Sundar.  After examining Mr. Berzins, 
Dr. Sundar assessed him with CRPS right foot following a crush injury.  Dr. Sundar 
stated that Mr. Berzins did meet the Budapest criteria of CRPS.  He noted that Mr. 
Berzins reports allodynia, sudamotor and vasomotor changes, loss of range of motion, 
atrophy, and this was confirmed on physical examination.  Dr. Sudar prescribed 
Tramadol and Gabapentin.  He also recommended a sympathetic nerve block series of 
3.  (JE6, pp. 55-56) 
 
Mr. Berzins returned to ORA on November 13, 2019.  He reported that he had 
undergone two injections and each gave him approximately five to six days of relief.  He 
felt his aquatic therapy was helping quite a bit.  He feels some improvement overall.  
The assessment was CRPS.  (JE6, p. 57) 
 
On December 17, 2019, Mr. Berzins reported that his color had gotten a little 
better.  Dr. Bries noted that Mr. Berzins “has all the findings and pain patterns 
consistent with CRPS and I have no concern or hesitancy and there is no malingering 
here and is unfortunately a clear case of CRPS after an injury.”  He was to return in four 
weeks.  (JE6, p. 60) 
 
Mr. Berzins continued to experience difficulty with CRPS in his right foot.  On 
December 23, 2019, Dr. Sundar recommended referral to the University of Iowa Pain 
Clinics for a second opinion.  However, this was delayed due to COVID.  (JE6, pp. 61-
69) 
 
On June 1, 2020, Mr. Berzins went to the medical clinic at the John Deere plant.  
He reported that he was feeling good and had virtually no foot pain.  One week later he 
returned to the same clinic and reported that his foot pain was resolved.  He did have 
swelling which occurs only with heat and exertion.  (JE5, p. 45) 
 
On September 15, 2020, Mr. Berzins returned to ORA.  Dr. Sundar noted Mr. 
Berzins had good resolution of his CRPS and that he no longer met the Budapest 
criteria and did not have signs of allodynia vasomotor, sudomotor or loss of range of 
motion.  Mr. Berzins had concerns about his safety in the workplace; Dr. Sundar 
recommended an FCE.  (JE6, pp. 70-71)   
 
Mr. Berzins underwent an FCE on September 28, 2020.  He demonstrated 
capabilities and functional tolerances to function within the very heavy physical demand 
level.  (JE8, pp. 79 and 81) 
 
Mr. Berzins returned to ORA on October 13, 2020, and reported that he was 
doing well.  He accepts the fact that he is probably going to have a degree of chronic 
pain for the remainder of his life.  He was not taking any medications at that time.  He is 
working his normal job.  Every 2-3 hours when his foot starts feeling hot inside his boot 
and hurting he goes to the locker room and takes his boot off and puts his foot on the 

BERZINS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 4 
cool tile floor.  After approximately 15 minutes he feels much better and is able to work 
for another 2 to 3 hours.  Examination revealed no ecchymosis nor edema.  He had no 
hypersensitivity to light touch sensation throughout his foot.  The assessment was right 
3rd, 4th, and 5th metatarsal shaft fractures secondary to a crush injury resulting in CRPS.  
He was placed at maximum medical improvement (MMI) with no restrictions.  Mr. 
Berzins was provided a note allowing him to take a 15 minute break every 2-3 hours to 
cool down his foot to prevent flare-ups of CRPS.  (JE6, p. 72)      
On December 18, 2020, Dr. Bries signed a letter authored by the defense 
attorney.  Dr. Bries’ signature indicates that he agrees that the letter accurately 
summarizes the conversation he had with the attorneys on December 11, 2020.  The 
letter indicates that Mr. Berzins does not have an appointment scheduled to see anyone 
at ORA.  He confirmed that when he last saw Dr. Berzins on July 14, 2020, his CRPS 
had resolved and he did not have any objective symptoms typically associated with 
CRPS.  Dr. Bries could not state that Mr. Berzins’ now resolved CRPS was permanent.  
He confirmed that Mr. Berzins did not have any permanent impairment from the right 
foot injury.  Dr. Bries also confirmed that when Mr. Berzins did have CRPS it was limited 
to and confined to his right foot.  He does not anticipate Mr. Berzins needing any 
medical care or treatment related to the July 1, 2019 injury.  (Def. Ex. C) 
On February 4, 2021, Dr. Bries authored a missive to the defendant.  He stated 
that his impairment rating was based on the fractures and not CRPS, which was 
resolved after treatment.  Based on the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, and the fact that the fractures healed in their anatomic 
position without significant angulation or shortening, he assigned zero percent 
impairment.  Dr. Bries also stated, “what I cannot account for is if there would be some 
reactivation of his complex regional pain syndrome, which we cannot specifically say 
will happen as it is somewhat unpredictable.”  (Def. Ex. H)   
At the request of his attorney, Mr. Berzins saw Marc Hines, M.D., on March 4, 
2021, for an independent medical examination (IME).  Approximately five months later 
Dr. Hines issued a report dated July 28, 2021.  (Cl. Ex. 2)  In the impression portion of 
his report Dr. Hines states:   
This is a patient who had a crush injury to the lateral aspect of his right 
foot.  Along the way, he developed complex regional pain syndrome, 
which continues on examination today, but with not all elements being 
present.  The improvement seems to be related in retrospect to both his 
sympathetic blocks and extensive physical therapy and home exercises as 
well.  Despite this, however, the patient has residuals that are clearly 
indicative of having had the complex regional pain syndrome and crush 
injury.  The main difficulties are maintenance of normal vascular control 
and difficulties with the small or smaller nerve fibers involved with the 
crush injury with continued neurologic impairments in sensory examination 
and perversions of sensation.  He also suffers from some depression 
considering these difficulties, difficulties with sleep that aggravates the 
difficulties with depression.  Almost all of it driven by the difficulties with 

BERZINS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 5 
continuing his career as a welder and loss of his job circumstances and I 
have given rating for these difficulties. 
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 14) 
 
Dr. Hines then addressed the issue of permanent impairment.  He notes that he 
utilized the Guides, Fifth Edition, to assign the impairment.  Dr. Hines stated that Mr. 
Berzins has “mild impairment related to depression and I would give a 5% whole person 
impairment for this difficulty.”  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 14)  Dr. Hines assigns a separate 
impairment for pain.  He states that he utilized Table 18-7 to reach 10 percent of the 
whole person for pain.  He then turned to the issue of CRPS.  He assigns 7 percent 
impairment of the whole person for CRPS.  Dr. Hines noted that Mr. Berzins previously 
met diagnostic criteria for complex regional pain syndrome.  In the examination portion 
of his report Dr. Hines did not find any strength weakness/deficit or movement difficulty 
in Mr. Berzins’ right foot.  Dr. Hines felt Mr. Berzins met the medial and lateral plantar 
dysesthesia impairment described in 17-37 on page 552 of the Guides and assigned 7 
percent impairment of the body for the medial and he assigned 7 percent impairment of 
the body for the lateral.  However, he believes the Guides lack clarity and is not certain 
if the medial and lateral should be a total of 7 percent or if each should be 7 percent.  
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 15)   
 
Mr. Berzins testified at the hearing regarding his work injury and the extensive 
treatment he received.  He testified that he continues to have pain when wearing his 
work boots and heat also bothers his foot.  At times he also experiences swelling in his 
toes.  His symptoms interfere with his ability to sleep.  (Testimony)   
 
There is some question in this case as to whether Mr. Berzins is making a claim 
for any type of mental injury.  Claimant did not allege a mental claim in his petition and 
the only mention of a potential mental claim on the hearing report is from the defendant.  
On January 18, 2021, defense counsel wrote to claimant’s counsel to ask about a 
potential mental claim.  Defense counsel noted that in claimant’s answer to an 
interrogatory Mr. Berzins made mention that he had become depressed; thus, defense 
counsel wanted clarification on whether a mental claim was being made.  The response 
from claimant’s counsel was that he did not know if they were claiming mental injury, but 
at that point it was not a specific allegation.  There is no mention of depression or any 
type of mental claim in claimant’s post-hearing brief.  Dr. Hines did mention anxiety and 
depression in his report.  Therefore, it not clear to the undersigned if claimant is alleging 
a mental injury.  However, even if Mr. Berzins is making a claim for any type of mental 
injury, including depression, I find that he has failed to show that any such mental 
condition is related to the work injury.   
In this case, the closest any expert comes to causally connecting any type of 
mental condition to the work injury is claimant’s IME doctor, Dr. Hines.  In his report Dr. 
Hines states, “[h]e also suffers from some depression considering these difficulties, 
difficulties with sleep that aggravates the difficulties with depression.  Almost all of it 
driven by the difficulties with continuing his career as a welder and loss of his job 
circumstances and I have given ratings for these difficulties.”  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 14)  I find 

BERZINS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 6 
that this statement is vague and does not rise to the level of a causation opinion.  
Furthermore, even if that confusing statement from Dr. Hines did rise to the level of a 
causation statement, I do not find it convincing because he failed to provide any 
rationale or explanation.  I find claimant has failed to demonstrate that he sustained any 
type of mental injury, including depression as the result of the work injury.  All other 
issues, including notice, regarding any mental claim are rendered moot.  (JE1, pp. 1-7; 
JE2, pp. 16-21; JE3, pp. 32-42)     
We now turn to the issue of whether Mr. Berzins’ CRPS is permanent.  Claimant 
contends that his CRPS is permanent and relies on the opinion of Dr. Hines.  However, 
Dr. Hines’ report indicates that Mr. Berzins’ CRPS has resolved.  In his report, Dr. Hines 
states that Mr. Berzins previously met the diagnostic criteria for CRPS.  Additionally, the 
Guides instruct that when CRPS occurs in an extremity, the evaluator should use 
Chapter 13 to assign permanent impairment.  (The Guides, Section 17.2, p. 553).  Dr. 
Hines did not use Chapter 13 to assign permanent impairment.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 14-15)    
Defendant relies on the opinions of Dr. Sundar and Dr. Bries in their assertion 
that the CRPS is not permanent.  On September 15, 2020, Dr. Sundar, the treating pain 
specialist, assessed that his CRPS type 2 of the right lower extremity was resolved.  He 
noted that Mr. Berzins had good resolution of his CRPS and that he no longer met the 
Budapest criteria.  He did not have signs of allodynia vasomotor, sudomotor or loss of 
range of motion.   (JE6, pp. 70-71)  On July 14, 2020, Dr. Bries, the treating orthopedic 
doctor noted that Mr. Berzins’ right foot had normal color, normal cap refill, normal 
temperature, no tenderness to palpation, no deformity, sensation intact to light touch, 
and normal range of motion of his toes.  (JE6, p. 68)  Dr. Bries opined that Mr. Bries did 
not have CRPS when he last saw him in October 2020.  Because Dr. Bries could not 
say Mr. Berzins’ CRPS was permanent, any permanent impairment from the July 1, 
2019 right foot injury would not be from the resolved CRPS.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 5) 
On the issue of whether Mr. Berzins’ CRPS is permanent, I find the opinions of 
Dr. Sundar and Dr. Bries to be persuasive.  Thus, I find claimant has failed to carry his 
burden of proof to demonstrate that his CRPS is permanent.   
The central dispute in this case is the nature and extent of permanent partial 
disability that Mr. Berzins sustained as the result of the stipulated work injury.  There are 
two doctors that have provided their opinion regarding impairment in this case, Dr. Bries 
and Dr. Hines.   
 
Dr. Bries stated that his impairment rating was based on the fractures and not 
CRPS, which was resolved after treatment.  Based on the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, 
and the fact that the fractures healed in their anatomic position without significant 
angulation or shortening he assigns zero percent impairment.  (Def. Ex. H)  I find this 
rating is consistent with the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, Tables 17-1 and 17-3.  I find Dr. 
Bries’ impairment rating is based on The Guides.    
 
The only doctor to assign any impairment in this case is Dr. Hines.  First, Dr. 
Hines assigns 5 percent impairment of the whole person related to depression.  

BERZINS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 7 
However, because claimant failed to demonstrate that any mental injury, including 
depression, is related to the work injury, any impairment for a mental condition is also 
not related to the work injury.   
Next, Dr. Hines stated Mr. Berzins:  
[M]eets the medial and lateral plantar dysesthesia impairments described 
in [Table] 17-37 page 552 of the fifth edition guides.  These immediately 
clarify that these are 7% impairment to the whole person on both the 
grounds of his sensory impairment and dysesthesias.  It is less clear 
whether the sensory impairment and dysesthesias are separately 
indicated as 7%. 
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 15)   
 
However, a review of section 17.21 Peripheral Nerve Injuries of the AMA Guides 
indicates that this rating is not appropriate under the Guides.  The Guides state, “[a]ll 
estimates listed in Table 17-37 are for complete motor or sensory loss for the named 
peripheral nerves.”  (AMA Guides, p. 550)  Although Dr. Hines notes that there are 
sensory abnormalities, there is no indication in Dr. Hines’ report that Mr. Berzins has 
complete motor or sensory loss.  Furthermore, the Guides also state that, “[s]ensory 
deficits, including dysesthesias, are subjective and must be carefully evaluated.  Ideally, 
two examiners should agree.”  (AMA Guides, p. 551)  There is no indication in Dr. 
Hines’ report that two examiners agreed.  Dr. Hines’ report does not indicate that he 
followed the Guides when he assigned impairment for sensory impairment and 
dysesthesias; I do not find these impairment ratings to be persuasive. 
 
Dr. Hines also assigned 10 percent impairment of the whole person for pain.  In 
assigning this impairment Dr. Hines stated that he used table 18-7, page 584 of the 
Guides.  Defendant correctly points out that under the Guides this rating is not 
appropriate.  Section 18.3b notes situations when chapter 18 should not be used to rate 
pain-related impairment.  (Guides, p. 571)  This section notes that chapter 18 should not 
be used to rate pain-related impairment for any condition that can be adequately rated 
on the basis of the body or organ impairment rating systems given in other chapters.  
Defendant contends the 10 percent rating for pain is improper because even if Mr. 
Berzins currently had CRPS and it was permanent, the CRPS could have been 
adequately rated under Table 13-15 of the Guides and the metatarsal fractures could 
have been adequately rated using Table 17-33.  I find defendant’s argument to be 
persuasive.  Furthermore, Dr. Hines uses Table 18-7 to assign an impairment rating.  
However, this table specifically states that the numbers in this table are for total pain-
related impairment score, not an impairment rating.  I find that the pain-related 
impairment rating assigned by Dr. Hines is not appropriate under the Guides.  Thus, I 
find Dr. Hines’ opinion on this issue is not persuasive.    
 
For the reasons set forth above, with regard to the issue of permanent 
impairment I find the opinions of Dr. Bries carry greater weight than those of Dr. Hines.   

BERZINS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 8 
Thus, I find Mr. Berzins has failed to demonstrate that he sustained any permanent 
impairment as the result of the July 1, 2019 work injury.    
 
Claimant is also seeking reimbursement for the Dr. Hines IME.  Dr. Bries issued 
an impairment rating in this case on February 4, 2021.  (Def. Ex. H, p. 15)  Dr. Hines 
performed an IME on March 4, 2021 and issued his report on July 28, 2021.  Defendant 
argues that claimant is not entitled to reimbursement because claimant’s counsel sent a 
letter to Dr. Hines requesting the IME on January 13, 2021, prior to the date of the 
impairment rating from Dr. Bries.  I do not find this argument to be persuasive.  I find 
that the prerequisites of Iowa Code section 85.39 were met and claimant is entitled to 
reimbursement for the IME in the amount of three thousand three hundred seventy-five 
and no/100 dollars ($3,375.00). 
 
Finally, claimant is seeking an assessment of costs.  Costs are to be assessed at 
the discretion of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner or the deputy hearing 
the case.  I find that claimant was generally not successful in this claims; therefore, I 
exercise my discretion and do not assess costs against the defendant in this case.  I 
find that each party shall bear their own costs.     
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Having found that Mr. Berzins failed to prove any mental condition is causally 
related to, or materially aggravated by, the July 1, 2019 work injury, I conclude that he is 
not entitled to permanent disability benefits related to any mental condition.  Similarly, 

BERZINS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 9 
having found that Mr. Berzins failed to prove that his CRPS is permanent, I conclude 
that he is not entitled to permanent disability benefits related to said condition.   
Instead, I conclude that any permanent disability related to the July 1, 2019 work 
injury is limited to the right foot.  A disability to the foot is classified as a scheduled 
member disability.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(o).  Under the schedule, 150 weeks is 
the maximum number of weeks of compensation for loss of a foot.  Id.  Iowa Code 
states,  
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the workers' compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining 
functional disability and not loss of earning capacity. 
 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x).   
 
 
The Commissioner has adopted the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment (AMA Press, 5th Ed. 2001). 876 IAC 2.4.  With regard to section 85.34(2)(x), 
the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has stated: 
Thus, the law, as written, is not concerned with an injured worker's actual 
functional loss or disability as determined by the evidence, but rather the 
impairment rating as assigned by the adopted version of The AMA 
Guides. The only function of the agency is to determine which impairment 
rating should be utilized. 
 
Merlyn Brown, Jr., Claimant, No. File Nos.: 5067998, 2021 WL 5575264, at *8 (Nov. 23, 
2021). 
 
Based on the above findings of fact, I found the opinion of Dr. Bries to carry 
greater weight than that of Dr. Hines.  Dr. Bries assigned zero percent permanent 
impairment as the result of the work injury.  Mr. Berzins sustained a compensable injury 
to his right foot.  As the result of that injury, he had to undergo extensive treatment and 
continues to have problems with his foot.  However, the undersigned is not allowed to 
consider lay testimony, when determining functional disability the extent of loss shall be 
determined solely by utilizing the Guides.  Thus, I conclude claimant failed to carry his 
burden of proof to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that he sustained 
any permanent disability as the result of the work injury with John Deere.   
 
Claimant is seeking reimbursement under Iowa Code section 85.39 for the IME 
of Dr. Hines.  The Code states: 

BERZINS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 10 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and 
upon delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its 
insurance carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee's own choice, 
and reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for the 
examination. 
 
Iowa Code section 85.39(2). 
 
In the present case, defendant contends claimant is not entitled to 
reimbursement for the IME because a letter was sent to Dr. Hines prior to Dr. Bries’ 
impairment rating.  However, the actual IME was not conducted by Dr. Hines until after 
Dr. Bries issued his impairment rating.  Thus, I conclude the prerequisites of section 
85.39 were met and claimant is entitled to reimbursement of the IME as set forth above.   
Finally, claimant is seeking an assessment of costs.  Costs are to be assessed at 
the discretion of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner or the deputy hearing 
the case.  876 IAC 4.33.  Based on the above findings of fact, I exercise my discretion 
and do not assess costs against the defendant in this case.  I conclude that each party 
shall bear their own costs. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant shall take no weekly benefits from this proceeding. 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant for the IME as set forth above. 
Each party shall bear their own costs. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this _26th __ day of January, 2022. 
 
 
 
       ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

BERZINS V. JOHN DEERE DAVENPORT WORKS 
Page 11 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
James Hoffman (via WCES) 
Troy Howell (via WCES) 
Austin Lenz (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal pe riod 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
