Case Number: 5056921
Case Title:  MAHONEY, CYNTHIA V. ROBERT HALF INTERNATIONA
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Mahoney Linn Co Ruling.pdf
========================================================================

1 
 
IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT IN AND FOR LINN COUNTY 
Cynthia S. Mahoney, 
 
 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
 
 
 
Petitioner, 
 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
No. CVCV094466 
vs. 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
RULING 
RHI, Insurance Co. of the State of  
) 
Pennsylvania, and Second Injury Fund, 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
 
 
 
Respondents.  
) 
 
 
On this date, the Petition for Judicial Review filed by Petitioner came before the 
undersigned for review.  The Court finds a hearing on the Petition is unnecessary.  Having 
considered the file, relevant case law, and written arguments of counsel, the Court hereby enters 
the following ruling: 
 
FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND 
 
 
Petitioner filed petitions for arbitration seeking workers’ compensation benefits from her 
employer, RHI; the Insurance Co. of the State of Pennsylvania; and the Second Injury Fund of 
Iowa, regarding an injury that occurred on October 20, 2014.  A hearing took place before 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner Joseph L. Walsh, who issued an Arbitration 
Decision on March 28, 2018.  The issues and stipulations are summarized by Deputy Walsh: 
 
All parties stipulated that the claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the 
course of her employment on October 20, 2014.  The injury affected the claimant’s left 
arm.  All parties have stipulated that the injury is a cause of both temporary and 
permanent disability.  While the defendants admit that there is some permanent partial 
disability, the extent of functional disability in the left arm is disputed.  The 
commencement date for benefits is also disputed.  The elements which comprise the rate 
of compensation are stipulated and based upon this stipulation, I find the appropriate rate 
of compensation is $590.26 per week.  Affirmative defenses have been waived.  There is 
no claim for medical benefits.  Defendants claim an overpayment of both temporary and 
permanency benefits.  The claimant alleges she suffered a prior injury on October 16, 
2006, which resulted in a functional disability to her right arm.  The claimant alleges that 
she is entitled to Second Injury Fund benefits.  The Fund denies this.  If claimant is 
entitled to industrial disability benefits through the extent of industrial disability is 
disputed, as well as the amount of the credits. 
… 
 
The claimant has alleged she sustained a cumulative trauma injury on March 2, 2015.  
The defendants, including the Fund, dispute that claimant sustained an injury which arose 
out of and in the course of employment.  All defendants further assert that the claimant 
did not provide legal notice of such injury under Section 85.23.  If an injury did manifest, 
the defendants dispute that it is a cause of any temporary or permanent disability.  The 
E-FILED  2020 JUN 01 10:07 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

2 
 
claimant contends the alleged injury is a cause of a permanent loss of function of her 
right arm.  Defendants dispute this and the commencement date of any benefits owed, is 
disputed.  The elements which comprise the rate of compensation are stipulated, and 
based upon those stipulations I find that the weekly rate of compensation is $562.54 per 
week.  Other than the affirmative defense of notice, all other affirmative defenses have 
been waived.  Claimant seeks an independent medical evaluation as set forth in 
claimant’s exhibit 9.  There is no claim for other medical expenses.  The claimant further 
alleges that this alleged work injury entitles her to Second Injury Fund benefits as a result 
of this injury.  The Fund denies this. 
 
See Arbitration Decision, pp. 1-2.   
 
 
Deputy Walsh went on to make the following findings of fact (citations within Deputy 
Walsh’s Decision are omitted): 
 
Cynthia Mahoney is a pleasant, married 58-year-old resident of Cedar Rapids, Iowa.  She 
has a master’s degree in accounting as well as a law degree, although she has never 
sought a law license.  She is an intelligent, articulate and professional woman, who 
presented as highly organized and competent.  She is right handed. 
 
Ms. Mahoney testified at hearing and I find her to be highly credible.  Her testimony was 
highly consistent with the records in the file, including medical documentation.  Her 
testimony was consistent with her previous discovery answers in the record, including her 
sworn deposition.  Her demeanor was straightforward and factual.  She is an excellent 
historian.  There was certainly nothing about her demeanor which would cause me any 
concern regarding her truthfulness. 
 
Ms. Mahoney has worked primarily as an accountant for various firms.  From 1993 
through 2010, she worked for Pearson’s as a senior accountant.  Her annual earnings 
exceeded $60,000.00 per year plus bonuses.  Much of her more recent employment has 
been assigned through employment staffing agencies, although it is generally the same 
type of work.  Based upon the record before me, I believe the claimant is very good at 
what she does.  She has high-demand skills. 
 
In October 2006, Ms. Mahoney suffered a significant injury to her right arm and wrist.  
During a traffic accident, she testified she shattered bones in her right wrist.  The parties 
all concede claimant suffered this injury.  In this injury, claimant suffered a “distal radius 
and ulnar fracture requiring closed reduction intraoperatively.”  She was treated at St. 
Luke’s.  She was treated by Lisa Coester, M.D.  According to records reviewed by Robin 
Sassman, M.D., claimant continued to follow up with right-sided complaints in 
September 2007, and had ongoing difficulties through 2012 and 2013. 
 
Following her 2006 traffic accident, the claimant continued to work in accounting.  The 
traffic accident, at that time, had very little impact on her employment or her 
employability.  She was not given an impairment rating or permanent restrictions at that 
E-FILED  2020 JUN 01 10:07 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

3 
 
time.  She undoubtedly, however, suffered some permanent functional impairment in her 
right hand and arm from this injury. 
 
In October 2014, claimant worked for Robert Half International, which claimant also 
referred to as Account Temps (hereafter, “RHI”).  She began taking assignments from 
RHI in 2011.  On October 20, 2014, Ms. Mahoney suffered an injury to her left wrist and 
arm which arose out of and in the course of her employment.  She was assigned to a job 
at Transamerica at that time.  On that date, she tripped on a trash can in her cubicle and 
stumbled.  When she did so, her left hand and arm hit a beam positioned between the 
cubicle walls and “shattered bones” in her left wrist.  She was immediately evaluated at 
St. Luke’s Hospital and began undergoing a course of treatment directed and authorized 
by her employer. 
 
After an appropriate work-up, Ms. Mahoney was diagnosed with fractures of the distal 
radius and ulna with intra-articular extension.  Timothy Loth, M.D., became her 
authorized treatment provider through Physicians’ Clinic of Iowa (PCI).  He performed 
surgery on her left wrist on November 7, 2014, described as open reduction and internal 
fixation left distal radius three part fracture, intra-articular; closed treatment distal ulna 
fracture.  She followed up with Dr. Loth through the end of 2014 and began attending 
occupational therapy in January 2015 where she had numerous visits up through April 8, 
2015. 
 
RHI assigned claimant a position with Tax Act in this timeframe.  The job at Tax Act was 
different than the work she performed for Transamerica.  Ms. Mahoney testified it was 
much faster paced and involved much more keyboarding.  Shortly after she started 
working at the Tax Act position she started having a new pain and numbness in her right 
hand which she attributed to her work activities.  She was not allowed to have treatment 
on her right hand, however, until such treatment was approved through the insurance 
carrier.  Ms. Mahoney testified she reported the problems to Yvonne King and asked for 
authority for treatment.  On March 2, 2015, she complained of “aching in both wrists by 
the end of the day” and was diagnosed with “right intersection syndrome with 
physiologic cramping.”  She was offered an injection on the right which she refused due 
to her concerns about authorization.  Melissa Fagan, ARNP, recommended an ergonomic 
evaluation of her work station at that time as well as occupational therapy.  Ms. Mahoney 
had some occupational therapy but ended up leaving the Tax Act job due to her 
condition. 
 
In May 2015, Dr. Loth authored a letter opining that her right arm symptoms were “not 
directly related to her October 2014 injury.”  Thereafter, Ms. Mahoney continued to 
follow up on her left arm condition.  Dr. Loth released Ms. Mahoney from care in 
November 2015, with a 3 percent functional impairment rating of her left arm and 
restrictions of no lifting more than 20 pounds with no forceful use of the left hand. 
 
Since November 2015, Ms. Mahoney has continued to accept assignments within her 
restrictions from RHI, including higher level accounting positions with Transamerica and 
Terex.  She has been able to perform these jobs without any significant difficulty.  
E-FILED  2020 JUN 01 10:07 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

4 
 
Claimant did testify that she is no longer able to perform the faster-paced work, such as 
she performed for Tax Act and Pearson’s due to recurrent pain in her bilateral arms.  She 
has not accepted any assignments such as this since her work injury.  Ms. Mahoney did 
suffer a loss of earnings in 2014 and 2015 as reflected in her W-2s.  This was the period 
of time she was receiving treatment on her hands, wrists and arms. 
 
In February 2017, Ms. Mahoney was evaluated by Robin Sassman, M.D., for purposes of 
a second opinion evaluation.  Dr. Sassman reviewed all of the appropriate medical 
records and had an accurate history of the course of events.  She performed an evaluation 
as well, noting “numbness in the anterior aspect of the [sic] both wrists,” as well as 
aching in the 4th and 5th digits of both hands.  She assigned an impairment rating of 12 
percent of the left arm causally-related to her October 2014, work injury.  For the right 
arm, she assigned a 3 percent left arm impairment for tenosynovitis, which she attributed 
to a new, repetitive motion injury in 2015.  She also assigned a 10 percent left arm rating 
causally connected to the 2006 motor vehicle accident.  She assigned permanent 
restrictions attributable to a combination of injuries. 
 
There are also expert vocational reports in the record.  At her attorney’s request, Ms. 
Mahoney was evaluated by Barbara Laughlin in April 2017.  She assessed a substantial 
loss of employability based upon her inability to return to past employment.  At the 
Fund’s request, Rene Haigh also prepared a report in April 2017.  Utilizing the 
restrictions only assigned by Dr. Loth, she opined claimant is able to maintain 
employment in the light work category.  The vocational experts provided more detailed 
analysis in rebuttal reports. 
 
See Arbitration Decision, pp. 2-4. 
 
 
After citing to the applicable legal authorities, Deputy Walsh entered the following 
conclusions of law (the Court has omitted the legal authorities cited by Deputy Walsh): 
 
 
The first question is the extent of claimant’s left arm functional disability. 
 
… 
 
Having reviewed all of the medical and lay evidence, I conclude that the claimant has 
suffered a 12 percent loss of function to her left arm as a result of her October 2014, work 
injury.  The rating provided by Dr. Sassman is more consistent with the symptoms and 
limitations described by claimant in testimony.  Therefore, claimant is entitled to 30 
weeks of compensation at the stipulated rate of compensation. 
 
The next issue is whether the claimant has proven a first qualifying injury and disability 
such that Second Injury Fund liability is triggered. 
… 
 
The question presented is whether the claimant’s October 2006 auto accident resulted in a 
first qualifying loss under the Act.  I find that it did.  The Fund argues that the claimant 
never suffered any industrial loss between 2006 and 2014.  She worked unrestricted 
E-FILED  2020 JUN 01 10:07 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

5 
 
during this period of time.  The right arm had never resulted in any permanent restrictions 
or and had not been rated until after her October 2014, work injury.  While this is true, 
there is no doubt in this record that Ms. Mahoney broker her wrist in that accident and it 
never fully healed.  She had an actual permanent functional loss of use of her right arm 
which preexisted the injury and permanent disability in her left arm.  Based upon the 
evidence in the record, I find that the claimant had suffered a 10 percent loss of function 
of her right arm prior to the March 2014, work injury.  This is exactly the purpose of the 
Second Injury Fund.  I therefore conclude that the Second Injury Fund Act is applicable. 
 
The next issue is the extent of industrial disability. 
… 
 
While Ms. Mahoney has demand work skills and is highly educated, she is, in fact, an 
older worker.  I find the restrictions set forth by Dr. Loth are the most accurate reflection 
of claimant’s work restrictions in the record.  The primary problem with Dr. Loth’s 
restrictions is that he made no consideration of claimant’s preexisting right arm 
difficulties in his assessment.  He restricted claimant from lifting more than 20 pounds 
and recommended that she avoid the forceful use of her left hand. 
 
Ms. Mahoney immediately ceased working in the position where she was assigned to 
work for Tax Act when her symptoms failed to resolve while performing faster-paced 
repetitive work.  She has refused certain assignments from RHI and has not looked for 
assignments which involve fast-paced repetitious use of her hands and arms.  I find that 
this is related to a combination of her October 2014, work injury and her earlier right arm 
disability.  Her restrictions undoubtedly make her a less attractive candidate in the 
competitive job market in spite of her advanced education, training and experience.  She 
has to be more selective about what types of accounting positions she accepts. 
 
Having stated this, it is also true that claimant had already, in approximately 2011, 
transitioned into a work career where she primarily worked in temporary job assignments 
through RHI.  She had decided, based upon a variety of factors, including the reality of 
the job market, to transition to this type of work life before the work injury occurred.  
The combination of her disabilities simply makes it more difficult for her, as an older 
worker, to secure assignments regularly and consistently.  I find it is likely there will be 
longer periods between assignments, as well as a requirement to occasionally accept 
positions for which she is overqualified, such as call center work.  Considering all of the 
factors of industrial disability, I find claimant has suffered a 30 percent loss of access to 
the competitive job market. 
 
This finding entitles claimant to 150 weeks of benefits minus the 30 weeks for her left 
upper extremity functional loss and 25 weeks for her preexisting right upper extremity 
functional loss.  Therefore, claimant is entitled to 95 weeks of compensation from the 
Second Injury Fund of Iowa. 
 
E-FILED  2020 JUN 01 10:07 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

6 
 
The next issue is whether the claimant sustained a new cumulative injury to her right arm 
which arose out of and in the course of employment which manifested on or about March 
2, 2015. 
… 
 
I find that the claimant has failed to meet her burden of proof that she suffered a new 
cumulative injury which manifested in March 2015.  While the claimant did suffer some 
new symptoms during that timeframe, I do not find the quality of evidence in this record 
to qualify these symptoms as a new, distinct work injury.  The claim was not worked up 
independently.  Other than Dr. Sassman, no physician has opined that she suffered a new 
work injury.  Ms. Mahoney had consistently experienced symptoms and difficulties in her 
right wrist from the auto accident as late as 2012 and 2013.  It appears that, at most, she 
suffered a temporary aggravation of her other impairments set forth above.  Moreover, I 
find that, even if she did suffer a new work injury, it did not substantially increase her 
loss of function in her right arm. 
 
See Arbitration Decision, pp. 5-9. 
 
 
Petitioner filed a motion for rehearing before Deputy Walsh, which Deputy Walsh 
addressed in a Ruling on Rehearing filed May 1, 2018 (citations are omitted): 
 
On March 28, 2018, I entered an arbitration decision which broadly accepted the parties’ 
stipulation regarding credit.   
 
On April 17, 2018, claimant filed a Motion for Rehearing, seeking a more specific ruling 
on the credit issue.  Claimant argues that defendants are seeking a credit for the full 
amount of an overpayment paid to claimant against this award.  Defendants’ employer 
and insurance carrier have not filed a resistance, although they did set forth their position 
regarding credit in their brief. 
 
The claimant is correct that I did not address the issue with the necessary specificity as 
requested by the parties in their Hearing Report and Order.  The defendant employer and 
insurance carrier are, in fact, seeking a credit for all benefits paid against the award of 
permanency in this case.  The defendant employer and insurance carrier are not entitled 
to such a credit under the Iowa Supreme Court decision in Swiss Colony v. Deutmeyer, 
789 N.W.2d 129, 136 (Iowa 2010).  I read Deutmeyer to strictly limit such credit in Iowa 
Code section 85.34 to future benefits.  I am bound by this decision.  As a result, 
defendants employer and insurance carrier are only entitled to a credit for the 
overpayments against future benefits for a subsequent injury and not against future 
benefits for this injury. 
 
Defendants’ credit is limited to seven point five (7.5) weeks of benefits at the stipulated 
rate of five hundred ninety and 26/100 dollars ($590.26). 
 
See Ruling on Rehearing, pp. 1-2. 
 
E-FILED  2020 JUN 01 10:07 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

7 
 
 
Petitioner and the Second Injury Fund filed appeals to the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner.  Commissioner Joseph S. Cortese II issued an Appeal Decision on November 8, 
2019.  After setting forth the procedural history for Petitioner’s claims, Commissioner Cortese 
found as follows (certain citations to the record and legal authorities are omitted): 
 
Claimant asserts on appeal that the deputy commissioner erred in File No. 5056922 in 
finding claimant did not sustain a compensable, cumulative work injury to her right upper 
extremity on or about March 2, 2015.  Claimant further asserts the deputy commissioner 
erred in failing to address the other issues raised in File No. 5056922.  Specifically, 
claimant asserts the deputy commissioner erred in not addressing the extent of permanent 
functional disability caused by the alleged March 2, 2015, work injury.  Claimant asserts 
the deputy commissioner erred in not assessing penalty benefits for defendant employer 
and defendant insurer’s unreasonable denial of benefits related to the alleged March 2, 
2015, cumulative injury.  Lastly, claimant asserts the deputy commissioner erred in not 
assessing the extent of claimant’s industrial disability as a combined result of the October 
2014 and March 2015 injuries. 
 
The Fund asserts on cross-appeal that the deputy commissioner erred in File No. 5056921 
in finding claimant sustained a first qualifying injury of the right upper extremity on 
October 16, 2006.  The Fund also asserts the deputy commissioner erred in finding 
claimant sustained industrial disability in excess of Fund credits.  Lastly, the Fund asserts 
the deputy commissioner erred in assessing costs against the Fund. 
 
Defendants RHI and ICSP assert on appeal that the arbitration decision should be 
affirmed in its entirety. 
 
Those portions of the proposed agency decision pertaining to issues not raised on appeal 
are adopted as a part of this appeal decision. 
 
I have performed a de novo review of the evidentiary record and the detailed arguments 
of the parties and I reach the same analysis, findings, and conclusions as those reached by 
the deputy commissioner. 
 
Pursuant to Iowa Code sections 17A.5 and 86.24, I affirm and adopt as the final agency 
decision those portions of the proposed arbitration decision filed on March 28, 2018, 
which relate to the issues properly raised on intra-agency appeal. 
 
In File No. 5056921, I find the deputy commissioner provided a well-reasoned analysis 
of all the issues raised in the arbitration proceeding.  I affirm the deputy commissioner’s 
findings of fact and conclusions of law pertaining to those issues.  I affirm the deputy 
commissioner’s finding that the claimant sustained scheduled member functional 
impairment of 12 percent of the left upper extremity as a result of the October 20, 2014, 
work injury which entitles her to receive 30 weeks of PPD benefits from defendants 
employer and insurer, commencing November 18, 2015.  I affirm the deputy 
commissioner’s finding that pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.64, claimant is entitled to 
receive benefits from the Fund as claimant sustained a first qualifying injury to her right 
E-FILED  2020 JUN 01 10:07 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

8 
 
upper extremity on October 16, 2006, and because claimant’s October 20, 2014, work-
related left upper extremity injury is a second qualifying injury.  I affirm the deputy 
commissioner’s finding that the combined effects of the two injuries result in 30 percent 
industrial disability, which entitles claimant to 150 weeks of PPD benefits, less credit to 
the Fund.  I affirm the deputy commissioner’s finding that the Fund is entitled to a credit 
of 25 weeks of PPD benefits for the October 16, 2006, first injury and a credit of 30 
weeks of PPD benefits for the October 20, 2014, second injury for a total credit of 55 
weeks of PPD benefits.  I affirm the deputy commissioner’s finding that after the 
deduction of the credit, claimant is entitled to receive 95 weeks of PPD benefits from the 
Fund commencing 30 weeks after November 18, 2015.  I affirm the deputy 
commissioner’s findings, conclusions and analysis regarding those issues. 
 
In File No. 5056922, I find the deputy commissioner provided a well-reasoned analysis 
of all the issues raised in the arbitration proceeding.  I affirm the deputy commissioner’s 
findings of fact and conclusions of law pertaining to those issues.  I affirm the deputy 
commissioner’s finding that claimant failed to carry her burden of proof that she 
sustained a cumulative injury to her right upper extremity arising out of and in the course 
of her employment on or about March 2, 2015.  Because I affirm the deputy 
commissioner’s finding that claimant failed to carry her burden of proof on the issues of 
causation and compensability, I affirm the deputy commissioner’s finding that it is 
unnecessary to address the other issues raised in the arbitration proceeding. 
 
I affirm the deputy commissioner’s findings, conclusions and analysis regarding all of the 
above issues.  I provide the following additional analysis for my decision: 
 
Further analysis is appropriate to respond to the Fund’s assertions regarding costs.  The 
Fund seeks clarification with respect to the deputy commissioner’s general order that, 
“costs are taxed to defendants.” 
 
The Second Injury Fund does not provide for costs to be paid by the Fund.  Iowa Code 
section 85.64.   Additionally, subsection 2 of Iowa Code section 85.66, which codifies the 
creation of the Fund, specifically states, in pertinent part “…Moneys collected in the 
second injury fund shall be disbursed only for the purposes stated in this subchapter, and 
shall not at any time be appropriated or diverted to any other use or purpose.”  The plain 
language of Iowa Code section 85.66 does not allow for the assessment of costs against 
the Fund. 
 
Therefore, I amend the arbitration decision to reflect claimant is entitled to 
reimbursement from RHI and ICSP for costs associated with the underlying arbitration 
decision.  Claimant is not entitled to reimbursement for costs from the Fund. 
 
See Appeal Decision, pp. 2-4. 
 
 
Petitioner has filed a Petition for Judicial Review with this Court, seeking review of the 
final agency action of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner.  Petitioner has argued 
that the agency abused its discretion in determining Petitioner did not suffer a cumulative trauma 
E-FILED  2020 JUN 01 10:07 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

9 
 
claim on March 2, 2015.  Petitioner contends Commissioner Cortese erred in rejecting the only 
expert medical opinion in the record to render a causation opinion on Petitioner’s cumulative 
trauma injury.  Petitioner also contends that, with her credible testimony, the medical records, 
and an unrebutted expert medical opinion, she has met her burden of establishing a permanent 
cumulative trauma injury to her right arm.  Petitioner requests the Court find that she sustained a 
cumulative trauma claim on March 2, 2015, and remand the case back to the agency for 
additional findings regarding the extent of impairment, penalties, and the extent of Second Injury 
Fund benefits, if any.  Petitioner asserts the record supports a finding of a 3% functional loss of 
use associated with the injury.  Petitioner further asserts that RHI failed to conduct a reasonable 
investigation, asking Dr. Loth a legally irrelevant question and failing to further investigate the 
claim upon receipt of Dr. Sassman’s report.  Petitioner claims penalty benefits should be 
assessed, and on remand, the agency should find Petitioner has suffered from substantial 
industrial loss associated with her claim for Second Injury Fund benefits. 
 
 
RHI and ICSP have filed a brief in response to Petitioner’s claims on judicial review.  
RHI and ICSP argue that there is substantial evidence to support the agency’s decision that 
Petitioner did not sustain a compensable, cumulative work injury to her right upper extremity on 
or about March 2, 2015.  The Second Injury Fund has joined in RHI’s and ICSP’s argument. 
 
 
Petitioner replies that she has demonstrated and met her burden of proof that she had 
sustained a new cumulative workplace injury that manifested on March 2, 2015. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
Petitioner is entitled to judicial review of this action pursuant to Iowa Code § 17A.19 
(2019).  Iowa Code § 17A.19(10) provides: 
The court may affirm the agency action or remand to the agency for further proceedings. 
The court shall reverse, modify, or grant other appropriate relief from agency action, 
equitable or legal and including declaratory relief, if it determines that substantial rights 
of the person seeking judicial relief have been prejudiced because the agency action is 
any of the following: 
 
a. Unconstitutional on its face or as applied or is based upon a provision of law that is 
unconstitutional on its face or as applied. 
 
b. Beyond the authority delegated to the agency by any provision of law or in violation of 
any provision of law. 
 
c. Based upon an erroneous interpretation of a provision of law whose interpretation has 
not clearly been vested by a provision of law in the discretion of the agency. 
 
d. Based upon a procedure or decision-making process prohibited by law or was taken 
without following the prescribed procedure or decision-making process. 
 
E-FILED  2020 JUN 01 10:07 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

10 
 
e. The product of decision making undertaken by persons who were improperly 
constituted as a decision-making body, were motivated by an improper purpose, or were 
subject to disqualification. 
 
f. Based upon a determination of fact clearly vested by a provision of law in the 
discretion of the agency that is not supported by substantial evidence in the record before 
the court when that record is viewed as a whole. For purposes of this paragraph, the 
following terms have the following meanings: 
 
(1) “Substantial evidence” means the quantity and quality of evidence that would be 
deemed sufficient by a neutral, detached, and reasonable person, to establish the fact at 
issue when the consequences resulting from the establishment of that fact are understood 
to be serious and of great importance. 
 
(2) “Record before the court” means the agency record for judicial review, as defined by 
this chapter, supplemented by any additional evidence received by the court under the 
provisions of this chapter. 
 
(3) “When that record is viewed as a whole” means that the adequacy of the evidence in 
the record before the court to support a particular finding of fact must be judged in light 
of all the relevant evidence in the record cited by any party that detracts from that finding 
as well as all of the relevant evidence in the record cited by any party that supports it, 
including any determinations of veracity by the presiding officer who personally 
observed the demeanor of the witnesses and the agency's explanation of why the relevant 
evidence in the record supports its material findings of fact. 
 
g. Action other than a rule that is inconsistent with a rule of the agency. 
 
h. Action other than a rule that is inconsistent with the agency's prior practice or 
precedents, unless the agency has justified that inconsistency by stating credible reasons 
sufficient to indicate a fair and rational basis for the inconsistency. 
 
i. The product of reasoning that is so illogical as to render it wholly irrational. 
 
j. The product of a decision-making process in which the agency did not consider a 
relevant and important matter relating to the propriety or desirability of the action in 
question that a rational decision maker in similar circumstances would have considered 
prior to taking that action. 
 
k. Not required by law and its negative impact on the private rights affected is so grossly 
disproportionate to the benefits accruing to the public interest from that action that it must 
necessarily be deemed to lack any foundation in rational agency policy. 
 
l. Based upon an irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable interpretation of a provision 
of law whose interpretation has clearly been vested by a provision of law in the discretion 
of the agency. 
E-FILED  2020 JUN 01 10:07 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

11 
 
 
m. Based upon an irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable application of law to fact 
that has clearly been vested by a provision of law in the discretion of the agency. 
 
n. Otherwise unreasonable, arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion. 
 
Iowa Code § 17A.19(10) (2019). 
  
“A person or party who has exhausted all adequate administrative remedies and who is 
aggrieved or adversely affected by any final agency action is entitled to judicial review thereof 
under this chapter.”  Iowa Code § 17A.19(1) (2019).  “Iowa Code section 17A.19(8)(g) 
authorizes relief from agency action that is ‘unreasonable, arbitrary or capricious or 
characterized by an abuse of discretion or a clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.’”  Dico, 
Inc. v. Emp. Appeal Bd., 576 N.W.2d 352, 355 (Iowa 1998).  “These terms have established 
meanings:  ‘An agency’s action is “arbitrary” or “capricious” when it is taken without regard to 
the law or facts of the case…Agency action is “unreasonable” when it is “clearly against reason 
and evidence.”’”  Id. (citing Soo Line R.R. v. Iowa Dep’t of Transp., 521 N.W.2d 685, 688-89 
(Iowa 1994)).  “An abuse of discretion occurs when the agency action ‘rests on grounds or 
reasons clearly untenable or unreasonable.’”  Id. (citing Schoenfeld v. FDL Foods, Inc., 560 
N.W.2d 595, 598 (Iowa 1997)).  The Iowa Supreme Court has stated that an “abuse of discretion 
is synonymous with unreasonableness, and involves a lack of rationality, focusing on whether 
the agency has made a decision clearly against reason and evidence.”  Id. (citing Schoenfeld, 560 
N.W.2d at 598).   
“Section 17A.19[10] provides that a party may successfully challenge an agency decision 
when the party’s substantial rights have been prejudiced because the agency action ‘is 
unsupported by substantial evidence’ or ‘is affected by other error of law.’”  Titan Tire Corp. v. 
Emp. Appeal Bd., 641 N.W.2d 752, 754 (Iowa 2003).  Factual findings are reversed “only if they 
are unsupported by substantial evidence in the record made before the agency when the record is 
viewed as a whole.”  Loeb v. Emp. Appeal Bd., 530 N.W.2d 450, 451 (Iowa 1995).  “Evidence is 
substantial if a reasonable mind would find it adequate to reach the same conclusion.  Id. (citing 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire & Casualty Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 849 (Iowa 1995)).  “The agency’s 
decision does not lack substantial evidence because inconsistent conclusions may be drawn from 
the same evidence.”  Id. (citing Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 849). 
“Substantial evidence is ‘the quantity and quality of evidence that would be deemed 
sufficient by a neutral, detached, and reasonable person, to establish the fact at issue when the 
consequences resulting from the establishment of that fact are understood to be serious and of 
great importance.’”  University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics v. Waters, 674 N.W.2d 92, 95 
(Iowa 2004).  “‘While “courts must not simply rubber stamp the agency fact finding without 
engaging in a fairly intensive review of the record to ensure that the fact finding is itself 
reasonable ··· evidence is not insubstantial merely because it would have supported contrary 
inferences.’”  Id.  “‘The substantial evidence rule requires to review the record as a whole to 
determine whether there is sufficient evidence to support the decision the commission made.’”  
Stark Const. v. Lauterwasser, No. 13-0609, 2014 WL 1495479, *8 (Iowa Ct. App. 2014) (citing 
Woodbury Cnty. v. Iowa Civil Rights Comm’n, 335 N.W.2d 161, 164 (Iowa 1983)).   
E-FILED  2020 JUN 01 10:07 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

12 
 
 
“[T]he agency is not required to mention each item of evidence in its decision and 
explain why it found the evidence persuasive or not persuasive.”  Keystone Nursing Care Center 
v. Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 299, 305 (Iowa 2005).  “While it is true that the commissioner’s 
decision must be ‘sufficiently detailed to show the path he has taken through conflicting 
evidence,’…the law does not require the commissioner to discuss each and every fact in the 
record and explain why or why not he has rejected it.”  Terwilliger v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 529 
N.W.2d 267, 274 (Iowa 1995).  “Such a requirement would be unnecessary and burdensome.”  
Id. 
 
 
If a “claim of error lies with the agency’s interpretation of the law, the question on review 
is whether the agency’s interpretation was erroneous, and we may substitute our interpretation 
for the agency’s.”  Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 219 (Iowa 2006).  “Still, if there is no 
challenge to the agency’s findings of fact or interpretation of the law, but the claim of error lies 
with the ultimate conclusion reached, then the challenge is to the agency’s application of the law 
to the facts, and the question on review is whether the agency abused its discretion by, for 
example, employing wholly irrational reasoning or ignoring important and relevant evidence.”  
Id.  “In sum, when an agency decision on appeal involves mixed questions of law and fact, care 
must be taken to articulate the proper inquiry for review instead of lumping the fact, law, and 
application questions together within the umbrella of a substantial-evidence issue.”  Id. 
 
 
Petitioner has argued that the agency abused its discretion in determining Petitioner did 
not suffer a cumulative trauma claim on March 2, 2015, ignored important and relevant 
evidence, and asserted erroneous facts.  Petitioner states that the only medical opinions are from 
Dr. Sassman and Dr. Loth, and Petitioner argues Dr. Loth’s opinion does not address Petitioner’s 
cumulative trauma claim, but rather answers a question posed by the workers’ compensation 
adjuster.  Petitioner further argues there are no medical opinions contrary to that presented by Dr. 
Sassman.  Petitioner notes that Deputy Walsh specifically found her testimony to be very 
credible, yet the record does not support a finding that she had consistently experienced 
symptoms and difficulties in her right wrist from the auto accident as late as 2012 and 2013.  
Petitioner relies on her own testimony that she began experiencing new symptoms associated 
with the significant amount of keyboarding she was doing when she began working at Tax Act, 
and states the condition was diagnosed by three medical providers and forced Petitioner to stop 
doing this kind of fast-paced work.  Petitioner contends her actions are not consistent with no 
injury, or with a temporary injury.  Petitioner also contends she has met her burden of 
establishing a permanent cumulative trauma injury to her right arm on or about March 2, 2015. 
 
 
The Court concludes that substantial evidence supports the agency’s ruling that Petitioner 
did not sustain a compensable, cumulative work injury to her right upper extremity on or about 
March 2, 2015.  It is clear that the agency considered the testimony of Petitioner and of Dr. 
Sassman.  However, when this testimony is considered in light of the other arm symptoms 
described by Petitioner, including as a result of her 2006 car accident and resulting surgery, as 
well as her description of the effects the symptoms had on her over the years, there is substantial 
evidence in the record to support a conclusion that Petitioner has not established a permanent 
cumulative trauma injury to her right arm on or about March 2, 2015.  The agency also could 
view the work Petitioner performed at Tax Act as differing from the description provided by 
Petitioner, particularly when the testimony of the senior staffing manager, Gina Carson, is 
E-FILED  2020 JUN 01 10:07 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

13 
 
considered.  Further, there is substantial evidence in the record to provide a basis for the agency 
to conclude that Dr. Sassman’s opinion is not persuasive, including with regard to Dr. Sassman’s 
opinion having been based on what the agency could have found as inaccurate facts provided by 
Petitioner regarding her job description at Tax Act, as well as when her wrist symptoms actually 
started.   
 
 
While Petitioner has argued that the agency failed to consider important and relevant 
evidence, the Court finds that the thorough decisions issued by Deputy Walsh and Commissioner 
Cortese establish that the agency did, in fact, consider all of the evidence presented by Petitioner, 
but did not find this evidence sufficient for Petitioner to meet her burden of proof on her claim.  
The issue before the Court is not whether this Court would have reached a different conclusion.  
It is whether the agency had substantial evidence to support its conclusion, or made any error of 
law in reaching its conclusion.  There is substantial evidence in the record to support the 
agency’s conclusion, and the Court finds the agency committed no error of law in reaching its 
conclusion.  The agency’s decision should be affirmed, and Petitioner’s request for relief on 
judicial review should be denied. 
 
RULING 
 
 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED that the agency action in this case is affirmed.  
Petitioner’s request for relief on judicial review is denied.  If there are costs to be assessed, they 
are assessed to Petitioner. 
 
Clerk to notify. 
E-FILED  2020 JUN 01 10:07 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

State of Iowa Courts
Type:
OTHER ORDER
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV094466
CYNTHIA S MAHONEY VS RHI ETAL
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2020-06-01 10:07:05     page 14 of 14
E-FILED  2020 JUN 01 10:07 AM LINN - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT
