Case Number: 21005287.01
Case Title:  GRAVES, MICHAEL V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MANAGEMENT
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Graves Michael-21005287.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MICHAEL GRAVES, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
   File No. 21005287.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                           
AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT., 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                        
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
WEST BEND MUTUAL INSURANCE,    : 
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos.: 1402.40; 1802; 1803; 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
2501 
 
Defendants. 
  :                 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Michael Graves filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against American Healthcare Management, employer, and West 
Bend Mutual Insurance, insurer, for an admitted work injury date of April 14, 2021. The 
case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on January 30, 2024. 
Pursuant to an order of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this case 
proceeded to a live video hearing via Zoom, with all parties and the court reporter 
appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded without significant difficulties. 
 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 14, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 11, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through M.  
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. Claimant also called Marsha Graves, 
Joseph Graves, Brandy Flanders, Stephanie Groenendyk, Jenice Southwick, and Tara 
Anderson as witnesses. The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the 
evidentiary hearing on January 30, 2024. The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on 
March 29, 2024, and the case was considered fully submitted on that date. 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Nov-07  13:49:21     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 2 
 
 
ISSUES 
1. Whether the stipulated work injury is a cause of temporary disability; 
2. Whether the stipulated injury is a cause of permanent disability; 
3. If so, the extent of permanent disability; 
4. Payment of certain medical expenses; 
5. Payment of claimant’s independent medical examination under Iowa Code 
section 85.39; and 
6. Taxation of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was approximately 58 years old. (Claimant’s 
Exhibit 5, p. 33) He is married with three children. (Hearing Transcript, p. 10) Claimant 
is a high school graduate, and his work history includes construction, carpentry, 
masonry, and trucking. (Tr., p. 11) He has also done side work on his own, including 
truck driving and lawn care/snow removal. (Tr., p. 15) 
 
In approximately 2019, claimant began working for Accura of Pleasantville, which 
is a subsidiary of American Healthcare Management. (Tr., pp. 11-12) Claimant was 
hired to be the maintenance director for two nursing homes, one in Pleasantville and 
one in Knoxville. (Tr., p. 12) Claimant described the general maintenance duties as 
including work on sewer lines, toilets, electrical work, sheetrock, installing braces and 
grab-bars, installing flooring, and “everything in general to keep a building going.” (Tr., 
p. 12) Claimant worked full time plus overtime between the two buildings. He also 
continued his side work, including hauling rock on weekends and his lawn care/snow 
removal business. (Tr., pp. 15-18) 
 
Claimant’s past medical history is relevant. In 2000, claimant was electrocuted 
while working on a camper at his home. (Tr., p. 13) Claimant testified that he was off 
work for about two weeks after that incident, and his prescription for gabapentin was 
increased for a time. (Tr., p. 14) He was previously prescribed gabapentin for 
neuropathy. After his two weeks off, he was able to return to work with no issues.  
 
Medical records in evidence indicate claimant was treated for chronic chest pain 
in 2010. (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 1) Claimant’s past history at that time noted the electrocution 
in 2000, as well as neuropathic pains since a motor vehicle accident in 2004, in which 
he sustained a whiplash-type injury with myofascial strain and sprains. The past history 
also notes HTN, hyperlipidemia, anxiety, restless leg syndrome, and chronic chest pain.  
 

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 3 
 
 
In 2011, while establishing care with Theresa Keller, ARNP, claimant noted he 
was told at the time of his 2000 electrocution that he could have cardiac problems. (Jt. 
Ex. 1, p. 9) He stated he had increasing neuropathy and numbness in his right arm 
extending into his shoulder over the last few years, and had begun to extend into his left 
arm. He said gabapentin helped. Later in the year, he reported continued discomfort in 
his arms and joints all over, and the gabapentin helped but made him sleepy.  
 
In 2012, claimant established care at Broadlawns. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 37) The record 
notes a history of shoulder and joint pain since 2008. He was to continue taking 
gabapentin. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 38) On October 7, 2013, claimant was seen at Broadlawns 
complaining of low back pain off and on for the past month or so. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 44) He 
also reported feeling anxious and being shaky off and on. He was sent to physical 
therapy for the back pain, and recommended to see neurology to evaluate the tremor. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 46) 
 
On February 19, 2014, claimant saw Laurie Goff, ARNP. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 48) His 
current problem was listed as neuropathy. The note states that claimant was 
electrocuted ten years prior, and felt the gabapentin did not always work. His medication 
was changed to Lyrica. Claimant also started seeing Larry Hirschy, D.C., on December 
2, 2015. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 58) He complained of left leg sciatica and low back pain. He 
described prickly and tingling sensations with throbbing and sharp pain radiating to the 
left lumbar, sacroiliac, gluteal, and upper posterior thigh areas.  
 
Claimant continued to see Dr. Hirschy for his back pain, and saw ARNP Goff for 
his medication refills. By December 2015 he had been switched back to gabapentin. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 50) The last note in evidence from Dr. Hirschy is dated February 26, 2016, and 
notes the same complaints as claimant’s first visit. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 72-74) On May 25, 
2016, claimant told ARNP Goff that he was still seeing Dr. Hirschy and was going to try 
using a TENS unit for his back pain. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 51)  
 
Chronologically, the next medical record in evidence is a visit with ARNP Goff on 
April 7, 2021, one week prior to the work injury. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 52) At that time, claimant 
reported problems with his stomach; ongoing mid to lower back pain; feeling sweaty and 
clammy with some chest pain; feeling stressed with some anxiety and depression, and 
not being able to do as much as he would like due to pain; and neuropathic pain, for 
which gabapentin had not been working. He was still taking gabapentin for his 
neuropathic pain. His gabapentin prescription was changed to Lyrica, and ARNP Goff 
added hydrocodone to help with acute pain. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 53) 
 
On April 14, 2021, claimant was injured while working. He was at the 
Pleasantville building, and was asked to perform some electrical work in a resident’s 
room for a light. (Tr., p. 23) When claimant plugged the light in, he had to crouch down 
on his knee and reach in between a nightstand and some other furniture. Unbeknownst 
to claimant, there was a bare spot on the plug, and it shorted out and electrocuted 
claimant. (Tr., pp. 23-24) Claimant testified his body was frozen, and the breaker finally 
blew after about one minute, releasing him. (Tr., p. 24) 

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 4 
 
 
Claimant was transported via ambulance to Knoxville Hospital’s emergency 
room. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 83-87) The record states that claimant was electrocuted when he 
touched a live wire with his right hand while working on a fluorescent light fixture. Upon 
arrival at the emergency room, claimant was noted to be slow to arouse and slow to 
respond. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 88) He was confused about what month it was and his age. He 
complained of diffuse peripheral vision loss, weakness on the right side of his body, and 
numbness in his left side, mostly in his lower extremity. He also complained of diffuse 
muscle pain throughout. Claimant’s neurological exam was “significantly abnormal,” but 
his head CT was normal. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 90) After consultation, claimant was transferred to 
the emergency department at University of Iowa Health Care (UIHC) for electrical injury 
with possible deep burns. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 90-91) 
At UIHC, claimant saw Cory Wittrock, M.D., in the emergency department. (Jt. 
Ex. 7, p. 97) Dr. Wittrock noted claimant’s past history of prior electrocution with 
neuropathic pain. He noted claimant presented to the Knoxville emergency room with 
altered mental status and neurologic deficits, including right ptosis and left facial droop, 
along with right-sided motor weakness and left-sided sensory deficits. When he got to 
UIHC, he reported shortness of breath and chest discomfort in the right chest. An EKG 
showed sinus bradycardia. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 100) Claimant was transferred to neurology, 
where he saw Melvin Donaldson, M.D. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 26) Claimant underwent an MRI of 
the brain and cervical spine, both of which were normal. He was discharged to home. 
Claimant was seen at the Knoxville emergency room on April 19, 2021, 
complaining of persistent right leg nerve pain, weakness, sensory deficit, and visual 
disturbance since the work injury. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 104) He also noted some dizziness and 
balance disturbance. His symptoms were most consistent with peripheral nerve 
injury/pain from electrocution. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 106) He was provided an increased dose of 
Lyrica, and told to follow up with his primary care physician for referrals to neurology for 
an EMG and possibly a pain referral. (Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 106-107) 
Claimant saw Matthew Doty, M.D., on April 22, 2021. (Claimant’s Exhibit 6, p. 
37)1 Dr. Doty diagnosed electrical injury and right-side weakness, pain, and 
paresthesia. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 37-38) He did not believe claimant could return to work at 
that time. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 38) Claimant had an EMG of the right lower extremity and right 
upper extremity on May 25, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 127(a)) The EMG was normal, showing 
no electrodiagnostic evidence of right upper or lower extremity peripheral compressive 
neuropathy, plexopathy, or radiculopathy. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 127(b)) 
On June 8, 2021, claimant saw Ludwig Gutmann, M.D., in neurology at the 
University of Iowa. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 36) The record notes claimant’s symptoms of pain and 
paresthesia after electrocution on April 14, 2021. His neurological exam was positive for 
some subjective sensory loss to pinprick and dysesthesias to temperature on the right 
side of his body, but otherwise muscle strength and deep tendon reflexes were normal. 
Considering the incident, Dr. Gutmann stated the objective sequelae were minimal, and 
                                                 
1 Dr. Doty’s records are not in evidence, but are summarized in claimant’s exhibit 6. 

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 5 
 
 
he expected a full recovery with time. There were concerns regarding claimant’s pain 
medication regimen, and it was suggested he see his primary care physician to taper off 
some medications. Physical therapy was recommended, as was a psychiatric 
evaluation for depression and possibly PTSD. No further neurology follow-up was 
needed. 
Claimant next saw Dr. Doty on June 9, 2021, at which time he complained of 
fatigue and loss of appetite, along with significant weight loss. He reported significant 
symptoms in his right leg, including pain rated at level 9 of 10, and severe intermittent 
cramping. He also reported numbness and tingling in his right upper and lower 
extremities, reduced grip strength on the right, and right leg weakness. Finally, he 
reported depression. Dr. Doty started claimant on Cymbalta for depression and 
suggested he monitor his moods over the coming weeks.  
On June 18, 2021, claimant saw Dan Moyse, M.D., at Pain Specialists of Iowa for 
neuropathic pain in the right thigh post electrocution.  (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 108) At that time he 
was taking 300 mg of gabapentin three times per day, with an occasional extra dose in 
the evening. He also reported depression due to his loss of function, noting that he had 
been working 12 to 15 hours per day prior to the work injury. Dr. Moyse noted his 
concerns regarding claimant’s mental status due to depression. (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 110) For 
claimant’s pain, Dr. Moyse recommended a right lateral femoral cutaneous nerve block. 
Claimant continued to see Dr. Doty in June 2021, and began attending physical 
therapy. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 38) His Cymbalta was discontinued, and he was prescribed 
Celexa instead. Claimant had the nerve block recommended by Dr. Moyse, and on July 
12, 2021 he told his physical therapist that he had a significant flare-up of his symptoms 
thereafter. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 39) He saw Dr. Doty on July 14, 2021, who noted claimant was 
not doing well and had increased symptoms in his right leg following a nerve block. He 
had severe pain in his right leg with a crawling sensation from the hip to the knee, and 
rated his pain at a level 9 of 10. He was not able to tolerate the Celexa and stopped 
taking it, but had made an appointment to see a mental health counselor. Dr. Doty 
noted concern about claimant’s lack of progress and significant continued symptoms.  
On July 15, 2021, claimant saw Deb Steinmann, Psy.D., at Heartland Christian 
Counseling. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 115) Claimant described the electrocution incident at work 
and noted that prior to the work injury, he was outgoing and worked 15-hours a day, six 
days a week. He said that going from that to doing nothing and taking medications that 
make him “sleepy and depressed” had been a “roller coaster.” He also noted that the 
nerve block had made everything worse. He described his ongoing symptoms, and his 
trouble sleeping, eating, and with irritability. Dr. Steinmann’s diagnosis was adjustment 
disorder with depressed mood. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 118) 
Claimant saw Dr. Doty on July 28, 2021, at which time he still had pain and 
weakness in his right upper extremity. Claimant noted that he was having to contract out 
projects around his house to others, when normally he would have done the work 
himself.  

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 6 
 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Moyse on August 4, 2021, and reported that he had no 
relief following the nerve block, and felt it made his pain worse. (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 112) Dr. 
Moyse recommended a lumbar MRI to rule out lumbar radiculopathy. (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 114) 
He noted that if the MRI did not show a compressive lesion, he would be perplexed as 
to cause other than electrocution to the nerves. 
On August 6, 2021, claimant saw Dr. Steinmann for psychotherapy. (Jt. Ex. 10, 
p. 119) He expressed ongoing pain, causing difficulties with sleep. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 120) 
He noted wanting to get back to work, but physically being unable to do so. Cognitively, 
he said he had been having trouble finding words to express himself. Dr. Steinmann 
noted that claimant’s presentation suggested no effort to exaggerate his experience, 
and she felt his desire to return to work was believable given his history of employment 
and work ethic.  
Claimant saw Dr. Doty on August 11, 2021, and reported some mild symptom 
improvement since he started taking Meloxicam. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 39) On examination, Dr. 
Doty noted significant weakness on the right side with SLR testing, and weakness on 
dorsiflexion and plantarflexion.  
Claimant saw Trevor Schmitz, M.D., at Iowa Ortho on September 17, 2021. (Jt. 
Ex. 11, p. 128) His note states claimant was referred by Dr. Moyse. Claimant reported 
pain at a level 9 of 10. The location of pain was his lower back, described as an ache, 
numbness, and stabbing. The record states that claimant reported no neck or back pain 
or treatment prior to the work incident on April 14, 2021. He complained of a five-month 
history of right upper and lower extremity numbness, burning, and tingling. He said the 
primary location of pain was his right upper and lower extremities. On examination, Dr. 
Schmitz noted an antalgic gait, with severe ataxia on tandem gait. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 129) 
Dr. Schmitz reviewed claimant’s prior EMG, which was normal. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 
130) He reviewed the MRI, which was done on August 12, 2021, and noted it showed 
high-grade central canal stenosis at T11-T12, likely with some evidence of 
myelomalacia. Dr. Schmitz stated this was related primarily to facet arthropathy. At T12-
L1 there was mild to moderate narrowing of a congenitally modest canal. At L1-L2 there 
was moderate spinal canal and neural foraminal narrowing. At L2-L3 and L3-L4 there 
was mild spinal canal narrowing with moderate right-sided foraminal stenosis. At L4-L5 
there was mild spinal canal narrowing, and at L5-S1 there was mild to moderate 
degenerative facet arthropathy with mild facet and thecal sac effacement.  
Dr. Schmitz discussed the MRI with claimant and noted that claimant’s diffuse 
right upper and lower extremity numbness, tingling, and associated weakness started 
when claimant was electrocuted at work, and he denied any symptoms prior to that. Dr. 
Schmitz wanted to get an MRI of the thoracic and cervical spine, and opined that 
claimant would likely need a two-level thoracic decompression and instrumented fusion. 
He noted that claimant saw a neurologist in Iowa City who did not feel as though 
claimant’s symptoms were coming from a more central source, and that he had an MRI 
of the brain in the emergency department that was normal.  

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 7 
 
 
Claimant saw Dr. Steinmann on September 29, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 122) At that 
time he noted feeling like he was being accused of lying. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 123) He said 
that workers’ compensation was looking for an MRI that was done after an earlier 
accident and saying that his current symptoms were caused by his prior electrocution in 
2000. Dr. Steinmann noted that claimant did not want people to “feel sorry” for him, and 
that he expressed he “would not accept a life in which he had to be taken care of by 
other people.” 
On October 4, 2021, claimant saw Michael Jacoby, M.D., for a neurology exam. 
(Jt. Ex. 12, p. 143) Dr. Jacoby’s assessment was electrocution, altered mental status, 
leg pain, arm pain, and numbness and tingling. (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 144) He opined that 
claimant may be experiencing dysesthesias, but features also presented for 
somatoform. He stated that features on exam were difficult to explain and the extent of 
symptoms seemed excessive for the nature of the event, but that electrocution could be 
difficult to judge. He did not suggest any further neurology testing, but said a cervical 
MRI may be warranted. 
On October 12, 2021, Dr. Schmitz authored a letter to the insurance carrier’s 
representative. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 131) The letter notes that claimant was electrocuted in 
April, and since then he had a significant amount of neurologic symptoms. He pointed 
out that claimant had myelomalacia in his thoracic spine, and denied any symptoms 
prior to the electrical episode. He stated that at a minimum, claimant had a material 
aggravation of his underlying myelomalacia, as his symptoms developed after the 
electrocution.  
Claimant followed up with Dr. Schmitz on October 15, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 132) 
He complained of persistent pain in his legs, including his right leg, with radiating pain to 
his right ankle, calf, foot, and thigh. He described the pain as aching, burning, 
numbness, shooting, and stabbing. Symptoms were aggravated by standing and 
walking and relieved with rest. He also reported continued weakness in his right arm. 
Dr. Schmitz reviewed the thoracic MRI, which showed mild to moderate spinal canal 
narrowing at T9-T10 and T10-T11. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 133) At T8-T9 he had moderate 
stenosis, with mild stenosis in between. Finally, he had moderate central canal stenosis 
at T12-L1. He also had a disc herniation to the left of T12-L1, but Dr. Schmitz did not 
think that was his primary stenosis generator at that level. Dr. Schmitz recommended 
surgery given claimant’s myelomalacia, specifically bilateral T8-L1 posterior thoracic 
laminectomy and fusion. He stated that the work accident likely did not cause the vast 
majority of claimant’s thoracic spine pathology, however, it likely caused a material 
aggravation given that he was not having any symptoms prior to the accident. Dr. 
Schmitz notes that he had not been provided with any health-related notes predating 
the accident at that time.  
Claimant was terminated from employment on October 26, 2021, as he had used 
all of his FMLA benefits, and he was not yet able to return to work. (Tr., pp. 29-30) On 
November 4, 2021, claimant expressed to Dr. Steinmann his deep concern that 
workers’ compensation was not going to act in time to “save his legs.” (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 
126) He said that workers’ compensation was trying to find a history of a preexisting 

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 8 
 
 
condition, but that Dr. Schmitz told him that his work accident caused his pain and 
limitations. He also stated that Dr. Schmitz told him his condition would continue to 
worsen and eventually he would lose the use of his legs. 
Claimant saw Troy Munson, M.D., at Mercy Neurosurgery on December 2, 2021. 
(Jt. Ex. 13, p. 145) His chief complaint was right thigh pain, numbness, and weakness. 
Dr. Munson reviewed claimant’s symptoms, prior MRI results, and EMG results. (Jt. Ex. 
13, pp. 145-147) Ultimately, Dr. Munson opined that claimant likely had some 
permanent injury to the peripheral nerves in his right arm and leg due to the electrical 
injuries. (Jt. Ex. 13, p. 147) With respect to claimant’s spine, Dr. Munson recommended 
thoracic decompression at T8-T9 and T11-T12.  
Defendants sent claimant’s medical records to David Boarini, M.D., for review, 
and requested his opinion regarding whether the surgery Dr. Schmitz recommended 
was related to the April 14, 2021 electrocution injury. (Defendants’ Exhibit B, p. 7) Dr. 
Boarini’s response is dated December 3, 2021. After reviewing the records, Dr. Boarini 
opined that claimant had thoracolumbar stenosis. He stated that diagnosis would not 
cause any pain in claimant’s extremities and no symptoms whatsoever in his right arm. 
He noted that after claimant’s electrical incident in April 2021, he was left with no 
evidence of neurologic problems, but likely had musculoskeletal symptoms related to 
the incident. However, as noted by “multiple neurology visits,” those did not require 
further treatment and were expected to resolve entirely. Dr. Boarini went on to say that 
claimant’s myelomalacia and thoracolumbar stenosis had nothing to do with his 
electrical incident, and the notion that those problems were materially aggravated or lit 
up by the incident “makes no scientific sense.” He stated claimant “may well be” a 
candidate for a decompression surgery, but did not see any indication for fusion. 
However, he would need to examine claimant to be more specific about whether 
surgery was appropriate. Either way, however, he opined it was unrelated to the 
electrocution. 
At some point around this time, the defendants denied claimant’s workers’ 
compensation claim. Claimant testified that they were paying medical bills until the time 
of his surgery. (Tr., pp. 30-31) Dr. Schmitz performed a T8-L2 posterior spinal 
decompression and fusion surgery on December 9, 2021. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 40-41)2 It is 
noted that claimant had been experiencing right lower and upper extremity weakness 
and tingling sensations, and had been increasingly falling due to leg weakness and his 
leg giving out. He had also experienced urge incontinence. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 41) He did not 
have these issues prior to April 2021. 
On February 17, 2022, Dr. Schmitz signed a letter authored by claimant’s 
attorney. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) He noted that he diagnosed claimant with stenosis and 
myelomalacia. He agreed that those conditions were materially aggravated and caused 
severe symptoms, including progressively worsening numbness and weakness, as well 
                                                 
2 In letters claimant’s attorney wrote to Dr. Schmitz, the date of surgery is often stated to be December 8, 
2021. (See Cl. Ex. 1) However, medical records state surgery was December 9, 2021. The date used in 
medical records is presumed to be correct. 

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 9 
 
 
as incontinence, as a result of the electrocution on April 14, 2021. Finally, he agreed 
that the material aggravation of his stenosis and myelomalacia necessitated prompt 
orthopedic surgery, which he performed.  
Dr. Doty signed a similar letter from claimant’s attorney on March 24, 2022. (Cl. 
Ex. 2, p. 9) He agreed that claimant’s diagnosis was stenosis and myelomalacia; that 
those conditions were materially aggravated due to the electrocution injury on April 14, 
2021; and that the aggravation caused the need for Dr. Schmitz’s surgery. Shortly 
thereafter, defense counsel sent a letter to Dr. Doty, outlining a discussion they had 
regarding claimant’s care and treatment. (Def. Ex. M, p. 118) The letter noted that when 
Dr. Doty was responding to the letter from claimant’s attorney, he was relying primarily 
on the causation opinion provided by Dr. Schmitz, including his MRI evaluation and 
what he viewed intraoperatively. He also based his opinion on there being no better 
explanation, in his opinion, for claimant’s condition, including the timing related to the 
symptoms and the electrocution on April 14, 2021. Dr. Doty signed the letter indicating 
his agreement on April 22, 2022. (Def. Ex. M, pp. 118-119) 
Dr. Boarini similarly responded to a letter authored by defense counsel by signing 
the letter indicating it accurately reflected his opinions regarding claimant’s medical 
condition and treatment. (Def. Ex. B, p. 15) Dr. Boarini signed the letter on May 11, 
2022. The letter states that Dr. Boarini completely disagreed with Dr. Schmitz’s opinion 
that the electrical incident materially aggravated claimant’s myelomalacia and 
thoracolumbar stenosis. (Def. Ex. B, p. 14) He also disagreed that there are studies that 
support the facts of this case as a work-related electrical injury. Rather, Dr. Boarini 
opined that there was no physiologic basis to causally relate the April 2021 injury to 
claimant’s myelomalacia and stenosis, and there was no evidence that the electrocution 
materially aggravated or worsened or lit up those conditions. Dr. Boarini also noted the 
multiple neurology visits that occurred after the electrocution injury indicated that no 
further treatment was required, and claimant’s condition was expected to resolve 
entirely. 
In addition, Dr. Boarini agreed that myelomalacia and stenosis are chronic 
degenerative conditions, and there was no physiologic explanation to indicate the 
electrical incident caused those conditions or made them worse. (Def. Ex. B, p. 15) He 
opined that electrical incidents such as the one on April 14, 2021, do not make 
thoracolumbar stenosis worse. He opined that the surgery was not done based on pain 
complaints, noting that stenosis does not cause pain, but rather was related to paralysis 
due to an ongoing chronic degenerative problem; not the electrical incident. He 
concluded that claimant myelomalacia and stenosis for which surgery was performed 
was not materially aggravated, accelerated, lit up, or worsened by the April 14, 2021 
electrical incident. 
Claimant testified that his employer would not allow him to return to work with 
light-duty restrictions. (Tr., pp. 33-34) As such, he spoke with Dr. Schmitz and explained 
that his son also worked with him, and he would have his son do any heavy lifting. (Tr., 
pp. 34-35) Claimant assured Dr. Schmitz he would only be doing painting, sheetrock 
repair, flooring, and similar tasks. (Tr., p. 35) He testified that Dr. Schmitz agreed to 

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 10 
 
 
release him to return to full duty but told him not to be “exceeding any kind of lifting.” 
(Tr., p. 34) As such, claimant returned to work on March 13, 2022. (Tr., p. 35) He 
testified that he is being accommodated by his employer allowing his son to continue to 
work with him, and his son lifts anything over about 20 pounds.  
On May 19, 2023, Dr. Steinmann wrote a letter addressing claimant’s mental 
health condition. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 27) She stated that claimant had no history of mental 
health treatment prior to the work injury. Her diagnosis of major depressive disorder, 
single episode, severe, was attributed to the physical injury from his electrocution. She 
noted that prior to the injury, claimant spent long days maintaining the nursing care 
facility where he worked, and that weekends were even more physically demanding as 
he worked his side jobs hauling rock and working on machinery or vehicles. However, 
after the work injury, “even putting his socks on” had become an ordeal, and the pain 
and muscle spasms in his back and chest were totally debilitating. During those 
episodes, she stated he experienced extreme pain and panic, and the mental anguish 
was extreme. Finally, she stated that the greatest significance to claimant was that his 
disability prevents him from participating in the physical labor that defined purpose and 
meaning in his life. She stated his mental health prognosis was guarded given that his 
physicians did not expect additional improvement. She concluded that he must attempt 
to adjust to “crippling pain in a life void of meaningful participation.” 
Claimant had regular follow-up visits with Dr. Schmitz over the next several 
months. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 41) He also saw ARNP Goff, reporting ongoing right leg pain from 
his hip to the top of his knee. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 54) He noted that all of his pain started after 
the electrocution at work. According to Dr. Schmitz, his condition appeared to be 
improving, but on June 17, 2022, he reported persistent aching and burning pain in his 
middle and lower back and right leg, worse with activity. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 135) He 
continued to have right leg weakness and radiculopathy as well. He was referred to 
physical medicine and rehab, and told to follow up in six months. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 136) 
On July 6, 2022, claimant told ARNP Goff that his life had changed since the 
electrocution, as he could no longer do the things he would like to do, had pain daily, 
and was not sleeping well. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 56) He also stated that physical therapy was 
making his pain worse. 
Claimant saw Kurt Smith, D.O., on July 20, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 137) He reported 
pain, hypersensitivity, and spasms in the right lateral thigh. He was taking the maximum 
dose of gabapentin at that time. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 139) Dr. Smith prescribed pregabalin, 
and ordered an MRI of the right upper leg. Claimant returned to Dr. Schmitz on July 29, 
2022, with the same symptoms. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 140) He had an updated lumbar MRI and 
right lower extremity MRI. The lumbar MRI showed some disc bulging and foraminal 
stenosis at several levels. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 142) The MRI of the right leg did not 
demonstrate any significant evidence of pathology. Dr. Schmitz noted that before the 
thoracic decompression, claimant was essentially wheelchair-bound, and was now up 
and walking. He had some residual right leg weakness and anterior thigh pain, but was 
overall doing pretty well. As such, he deferred most of his remaining care to Dr. Smith. 

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 11 
 
 
He also ordered a functional capacity evaluation (FCE), as claimant had plateaued in 
physical therapy.  
Claimant had an FCE on August 15, 2022. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 11) The results 
demonstrated an ability to function in the light physical demand category for an eight-
hour workday. He demonstrated the ability to occasionally lift up to 10 pounds from floor 
to waist, 19 pounds waist to shoulder, 10 pounds floor to shoulder, carry up to 33 
pounds, push 29 pounds of force, and pull 25 pounds of force. He was able to stand 
and perform fine motor skills and grasping frequently, and occasionally sit, walk, crouch, 
reach, and kneel. 
Claimant continued to follow up with Dr. Smith, and his symptoms did not 
change. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 42) He also continued to report mental symptoms including 
depression and anxiety. Dr. Smith prescribed amitriptyline, but claimant was unable to 
tolerate it.  
On September 20, 2022, Dr. Gutmann authored a note regarding claimant’s 
condition. (Def. Ex. C, p. 16) He noted at the time he saw claimant his complaints were 
subjective weakness and sensory decrease involving the right side of his body. 
Examination showed subjective sensory loss to pinprick, altered temperature sensation 
of the right side of the body, and right-sided giveaway weakness. After reviewing the 
MRI and learning about claimant’s spinal surgery, Dr. Gutmann stated that he was 
unable to relate the symptoms and findings for which he saw claimant to the lesion 
present at the low thoracic level of the spinal cord. He noted that a lesion at that level 
would not cause symptoms on the right side of the trunk nor right arm. He further noted 
that an electrocution episode occurring at the level of the right arm would not cause the 
spondylosis changes seen on the MRI. He concluded that these were two unrelated 
events.  
On October 17, 2022, Dr. Schmitz wrote to claimant’s attorney. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 3) 
He opined that claimant had reached maximum medical improvement (MMI) at that 
time, and provided an impairment rating using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. Using Table 15-4, Dr. Schmitz noted that claimant 
had an alteration of motion segment integrity due to a fusion. He also had impairment 
related to lower extremity weakness and numbness. Finally, given that claimant also 
had some mild residual neurologic impairment, he opined that claimant qualified for a 
DRE thoracic category V. As such, Dr. Schmitz assigned 25 percent impairment of the 
whole person. 
Defense counsel wrote to Dr. Jacoby with questions regarding causation of 
claimant’s diagnosed myelomalacia and stenosis, to which Dr. Jacoby responded on 
June 1, 2023. (Def. Ex. E, pp. 26-27) Essentially, Dr. Jacoby noted that those conditions 
were not evaluated during his one encounter with claimant. (Def. Ex. E, p. 26) He stated 
that none of his examination features or evaluation were pertinent to thoracic spine 
issues or questions, and noted that claimant’s exam features suggested embellishment. 
(Def. Ex. E, p. 27) 

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 12 
 
 
Defense counsel also wrote to Dr. Wittrock, outlining their prior telephone 
discussion, and Dr. Wittrock signed the letter indicating his agreement on July 15, 2023.  
(Def. Ex. G, pp. 40-41) Dr. Wittrock confirmed that while a potential burn clinic 
evaluation was scheduled for claimant at the University of Iowa, it was learned prior to 
his arrival that it would be unnecessary as he did not have any burn wounds. (Def. Ex. 
G, p. 40) He also confirmed that had claimant had any burn wounds, standard clinic 
procedure would be to have an evaluation in the burn clinic. Claimant was sent directly 
to the emergency room for evaluation given his lack of burns. Finally, he confirmed that 
neurology was consulted for claimant’s upper and lower extremity symptoms, and that 
claimant was walking, and the upper and lower extremity symptoms had resolved, 
allowing him to be discharged from the emergency department.  
On August 21, 2023, Dr., Schmitz wrote to claimant’s attorney in response to 
some questions posed regarding claimant’s condition. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 4-6) Dr. Schmitz 
noted that claimant first presented with low back pain along with bilateral lower 
extremity weakness. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4) An MRI showed evidence of myelomalacia. Dr. 
Schmitz stated that claimant “had absolutely no evidence of any symptoms prior to the 
work-related incident.” He stated that according to medical literature, electrocution 
episodes can cause or aggravate spinal cord injuries. As such, he opined that claimant 
likely materially aggravated his underlying spinal stenosis and myelomalacia. He further 
explained that when a person is electrocuted, the electricity travels through the body 
passing through neural structures. He stated that the incidence of spinal cord damage 
following electrical injury is in the range of 2 to 5 percent. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 4-5) Given this, 
and the fact that claimant “had absolutely no record of any symptoms preexisting the 
reported work injury in question,” he opined that claimant had a material exacerbation of 
his preexisting spinal condition from the electrocution event on April 14, 2021. (Cl. Ex. 1, 
p. 5) He reiterated his 25 percent impairment rating, and stated the medical treatment 
he provided was medically necessary and the charges were reasonable.  
Defendants asked Robert Broghammer, M.D., to perform a record review and 
provide opinions regarding causation of claimant’s condition. (Def. Ex. I) Dr. 
Broghammer issued a report dated October 2, 2023. (Def. Ex. I, p. 74) He reviewed 
nearly 700 pages of medical records, and provided a detailed review. (Def. Ex. I, pp. 74-
96) Turning to the questions he was asked, he first noted that his medical opinion would 
not change, and he did not believe it would be of any benefit to evaluate claimant in 
person. (Def. Ex. I, p. 97) Rather, he believed the medical records “speak for 
themselves.” With respect to the April 14, 2021 work incident, Dr. Broghammer’s 
diagnosis was a mild electrical shock injury. He opined that the electrical shock injury 
caused a temporary condition with a temporary exacerbation of pre-existing leg 
neuropathic symptoms. He stated that the temporary condition would have had full 
resolution, and noted his opinion was supported by multiple medical records, including 
neurology records, as well as the May 25, 2021 EMG/NCV studies that were normal. 
Dr. Broghammer went on to opine that the treatment provided by Dr. Schmitz 
was not necessitated by the electrocution incident. He noted that myelomalacia is 
softening of the spinal cord due typically to spinal stenosis. He stated that claimant’s 
spinal stenosis was not caused by or materially aggravated by the electrocution 

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 13 
 
 
incident. (Def. Ex. I, p. 98) He took issue with Dr. Schmitz’s statement that 2 to 5 
percent of electrical injuries result in spinal cord injuries, as he stated that claimant was 
not exposed to high voltage. He stated that claimant would have been exposed to about 
110 volts, or typical household current, while high voltage is defined as at least 1,000 
volts. He stated that the medical literature states that high voltage exposure can result 
in spinal cord injury, but claimant was not exposed to high voltage. As such, he did not 
believe the surgery performed by Dr. Schmitz was necessitated by claimant’s electrical 
injury at work.  
Dr. Broghammer also noted that claimant had a “significant preexisting history of 
symptoms” after his first electrical shock in 2000. (Def. Ex. I, p. 99) He noted that 
claimant had been seen at the University of Iowa in 2011 with complaints of discomfort 
in his arms and joints, and had been on gabapentin and Naprosyn for his symptoms. 
The physician at that time noted claimant had increasing numbness and neuropathy-like 
discomfort in his right arm and shoulder over the prior few years. He also noted that in 
2012, claimant was seen at Broadlawns, reporting leg and joint pain, and a prior 
electrocution in 2000. In 2013, claimant was seen for back pain, muscle pain, and 
muscle stiffness. In late 2015 into 2016 claimant saw a chiropractor for left lower back 
pain, as well as prickling and tingling sensations into his left lower extremity. Finally, he 
noted that claimant saw ARNP Goff regularly since 2014, who regularly refilled his 
prescriptions for gabapentin. He also noted that claimant saw ARNP Goff one week 
prior to the April 14, 2021 incident, at which time she prescribed hydrocodone to help 
with claimant’s acute back pain. (Def. Ex. I, pp. 99-100) As such, Dr. Schmitz’s 
statement that claimant had no record of symptoms predating the work injury was 
incorrect. (Def. Ex. I, p. 100) 
In conclusion, Dr. Broghammer disagreed with Dr. Schmitz that claimant had a 
material exacerbation of his preexisting spinal condition due to the electrocution incident 
on April 14, 2021. He stated that claimant had a “largely unremarkable” workup 
following the incident, including neurological evaluations with no recommendations for 
additional treatment. He had a normal EMG/NCV. Finally, the MRI of the thoracic and 
lumbar spine from August 12, 2021, demonstrated a congenitally modest spinal canal, 
meaning it was narrow from birth, which is a preexisting condition that Dr. Broghammer 
opined was not materially aggravated or lit up by the electrocution incident. With respect 
to Dr. Schmitz’s impairment rating, Dr. Broghammer stated it was likely an appropriate 
rating given claimant’s five-level spinal fusion. However, he reiterated that the 
impairment was due to personal and preexisting conditions, and was unrelated to the 
April 14, 2021 work incident. (Def. Ex. I, pp. 100-101) 
On October 20, 2023, Dr. Schmitz authored a letter to claimant’s attorney 
following his review of Dr. Broghammer’s report. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 7) Dr. Schmitz disagreed 
with Dr. Broghammer’s opinions, and noted that there are a number of case reports and 
findings to suggest that a low voltage electrocution can cause spinal cord injury. With 
respect to his preexisting condition, Dr. Schmitz noted that claimant had preexisting 
neuropathic pain, and presented with low back and left leg pain prior to the accident in 
question. However, he stated that claimant was working full duty as a manual laborer 
prior to the electrical injury, and after the injury, he was unable to work. He stated it was 

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 14 
 
 
“readily apparent” that claimant had a material aggravation of his underlying stenosis, 
given that after the electrical injury, he deteriorated to the point of being essentially 
wheelchair-bound prior to surgery. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 7-8) 
Dr. Schmitz reiterated that the medical literature supports low voltage spinal cord 
injuries that can be delayed. He stated that this is “not a debated topic, and is well 
established in the medical literature.” Dr. Schmitz concluded that given the timing of 
claimant’s symptoms and the fact that low voltage electrical injuries causing delayed 
case presentation of paraplegia are well established in the medical literature, he most 
likely had a material aggravation of his underlying thoracic stenosis. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 8) 
None of his opinions changed after reviewing Dr. Broghammer’s report. 
On November 17, 2023, Dr. Broghammer provided a supplemental report, in 
response to Dr. Schmitz’s October 20, 2023 letter. (Def. Ex. I, pp. 104-105) He clarified 
that it was not his opinion that a low voltage injury could not cause a spinal cord injury. 
(Def. Ex. I, p. 106) Rather, given that only 2 to 5 percent of high voltage injuries result in 
spinal cord injury, he does not believe it is probable, to a reasonable degree of medical 
certainty, that claimant’s low voltage injury caused an aggravation of his preexisting 
spinal cord stenosis. He pointed to Dr. Boarini’s opinion as support for his own, as well 
as the opinions of the neurologists who have seen claimant, and the results of 
claimant’s MRI, which showed degenerative issues unassociated with any injury. (Def. 
Ex. I, pp. 106-107) He concluded with an acknowledgement that Dr. Schmitz found at 
least one article referencing a single case study in which a low voltage injury caused a 
spinal cord injury, but noted that this does not rise to the level of medical probability. 
(Def. Ex. I, p. 107) As such, he stood by his original opinions in his October 2, 2023 
report. 
Vocational specialist Phil Davis, M.S., prepared a report dated October 14, 2023, 
regarding claimant’s employability. (Cl. Ex. 5) Mr. Davis reviewed medical records, 
claimant’s FCE report, discovery answers, and conducted a vocational interview with 
claimant. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 28) He noted that claimant had returned to work in a 
maintenance position with the employer, but was only working about 30 to 32 hours per 
week due to his physical limitations. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 31) Prior to the injury, claimant was 
working 40 to 60 hours per week. Additionally, prior to the injury, claimant maintained 
self-employment on the weekends, hauling rock and working on machinery and/or 
vehicles. He is no longer able to do those jobs.  
Mr. Davis concluded that prior to the injury, claimant’s work history generally 
involved unskilled to skilled manual labor. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 32) This type of work typically 
requires the physical ability to perform work in the range of medium to very heavy 
physical demand. Given the permanent restrictions set forth in the FCE, claimant is now 
limited to the light physical demand level. As such, claimant is physically unable to 
perform all of the essential functions to the level of which he was prior to the injury.  
In reviewing claimant’s past employment, Mr. Davis found that all of his past 
employment involved skilled employment as a maintenance worker and truck/dump 
truck driver. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 33) Based on the FCE, he concluded that claimant is now 100 

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 15 
 
 
percent precluded from self-employment as a dump truck driver. Additionally, without 
the reduced work hours and assistance being provided by his current employer, Mr. 
Davis opined that claimant would not be able to perform all the essential functions of his 
current job.  
On November 3, 2023, claimant had an independent psychiatric evaluation with 
Kunal Patra, M.D. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 34) Dr. Patra’s report is dated November 17, 2023. (Cl. 
Ex. 6, p. 64) Dr. Patra interviewed claimant and his wife, and reviewed extensive 
medical records and provided a detailed summary. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 34-44) Dr. Patra noted 
that prior to the electrical injury, claimant was a “jack of all trades,” and was responsible 
for fixing almost anything that was broken at work. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 44) However, since the 
electrical injury, he had experienced a variety of health issues with his back, right upper 
and lower extremities, and fatigue, and was barely managing to work 32 hours per 
week. He also noted that unlike in the past, he now felt “spent” if he had a busy day at 
work.  
Claimant described his symptoms after the electrical injury as including pinching 
sensations in his back, lack of sensation in his right upper and lower extremities, 
difficulty bending and squatting, dragging his right foot, and difficulty performing day to 
day activities and focusing on tasks. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 45) He stated that he did not have any 
of those symptoms prior to the injury. Claimant described his condition as continuing to 
deteriorate until he was finally able to get surgery in December 2021. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 45-
46) He reported that he started struggling with significant depression and anxiety within 
a few months of the injury, but did not want to accept it at first. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 46) It 
continued to worsen. Claimant said that after surgery, he started to have muscle 
spasms in his back, and continued to have poor sensation in his right leg and dragged 
his foot around, did not have sensation in his right hand, and had difficulty lying in bed. 
He explained that Dr. Schmitz “reluctantly” released him to full duty work at his own 
request, and that he continued to struggle with symptoms and aggravations after 
working an 8-hour shift.  
Claimant stated that during this entire process, he felt more demoralized and 
defeated because of his physical health issues from the electrical injury. He also 
described how everything requires more mental effort since the injury, as if his brain is 
not processing information quickly enough. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 46-47) He also explained that 
prior to surgery, there were a few times he thought about ending his life, and it was hard 
for him to accept the loss of his capabilities in so many ways following the electrical 
injury. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 47) 
Dr. Patra administered several psychiatric tests, including a validity test. (Cl. Ex. 
6, pp. 51-54) The validity tests were characteristic of someone with a genuine disorder 
who is not making any effort to overstate their symptoms. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 53) On 
supplemental validity exams, claimant’s response pattern suggested that he likely did 
not attempt to feign his symptoms. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 54) Based on his review of the records, 
his examination of claimant, and review of his clinical testing, Dr. Patra’s diagnosis of 
claimant’s psychiatric condition related to the electrical injury was major depressive 

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 16 
 
 
disorder, single episode, moderate, with anxious distress. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 55-58) He 
opined that the electrical injury at work was a substantial causal factor in claimant 
developing major depressive disorder with anxious distress as well. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 58-
60) He noted that claimant did not have any preexisting psychiatric conditions before 
the work injury. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 61)  
With respect to restrictions, Dr. Patra would not restrict claimant from his job, as 
working at the nursing facility gives him meaning and purpose. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 61) He felt 
that restricting claimant from work would aggravate his depression. However, he listed 
several areas in which he would expect claimant to have problems, including memory, 
decision making, and following instructions, among other things. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 61-62) 
He placed claimant at MMI for his psychiatric diagnosis as of November 3, 2023. (Cl. 
Ex. 6, p. 62) He opined that claimant’s psychiatric condition was permanent, and 
provided an impairment rating using the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides. He noted the 
five category scale provided in the Guides, and assigned claimant to class 3 on 
activities of daily living, class 4 on social functioning, class 3 on concentration, 
persistence, and pace, and class 3 on adaptation to competitive and dynamic work 
environment. Based on that, he opined claimant fell into the moderate level of 
impairment.  
Dr. Patra noted that the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides does not provide 
numerical impairment for mental health. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 62-63) He looked to the Second 
Edition for guidance, and noted the corresponding impairment rating for moderate 
impairment fell between 25 and 50 percent. Looking at claimant’s current presentation, 
he assigned 45 percent permanent impairment of the whole person related to the April 
14, 2021 injury. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 63) With respect to future treatment, he recommended 
claimant have the flexibility to return for individual psychotherapy with Dr. Steinmann or 
another psychologist. He felt this was important since his physical disabilities, pain, and 
limitations were permanent, and those are the major factors behind his depression and 
anxiety.  
Claimant testified that since returning to work after his surgery, he has continued 
to work reduced hours. (Tr., p. 39) Shortly before hearing, he was bumped back up to 
40 hours per week, but he does not get the same overtime as he did before the injury 
and is not earning as much as before. (Tr., p. 49) When he comes home at the end of 
the workday, he is sore, and he testified he basically goes home and takes a muscle 
relaxer, oxycodone, and gabapentin and sits in a heated chair. He has purchased the 
heated chair and a new adjustable bed since the injury. (Tr., pp. 39-40) He is no longer 
able to do the side work that he performed prior to the electrical injury, and sold his 
dump truck. (Tr., pp. 40-41) He testified that without his son’s help at work, he would not 
be able to do his job. (Tr., p. 48) He continues to experience depression and anxiety 
due to his inability to do everything he used to do. (Tr., pp. 49-51) 
Claimant called Marsha Graves, Joseph Graves, Brandy Flanders, Stephanie 
Groenendyk, Jenice Southwick, and Tara Anderson as witnesses. Marsha Graves is 
claimant’s wife. (Tr., p. 101) Joseph Graves is claimant’s son who works with him. (Tr., 

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 17 
 
 
pp. 109-110) Tara Anderson is claimant’s daughter. (Tr., p. 139) The other three 
witnesses are all coworkers of claimant. (Tr., pp. 121; 126; 133) All of the witnesses 
were sequestered prior to their own testimony. (Tr., p. 8) Each witness independently 
testified to the changes in claimant’s physical and mental condition since the electrical 
injury. (Tr., pp. 103-107; 111-117; 122-124; 129-130; 135-137; 139-143) Each one 
described claimant as someone who was always working and always doing things prior 
to the electrical injury. Each witness described how that had changed since the injury, in 
that claimant physically is no longer capable of doing as much. Mentally, each witness 
noted changes in his demeanor as well. In fact, all three of claimant’s coworkers who 
testified independently described claimant as a “happy-go-lucky” guy before the 
electrical injury. (Tr., pp. 122-123; 130; 137) However, since the injury, he does not 
smile or joke around as much, and he struggles to do things. Every witness confirmed 
the changes in claimant’s physical abilities and mental condition since the electrical 
injury occurred.  
Defendants accepted liability for the electrocution, but have denied it caused 
permanent disability. Defendants deny that claimant’s spinal condition and surgery was 
caused by and/or materially aggravated by the electrical injury, and deny the mental 
health claim. Defendants argue that claimant is not credible, that Dr. Schmitz’s opinions 
are deficient, and the greater weight of evidence supports their position. 
With respect to claimant’s credibility, I found him to be a very credible witness. 
There was nothing about his demeanor at the time of hearing that gave me reason to 
doubt his veracity. Defendants point to Dr. Schmitz’s records, in which claimant denied 
prior symptoms, despite having had some prior treatment for back and neck pain, as 
well as prior neuropathic symptoms and a long-standing prescription for gabapentin. 
However, when asked about this at hearing, claimant clarified that he did not have the 
same severe pain prior to the electrical injury. (Tr., p. 95) He testified that he 
occasionally treated for back pain prior to the electrical injury, but it was not equivalent 
to the severe pain he experienced after the electrical injury. (Tr., pp. 94-97) The medical 
records support claimant’s testimony, as he never described his pain level at an 8 or 9 
out of 10 prior to the electrical injury. Additionally, he was able to continue working over 
40 hours per week for the employer, as well as working additional side jobs in evenings 
and on the weekends. There is nothing to indicate claimant intended to deceive Dr. 
Schmitz or any other health care provider about his prior condition. There is no 
evidence that claimant was experiencing the same severe and debilitating symptoms 
prior to the electrical injury on April 14, 2021.  
Defendants also point to the opinions of Dr. Boarini and Dr. Broghammer, as well 
as Dr. Gutmann, to support their denial. Dr. Gutmann does not address whether the 
electrical injury could have aggravated claimant’s underlying condition. He only states 
that it would not have caused the changes on the MRI.  
Neither Dr. Boarini nor Dr. Broghammer examined claimant in person. Both 
conducted records reviews only. The main problem with both reports is that neither 
doctor provides any explanation for why claimant’s physical condition deteriorated so 
severely following the electrical injury if that incident did not materially aggravate his 

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 18 
 
 
condition. There is no explanation anywhere in the record as to what else could have 
caused claimant to go from working well over 40 hours per week, plus side jobs on 
weekends, to being “essentially wheelchair-bound” in a matter of months. Given that 
neither doctor examined claimant and saw his actual physical condition, it is difficult to 
accept their opinions that the electrical injury did not make his preexisting condition 
worse.  
To the contrary, Dr. Schmitz saw claimant multiple times, and actually performed 
surgery on his spine. Dr. Schmitz is far more familiar with claimant’s condition, and had 
many opportunities to evaluate his physical abilities. With respect to claimant’s 
preexisting condition, despite some intermittent care for back pain in the past, claimant 
did not have the same level of severe symptoms prior to the 2021 electrical incident. Dr. 
Schmitz appears to be aware of claimant’s prior treatment for back pain and 
neuropathic pain by at least October 20, 2023. However, he noted that claimant was 
able to work full duty as a manual laborer before the electrical incident. After the 
incident, claimant’s pain became severe, and his condition continued to deteriorate to 
the point of needing a wheelchair. I find Dr. Schmitz’s opinions to be more reliable. 
There is no other reasonable explanation for the severe deterioration of claimant’s 
underlying condition, which ultimately resulted in surgery. 
In addition to the medical evidence, six witnesses testified to claimant’s level of 
activity prior to the electrical injury, and the changes in his physical abilities after. Each 
of those witnesses was equally credible and their testimony was entirely consistent 
across the board. The same is true regarding claimant’s mental state before and after 
the injury. When viewing the evidence as a whole in the light most favorable to claimant, 
I find it more likely than not that the electrical injury on April 14, 2021 resulted in a 
material aggravation of claimant’s preexisting spinal stenosis.  
With respect to the mental health claim, there are no medical opinions in the 
record contrary to those of Dr. Steinmann and Dr. Patra. I find claimant’s diagnosed 
depression with anxiety is a sequela of the physical injury.   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the 
course of the employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); 
Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” 
refer to the cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, 
place, and circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 
(Iowa 1995). An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 19 
 
 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 908, 76 N.W.2d 756, 760-61 
(1956).  If the claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially 
aggravated, accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant 
is entitled to recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 135, 115 N.W.2d 
812, 815 (1962); Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369,374-75,  112 
N.W.2d 299, 302 (1961). 
In this case, defendants accepted liability for the electrocution, but have denied it 
caused permanent disability. Defendants deny that claimant’s spinal condition and 
surgery was caused by and/or materially aggravated by the electrical injury, and deny 
the mental health claim. Defendants argue that claimant is not credible, that Dr. 
Schmitz’s opinions are deficient, and the greater weight of evidence supports their 
position. 
I found claimant to be a credible witness, as explained above, and I found Dr. 
Schmitz’s opinions to be the most credible. As such, I found that the electrical injury on 
April 14, 2021, resulted in a material aggravation of claimant’s preexisting spinal 
stenosis. Therefore, defendants are responsible for the medical treatment claimant 
received related to that condition, including the surgery performed by Dr. Schmitz. I 

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 20 
 
 
further found claimant’s diagnosed depression to be sequelae of the physical injury. As 
such, defendants are responsible for medical treatment related to that condition as well, 
including any ongoing psychotherapy claimant may be receiving. 
The parties stipulated that claimant was off work from December 7, 2021 through 
March 12, 2022. Medical records indicate he was off work related to his spinal surgery 
during this time. As such, claimant is entitled to healing period benefits for this time. 
The next issue to determine is the extent of permanent disability. The parties 
stipulated that claimant sustained industrial disability should permanent disability be 
awarded. Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 258 
N.W. 899, 902 (Iowa 1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the Legislature intended 
the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning capacity and not a 
mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of the total physical 
and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963); Barton 
v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660, 663 (1961). 
Claimant continues to work for the defendant employer, but does not work as 
much overtime and is not earning the same as he was prior to the injury. In addition, he 
is no longer able to work his side jobs. Claimant testified that he would not be able to 
continue in his position with the employer if he were not being accommodated by being 
allowed to work with his son. The records support that testimony, as claimant had a 
valid FCE that placed him in the light work category. Mr. Davis provided a vocational 
analysis and found claimant 100 percent precluded from his prior self-employment as a 
dump truck driver, and agreed he would not be able to continue in his current position 
were it not for his accommodations. Given all of the evidence in the record, I find 
claimant is entitled to 60 percent industrial disability, which is equal to 300 weeks of 
benefits. 
Because claimant’s injury arose out of and in the course of employment, 
defendants are responsible for all medical expenses and milage incurred in claimant’s 
treatment. Under Iowa law, once defendants denied compensability for claimant’s 
alleged injuries, it lost the right to choose the medical providers for that care during the 
period of denial. “[T]he employer has no right to choose the medical care when 
compensability is contested.” Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 
N.W.2d 193, 204 (Iowa 2010). Further, when compensability is contested, “the employer 
cannot assert an authorization defense in response to a subsequent claim by the 
employee for the expenses of the alternate medical care.” R. R. Donnelly & Sons v. 
Barnett, 670 N.W.2d at 197-198 (Iowa 2003). As such, defendants are responsible for 

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 21 
 
 
all medical care claimant has received related to the work injury. This includes the cost 
of the FCE, which was ordered by Dr. Schmitz. (Cl. Ex. 9, p. 76) 
Claimant has submitted a summary of mileage and medical expenses for which 
he seeks reimbursement. (Cl. Exs. 8, 10-11) Claimant is not entitled to reimbursement 
for medical bills unless claimant shows that they were paid from his own funds. See 
Caylor v. Employers Mutual Casualty Co., 337 N.W.2d 890 (Iowa Ct. App. 1983). 
Otherwise, claimant is entitled only to an order directing the responsible defendants to 
make such payments directly to the provider. See Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 
(Iowa 1988). Where medical payments are made from a plan to which the employer did 
not contribute, the claimant is entitled to a direct payment. Midwest Ambulance Service 
v. Ruud, 754 N.W.2d 860, 867-68 (Iowa 2008) (“We therefore hold that the 
commissioner did not err in ordering direct payment to the claimant for past medical 
expenses paid through insurance coverage obtained by the claimant independent of 
any employer contribution.”) See also: Carl A. Nelson & Co. v. Sloan, 873 N.W.2d 552 
(Iowa Ct. App. 2015) (Table) 2015 WL 7574232 15-0323. 
The final issues to determine are whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement 
of his independent psychiatric evaluation with Dr. Patra under Iowa Code section 85.39, 
and taxation of costs. Iowa Code section 85.39(2) states, in relevant part: 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and 
upon delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its 
insurance carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, 
and reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for the 
examination.  
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has noted that the Iowa 
Supreme Court adopted a strict and literal interpretation of Iowa Code section 85.39 in 
Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015) 
(hereinafter “DART”). See Cortez v. Tyson Fresh Meats. Inc., File No. 5044716 (Appeal 
December 2015). If an injured worker wants to be reimbursed for the expenses 
associated with a disability evaluation by a physician selected by the worker, the 
process established by the legislature must be followed. This process permits the 
employer, who must pay the benefits, to make the initial arrangements for the 
evaluation and only allows the employee to obtain an independent evaluation at the 
employer’s expense if dissatisfied with the evaluation arranged by the employer. DART, 
867 N.W.2d at 847 (citing Iowa Code § 85.39). This includes an employer-chosen 
physician’s opinion that there was no causation, as such an opinion is tantamount to a 
zero percent impairment rating. Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 966 N.W. 2d. 
326 (Iowa Ct. App., 2021). 
In this case, no employer-retained physician evaluated claimant’s mental health. 
Claimant has failed to establish entitlement to reimbursement of his independent 

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 22 
 
 
psychiatric evaluation with Dr. Patra under Iowa Code section 85.39. Id. at 844 (“An 
employer, however, is not obligated to pay for an evaluation obtained by an employee 
outside the statutory process.”)   
That being said, the Supreme Court in DART noted that in cases where Iowa 
Code section 85.39 is not triggered to allow for reimbursement of an IME, a claimant 
can still be reimbursed at hearing for the costs associated with the preparation of the 
written report as a cost under rule 876 IAC 4.33. DART, 867 N.W.2d at 846-847. 
Assessment of costs is a discretionary function of this agency. Iowa Code § 10A.328. 
Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers’ 
compensation commissioner hearing the case. 876 IAC 4.33. 
Dr. Patra provided an itemized bill for his evaluation, which shows $2,383.33 of 
his total fee was related to preparing the written report. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 65) As such, I find 
that the cost of the report is reimbursable pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33. With respect to the 
remainder of claimant’s requested costs, I find that claimant was generally successful in 
his claim, and an award of additional costs is appropriate. I exercise my discretion and 
award claimant the cost of the filing fee in the amount of $100.00, deposition costs in 
the amount of $232.65, and the cost of Phil Davis’s vocational report in the amount of 
$2,347.30. (Cl. Ex. 9) 
The last item claimant seeks as a cost is $650.00 for Dr. Schmitz’s impairment 
rating. I find this item is reimbursable under Iowa Code section 85.39. Defendants 
sought an opinion from Dr. Boarini regarding causation, and his report is dated 
December 3, 2021. An opinion finding no causation is tantamount to a zero percent 
impairment rating. See Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, No. 20-1206, 2021 WL 
3890603, at *4-5 (Iowa Ct. App. 2021). As such, claimant is entitled to reimbursement 
for Dr. Schmitz’s later impairment rating under section 85.39. 
ORDER 
 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
All benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of eight hundred forty and 99/100 
dollars ($840.99). 
 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant healing period benefits from December 7, 2021 
through March 12, 2022. 
 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant three hundred (300) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits, commencing on the stipulated date of October 17, 2022. 
 
 
Defendants shall be entitled to a credit for all permanent partial disability benefits 
previously paid, as stipulated. 
 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 

GRAVES V. AMERICAN HEALTHCARE MGMT. 
Page 23 
 
 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.  
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for medical mileage and medical expenses 
as outlined in this decision. 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant six hundred fifty and 00/100 dollars 
($650.00) for Dr. Schmitz’s impairment rating pursuant to Iowa Code 85.39. 
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the total amount of five thousand 
sixty-three and 28/100 dollars ($5,063.28), as itemized above. 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7 
Signed and filed this __7th __ day of November, 2024. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Trevor Hook (via WCES) 
 
Michael Roling(via WCES) 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
 
