Case Number: 1653797.01
Case Title:  BOONE, GLORIA V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Boone Gloria-1653797.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
GLORIA BOONE, 
 
Claimant, 
 
 
vs. 
 
LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC., 
 
 
File No.  1653797.01 
 
Employer, 
 
and  
 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE CO. OF 
N. AMERICA, 
      
           Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
 
          ARBITRATION 
DECISION 
 
Head Notes:  1108.50, 1402.40. 1803.1,     
2907 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Gloria Boone, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Lennox Industries, Inc., employer, and Indemnity Insurance 
Company, Inc., insurance carrier, as defendants.  Hearing was held on October 13, 
2020.  This case was scheduled to be an in-person hearing occurring in Des Moines.  
However, due to the outbreak of a pandemic in Iowa, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner ordered all hearings to occur via video means using CourtCall.  
Accordingly, this case proceeded to a live video hearing via CourtCall with all parties 
and the court reporter also appearing remotely.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision, and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Claimant, Gloria Boone was the only witness to testify live at trial.  The 
evidentiary record also includes Joint Exhibits 1-6, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-5, and 
Defendant’s Exhibits A-D.  All exhibits were received without objection.  The evidentiary 
record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.       
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on November 2, 2020, at which time 
the case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Mar-04  14:54:21     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BOONE V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant’s injury should be compensated as a “shoulder” under Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(n) or as an unscheduled injury pursuant to section 
85.34(2)(v). 
 
2. Assessment of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant, Gloria Boone, was 65 years old at the time of the hearing.  She 
sustained an admitted injury on September 11, 2018, while working at Lennox 
Industries, Inc.  Gloria began working in Marshalltown, Iowa at Lennox in 2001 and was 
still employed there at the time of the hearing.   
In July of 2018, a tornado tore through Marshalltown.  As a result of the tornado, 
the Lennox plant was damaged and the plant was closed for a period of time.  When the 
employees were called back to work after the tornado, some employees were asked to 
perform jobs that were different from their regular jobs.  (Testimony) 
On September 11, 2018, Gloria was assigned to operate a motorized tugger to 
move materials around the plant.  While Gloria was making a U-turn, Gloria fell off the 
tugger onto her right shoulder.  Gloria could not move her right arm.  (Testimony; JE1, 
p. 5)   
Gloria’s employer drove her to the local emergency room at UnityPoint Health 
where she was examined.  X-rays revealed a displaced fracture involving the humeral 
neck and greater tuberosity.  Gloria was discharged with a sling and with instructions to 
follow-up with an orthopedic doctor.  She was restricted to no use of right arm.  (JE1, p. 
5; JE3)  
On September 12, 2018, Gloria saw Steven A. Aviles, M.D. at Iowa Ortho.  Dr. 
Aviles’ assessment included closed displaced fracture of proximal end of right humerus.  
He felt Gloria would not do well with conservative care.  Given the four-part fracture, he 
recommended, and Gloria agreed to, a hemiarthroplasty.  (JE4, pp. 13-16) 
On September 21, 2018, Dr. Aviles performed a right shoulder hemiarthroplasty 
and rotator cuff repair surgery.  (JE5, p. 48)  He removed the fractured humeral head 
and replaced it with a metal humeral head.  (JE5, pp. 48-50) 
Dr. Aviles issued a work status report.  He restricted Gloria from work for 5 days 
after the surgery.  Once she returned to work, Gloria was restricted to no use of her 
right upper extremity except typing and writing with her right hand.  (JE4, p. 17) 

BOONE V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 3 
 
Gloria returned to see Dr. Aviles on October 3, 2018.  She reported the surgery 
improved her pain.  Dr. Aviles noted that she had fairly dense postoperative radial nerve 
palsy.  Gloria was to return in four weeks.  In the meantime, she was restricted to no 
use of her right arm.  (JE4, pp. 19-21) 
Gloria continued to follow-up with Dr. Aviles.  (JE4)  On November 19, 2018, Dr. 
Aviles authored a missive.  He opined that the September 11, 2018, injury caused the 
need for Gloria’s operation.  Dr. Aviles did not believe that there was any preexisting 
condition that could have affected the need for further treatment.  He explained that 
Gloria had a fall that sustained a proximal humerus fracture that had displaced.  He 
opined that the fall was the cause of her condition.  (JE4, p. 24)   
On January 21, 2019, Gloria returned to Iowa Ortho.  At the request of UnityPoint 
she he saw Scott M. Shumway, M.D.  Gloria reported that on January 16, 2019, she fell 
in her shower.  She landed on her right hand and developed pain and swelling along the 
dorsal ulnar aspect of the hand.  X-rays at UnityPoint revealed a nondisplaced fracture 
involving the shaft of the right 5th metacarpal.  UnityPoint gave her a thumb spica splint 
and referred her to Dr. Shumway for further evaluation.  Dr. Shumway placed her in a 
fiberglass ulnar gutter splint.  (JE4, pp. 29-31) 
On January 23, 2019, Gloria returned to see Dr. Aviles. She reported that her 
pain level was 0 and there was no radiation.  She continued to be stiff.  Dr. Aviles 
encouraged her to continue to work on her motion and strength.  She was restricted to 0 
(zero) pound lifting restriction given her broken hand.  He also restricted her to no work 
above shoulder level.  (JE4, pp. 32-34) 
Dr. Aviles placed Gloria at maximum medical improvement (MMI) as of March 6, 
2019.  He utilized the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides and assigned 8 percent 
impairment of the upper extremity.  He noted that her restrictions included a 25-pound 
lifting restriction and that she should avoid work above shoulder level.  He felt that she 
did not require any additional treatment.  (JE4, p. 47) 
On November 25, 2019, at the request of her attorney, Gloria was seen for an 
IME by Mark B. Kirkland, D.O.  She reported weakness of her right upper extremity.  
She also complained of some popping in her neck and occasional neck pain.  At the 
time of the IME she had recently had a stent placed so she had not been working.  Dr. 
Kirkland’s impressions included right shoulder 4-part head splitting fracture of the 
humeral head; rotator cuff tear; osteoarthritis of the right acromioclavicular joint; 
resolved radial nerve palsy on the right; and status post right shoulder hemiarthroplasty 
and rotator cuff repair.  Dr. Kirkland felt that her right shoulder condition and radial nerve 
palsy were causally related to the September 11, 2018, injury at Lennox.  He placed 
Gloria at MMI as of March 6, 2019.  Dr. Kirkland utilized the 5th Edition of the AMA 
Guides to assign permanent impairment.  He assigned 16 percent impairment to her 
right upper extremity secondary to range of motion loss and 24 percent to the right 
upper extremity secondary to implant.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-5) 

BOONE V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 4 
 
On July 22, 2020, Dr. Aviles authored a missive to defendants.  He stood by his 
prior 8 percent upper extremity permanent impairment rating.  Additionally, Dr. Aviles 
stated: 
   On September 21, 2018, I performed a right shoulder hemiarthroplasty 
and rotator cuff repair.  My diagnosis left head splitting proximal humerus 
fracture and rotator cuff tear at the level of the humerus.  The site of Ms. 
Boone’s injury was at the level of the shoulder joint and distal on the arm 
side.  There was no portion of the surgery that was proximal or medial to 
the shoulder joint on the neck side.  There was no structural damage or 
injury that was proximal to the glenohumeral joint or on the neck side.  In 
the hemiarthroplasty, I repaired Ms. Boone’s humerus and rotator cuff at 
the level of the humerus.  The surgery I performed was at the level of the 
shoulder joint and distal to it.  There was no portion of the surgery that 
was proximal to the glenohumeral joint or on the neck side.  The letter 
addresses how I disagreed with Dr. Kirkland’s permanent impairment 
rating of 36% to the upper extremity.  I provided an impairment rating of 
8%, which I feel is accurate according to the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 5th Edition.  Furthermore, I also 
disagree with Dr. Kirkland’s inclusion of a 24% impairment of the upper 
extremity as a result of implant arthroplasty.  Table 16-27 of the AMA 
Guides provides a 24% upper extremity impairment rating for a total 
shoulder arthroplasty, which is a procedure that is used for a very different 
reason; this is not a procedure utilized for fracture.  I performed a 
hemiarthroplasty for fracture, which has a very different impairment.  
Hemiarthroplasty is not total shoulder replacement.  Total shoulder 
replacement incorporates replacement of the glenoid or socket side, as 
well as the humerus or the ball side.  Hemiarthroplasty only performs 
surgery on the ball side, once again, at the level or distal to the 
glenohumeral joint.  It should be noted that in other sections of Table 16-
27, and specifically as it pertains to the wrist replacement, that they make 
allowments for other forms of arthroplasty.  This is not seen in the 
shoulder replacement section, as it only accounts for a total shoulder 
arthroplasty. 
(Def. Ex. A, p. 2)     
On September 8, 2020, Dr. Kirkland issued a letter in reply to a rebuttal report 
from Dr. Aviles.  Dr. Kirkland stated that he assigned a 24 percent rating based on 
Table 16-27 of the Guides.  Dr. Kirkland felt that the rating was very reasonable based 
on the significant injury and treatment.  Dr. Kirkland also noted that: 
   The rotator cuff tendon is formed from supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and 
teres minor muscles.  These tendons are inserted on the greater 
tuberosity.  The tendons do not contract themselves.  They need the 
contraction of the muscles.  These muscles are proximal to the 

BOONE V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 5 
 
glenohumeral joint and thus converts to the whole body.  This is described 
as the muscle tendon unit. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 6) 
With regard to the right shoulder injury sustained by Gloria, I find the diagnosis of 
Dr. Aviles to carry great weight.  He is the doctor who performed the surgery in this case 
and has the greatest personal knowledge of the exact extent of Gloria’s physical 
injuries.  I find that as the result of the work injury Gloria sustained a left head splitting 
proximal humerus fracture and rotator cuff tear at the level of the humerus.  Based on 
the opinion of Dr. Aviles, I find that there was no portion of the surgery that was 
proximal to the glenohumeral joint.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 2) 
The parties have stipulated that Gloria sustained permanent disability as the 
result of the September 11, 2018, work injury.  There is a dispute regarding the amount 
of permanent partial disability sustained by Gloria.  Claimant contends that the 36 
percent upper extremity impairment rating assigned by Dr. Kirkland is the more 
appropriate rating.  Defendants argue that the 8 percent upper extremity impairment 
rating assigned by Dr. Aviles is the appropriate rating.     
Dr. Aviles stated, “Based on the various motion restrictions as seen in Figure 16-
40 and 16-46, I do feel that she requires a permanent impairment rating.”  (Def. Ex. A, 
p. 1)  He assigned 8 percent upper extremity impairment.  To arrive at this rating, Dr. 
Aviles utilized the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 5th Edition.  
Id. 
In November of 2019, Dr. Kirkland assigned 16 percent impairment to her right 
upper extremity secondary to range of motion loss.  He stated that these impairment 
values were obtained from Figure 16-40, 16-43, and 16-46 of the AMA Guides 5th 
Edition.  Dr. Kirkland assigned an additional 24 percent impairment to the right upper 
extremity secondary to implant arthroplasty.  He obtained this rating from Table 16-27 of 
the Guides.  He combined those two ratings for a total of 36 percent impairment of the 
right upper extremity.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 4-5) 
In July of 2020, Dr. Aviles specifically stated that he disagreed with Dr. Kirkland’s 
rating of 36 percent to the upper extremity.  He disagreed with Dr. Kirkland’s inclusion of 
24 percent impairment of the upper extremity as the result of the implant arthroplasty.  
Dr. Kirkland utilized Table 16-27.  Dr. Aviles states,  
   Table 16-27 of the AMA Guides, provides a 24% upper extremity 
impairment rating for a total shoulder arthroplasty, which is a procedure 
that is used for a very different reason; this is not a procedure utilized for 
fracture.  I performed a hemiarthroplasty for fracture, which has a very 
different impairment.  Hemiarthroplasty is not total shoulder replacement.  
Total shoulder replacement incorporates replacement of the glenoid or 
socket side, as well as the humerus or the ball side.  Hemiarthroplasty 
only performs surgery on the ball side, once again, at the level or distal to 

BOONE V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 6 
 
the glenohumeral joint.  It should be noted that in other sections of Table 
16-27, and specifically as it pertains to the wrist replacement, that they 
make allowments for other forms of arthroplasty.  This is not seen in the 
shoulder replacement section, as it only accounts for a total shoulder 
arthroplasty. 
(Def. Ex. A, p. 2) 
In September of 2020, Dr. Kirkland stood by his prior impairment rating. In 
support of his impairment rating Dr. Kirkland stated, “This impairment rating is very 
reasonable based on the significant injury and treatment.”  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 6).   
I find that Dr. Aviles’ explanation for why he disagrees with the rating of Dr. 
Kirkland is based on the AMA Guides.  When Dr. Kirkland was given the opportunity to 
rebut Dr. Aviles’ criticism of his rating, Dr. Kirkland replied by stating he felt his rating 
was very reasonable given her significant injury and treatment.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 6) 
However, Dr. Kirkland did not support his feeling that his rating was reasonable with any 
rebutting rationale or citation to the AMA Guides.  Thus, I find that Dr. Aviles’ rating was 
determined by utilizing The Guides and is the appropriate rating in this case.  I find 
Gloria has sustained 8 percent impairment of the right upper extremity.    
 
Claimant is seeking an assessment of costs.  Costs are to be assessed at the 
discretion of the hearing deputy or the Commissioner.  I find that claimant was generally 
not successful in her case.  Therefore, I exercise my discretion to not assess costs 
against the defendants.  Each side shall bear their own costs.         
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 

BOONE V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 7 
 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
The parties have stipulated that Ms. Boone sustained a work injury on 
September 11, 2018, which resulted in permanent disability.  The central dispute in this 
case is whether her injury should be compensated as a “shoulder” injury under Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(n) or as an unscheduled injury under section 85.34(v). 
Claimant’s post-hearing brief states:  “[w]hile the Commissioner’s recent decision 
in Chavez and Deng (File Nos. 5066270 and 5061883) may cast doubt on Gloria’s 
contention that her shoulder injury is a body as a whole injury, there should be no 
question that Gloria’s impairment to her right shoulder exceeds the minimal 8% rating 
assigned by Dr. Aviles. . .”  (Claimant’s Brief, p. 4)  Thus, claimant’s argument centers 
on which impairment rating should be used to compensate the claimant.  Defendants 
argue that according to the Deng decision, claimant’s injury should be compensated as 
a “shoulder” under 85.34(n).  Thus, it appears the parties agree that Deng is controlling 
in this case.     
In 2017 the Iowa Legislature amended Iowa Code section 85.34.  Before the 
2017 changes, shoulder injuries were considered proximal to the arm and compensated 
as a body as a whole injury, pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(u).  Thus, a 
shoulder injury was compensated as an unscheduled injury, and based on industrial 
disability.  See Alm v. Morris Barick Cattle Co., 240 Iowa 1174, 38 N.W.2d 161(1949).  
One of the changes made to Iowa Code section 85.34 in 2017, dealt with the shoulder.  
Through the change, the legislature added the shoulder to the list of scheduled 
members.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) states:  “[f]or the loss of a shoulder, weekly 
compensation during four hundred weeks.”  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n)(2018).  This 
amendment went into effect on July 1, 2018.  It should be noted that the legislature did 
not define the term “shoulder.”    
The Iowa Supreme Court has said that this agency does not have the authority to 
interpret worker’s compensation statutes.  See Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, LLC, 878 
N.W.2d 759, 770 (Iowa 2016).  However, the agency is the front-line in interpreting 
recently amended statutes.  The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has 
issued several decisions regarding the amended Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) which 
provide agency precedent for the shoulder amendment.  See Deng v. Farmland Foods, 
Inc., File No. 5061883 (App. September 29, 2020); Chavez v. MS Technology, LLC, File 
No. 5066270 (App. September 30, 2020); Smidt v. JKB Restaurants, LC, File No. 
5067766 (App. December 11, 2020).        
The commissioner determined that under Iowa Code section 85.34(n), the 
“shoulder” is not limited to the glenohumeral joint.  The commissioner also determined 
that the muscles that make up the rotator cuff are considered part of the “shoulder.”  

BOONE V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 8 
 
Deng v. Farmland Foods, Inc., File No. 5061883 (App. September. 29, 2020).  The 
commissioner stated: 
   Given the entwinement of the glenohumeral joint and the muscles that 
make up the rotator cuff, including the infraspinatus, and the importance of 
the rotator cuff to the function of the joint, I find the muscles that make up 
the rotator cuff are included within the definition of ‘shoulder’ under section 
85.34(2)(n).   
Deng at 11. 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that as the result of the 
September 11, 2018, work injury, Gloria sustained a left head-splitting proximal 
humerus fracture and rotator cuff tear at the level of the humerus to her right shoulder.  
Thus, I conclude, according to agency precedent, Gloria’s injury is to be compensated 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(n).   
As noted, section 85.34(n) provides that permanent partial disability benefits for 
injuries to the shoulder are based on a percentage of four hundred weeks.  Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(x) states: 
In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “u” . . . the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of 
permanent shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the worker’s compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A.  
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x)(2018).   
 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that Dr. Aviles arrived at his 
impairment rating by utilizing The Guides and is the appropriate rating in this case.  I 
adopt the impairment rating as set forth by Dr. Aviles.  Thus, I find Gloria has sustained 
8 percent impairment to her right upper extremity.  
Permanent partial disability compensation for the shoulder shall be paid based 
on a maximum of 400 weeks.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n).  Having adopted Dr. 
Aviles’ 8 percent upper extremity impairment rating, I find claimant has shown by a 
preponderance of the evidence that she is entitled to receive 32 weeks of PPD benefits.    
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of six hundred fifty and 
27/100 dollars ($650.27).   

BOONE V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 9 
 
Defendants are responsible for 32 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits. 
Defendants shall be entitled to credit for all weekly benefits paid to date.  In the 
hearing report the parties stipulated that prior to the hearing defendants paid 32 weeks 
of compensation at the stipulated rate.  Thus, defendants do not owe any additional 
PPD benefits as the result of this proceeding.  Claimant shall take nothing further from 
this proceeding.   
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this ___4th____ day of March, 2021. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
James Ballard (via WCES) 
Gregory Michael Taylor (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 
days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
       ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
