Case Number: 20014133.01
Case Title:  BROWN, WILLIAM V. ESTES EXPRESS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Brown William-20014133.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
WILLIAM BROWN, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
   File No. 20014133.01 
 
 
  :  
 
 
vs. 
 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
ESTES EXPRESS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
and 
 
  :                           
 
 
  : 
NEW HAMPSHIRE INSURANCE CO., 
  :  
 
 
  :                        
 
Insurance Carrier,  
  : 
Headnotes: 1402.40; 1803; 2907; 3001 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
William Brown, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against Estes Express Lines, 
Inc., as the employer, and New Hampshire Insurance Company as its workers' 
compensation insurance carrier. This case came before the undersigned for an arbitration 
hearing on March 29, 2023.   
 
Pursuant to an order from the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this 
case was heard via Zoom video conference. All participants appeared remotely.  
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. A discussion of the 
hearing report was held on the evidentiary record and modifications were verbally made 
to the hearing report. However, any remaining stipulations were accepted and no factual 
or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made or discussed. The parties 
are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 6, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 6, as well as Defendants’ Exhibits A through K. All exhibits were received without 
objection.   
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. Defendants called Ronald Seifert to testify. 
The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the March 29, 2023 arbitration hearing.   
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Sep-06  13:26:16     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BROWN V. ESTES EXPRESS 
Page 2 
 
 
However, counsel for the parties requested an opportunity to file post-hearing 
briefs. This request was granted and both parties filed briefs simultaneously on May 18, 
2023. The case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on that date. 
 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
 
1. 
The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits. 
 
2. 
Claimant’s gross earnings at the time of his injury and the corresponding 
weekly worker’s compensation rate at which benefits should be paid. 
 
3. 
Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
William Brown is a 70-year-old gentleman, who works as a pick-up and delivery 
driver for Estes Express Lines, Inc. He has worked for the employer since December 
2008. Claimant testified this is a physically demanding job, but he continued to be able to 
perform all job duties prior to November 13, 2020.   
 
On November 13, 2020, Mr. Brown sustained a stipulated left shoulder injury 
performing his work duties. The parties stipulate this injury caused permanent disability. 
However, there is a dispute about the extent of claimant’s permanent disability resulting 
from the injury. (Hearing Report) 
 
Mr. Brown credibly testified that he had no prior injury or limitations to his left 
shoulder. Unfortunately, the November 13, 2020 injury resulted in a massive rotator cuff 
tear in the claimant’s left shoulder. The employer authorized medical care, including an 
MRI and orthopedic treatment. (Joint Exhibit 3) 
 
Timothy R. Vinyard, M.D. provided claimant’s orthopedic care. He took claimant to 
surgery on January 6, 2021, and performed a repair of claimant’s massive rotator cuff 
tear. Dr. Vinyard also performed a subacromial decompression and a distal clavicle 
excision. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 21) 
 
Following a period of recovery, including physical therapy, Dr. Vinyard declared 
maximum medical improvement (MMI) on June 21, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 38-39) Dr. Vinyard 
released claimant to return to work without restrictions on that date. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 40-41) 
Mr. Brown did return to work, but developed additional problems with his left shoulder. He 

BROWN V. ESTES EXPRESS 
Page 3 
 
 
requested, and the employer authorized, a return for evaluation by Dr. Vinyard on 
November 22, 2021. 
 
At the November 22, 2021 evaluation, Dr. Vinyard noted the ongoing symptoms, 
discussed permanent restrictions with claimant, and ultimately imposed permanent 
restrictions that included no lifting greater than 70 pounds and to avoid repetitive lifting, 
pulling, pushing, climbing, reaching above head, and work above shoulder level. (Jt. Ex. 
3, p. 44) The restrictions imposed by Dr. Vinyard permitted claimant to continue working 
without accommodation or limitation in his driving job with the employer. Claimant has not 
obtained further medical treatment for his left shoulder since November 22, 2021. 
 
Two orthopedic surgeons offered opinions about claimant’s permanent functional 
impairment relative to the stipulated left shoulder injury. Dr. Vinyard opined on July 1, 
2021 that claimant sustained a two percent permanent functional impairment of the left 
upper extremity as a result of the November 13, 2020 work injury. (Jt. Ex. 3, p, 42) Dr. 
Vinyard references the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition, and three figures contained therein in formulating his impairment rating. (Jt. Ex. 
3, p. 42) 
 
Review of the figures referenced by Dr. Vinyard demonstrates that he evaluated 
and assigned permanent impairment based upon his range of motion measurements of 
claimant’s left shoulder. Dr. Vinyard’s range of motion measurements are documented at 
Joint Exhibit 3, p. 38 and were obtained on June 21, 2021.   
 
The second physician that offered an opinion on claimant’s permanent functional 
impairment is claimant’s independent medical evaluator, Mark B. Kirkland, D.O. Dr. 
Kirkland performed his evaluation on March 9, 2022. Dr. Kirkland confirmed the diagnosis 
of a massive left rotator cuff tear, subacromial decompression, and distal clavicle 
excision. He also noted that claimant sustained a ruptured left biceps tendon as a result 
of the work injury. (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 4)   
 
Dr. Kirkland performed a physical examination of claimant and recorded his range 
of motion findings at Claimant’s Exhibit 1, page 4. Dr. Kirkland’s range of motion 
measurements were performed using a goniometer, but claimant testified Dr. Vinyard did 
not use a goniometer during his June 21, 2021 evaluation. Dr. Kirkland’s March, 2022 
measurements demonstrate reduced ranges of motions when compared with those 
identified by Dr. Vinyard in June, 2021.  
 
Dr. Kirkland offers a permanent impairment for claimant’s reduced left shoulder 
range of motion. Dr. Kirkland references the same figures within the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, and offers a permanent impairment 
equivalent to 10 percent of the left upper extremity as a result of reduced ranges of 
motion. Dr. Kirkland also offers a 10 permanent impairment rating for the excision of 
claimant’s distal clavicle and references Table 16-27 of the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition. 
Dr. Kirkland combines the impairment ratings for range of motion and for the distal clavicle 
excision and provides a final impairment rating of 19 percent of the left upper extremity.   

BROWN V. ESTES EXPRESS 
Page 4 
 
 
 
The factual question to be answered is which permanent impairment rating is most 
convincing and appropriate for claimant’s injury. Dr. Vinyard has the advantage of being 
the treating surgeon, having seen claimant on multiple occasions and inspected 
claimant’s shoulder intra-operatively. However, according to claimant, Dr. Vinyard did not 
utilize a goniometer to measure claimant’s left shoulder ranges of motion. 
 
Dr. Kirkland has the advantage of having evaluated claimant last. He evaluated 
claimant on March 9, 2022 and re-evaluated him on February 2, 2023. He opined that 
claimant had very similar range of motions at both evaluations and resulted in the same 
permanent impairment rating at both evaluations. Dr. Kirkland also utilized a goniometer 
to measure claimant’s shoulder ranges of motion. The AMA Guides specifically reference 
the use of a goniometer to measure range of motion. See AMA Guides to the Evaluation 
of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, p. 451. 
 
Ultimately, I find the range of motion measurements taken by Dr. Kirkland to be 
most accurate, credible, and convincing because he used a goniometer. Dr. Kirkland’s 
examination and evaluation, as well as his multiple evaluations and measurements of the 
range of motion, appear to be appropriate and consistent with the requirements of the 
AMA Guides. I find that Mr. Brown proved he sustained a 10 percent permanent functional 
impairment of the left arm as a result of loss of range of motion resulting from his 
November 13, 2020 work injury. 
 
Dr. Kirkland also identified and awarded impairment for the distal clavicle excision 
performed on claimant’s left shoulder. I find the award of permanent impairment for the 
distal clavicle excision is appropriate under the AMA Guides. However, I note that Dr. 
Kirkland did not use the applicable multiplier provided for in the AMA Guides. I find that a 
25 percent multiplier must be used on the 10 percent impairment rating offered, resulting 
in a 2.5 percent permanent impairment for the distal clavicle excision. 
 
Therefore, I accept Dr. Kirkland’s 10 percent permanent impairment rating for loss 
of range of motion as most accurate. I accept that claimant is entitled to permanent 
impairment for the distal clavicle excision but find that the applicable permanent 
impairment rating for that procedure is 2.5 percent of the left upper extremity under the 
AMA Guides. Pursuant to the Combined Values Chart on page 604 of the AMA Guides, 
Fifth Edition, these functional impairment ratings combine and result in 13 percent 
permanent functional impairment of the left upper extremity. I specifically find that 
claimant proved he sustained 13 percent permanent functional impairment of the left 
shoulder as a result of his November 13, 2020 work injury. 
 
Claimant is now 70 years of age and was clearly over the age of 65 years when 
he sustained this work injury. Claimant provided unrebutted testimony that his wife was 
also over the age of 65 when he was injured. (Transcript, p. 42) He also introduced tax 
records from 2020 demonstrating that both claimant and his wife claimed an additional 
exemption as individuals over the age of 65. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 17) Defendants offered no 

BROWN V. ESTES EXPRESS 
Page 5 
 
 
rebuttal to this evidence. I find that both Mr. Brown and his wife were over the age of 65 
when claimant was injured in November, 2020. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
 The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 
 The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an expert 
opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy of the 
facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The expert 
opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 
N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); Dunlavey v. 
Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, 
Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical testimony cannot be 
summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 
1994). 
 
In this case, defendants admit that claimant sustained a compensable work injury 
on November 13, 2020. Defendants further stipulate that the injury resulted in permanent 
disability. The parties stipulate that the injury is limited to a scheduled member disability 
to the left shoulder. (Hearing Report) 
 
However, there is a dispute between the parties as to the extent of the permanent 
disability resulting from the injury. Two experts provided opinions on the extent of 
claimant’s permanent functional impairment. Dr. Vinyard opined that claimant sustained 
a two percent permanent functional impairment of his left upper extremity as a result of 
reduced range of motion. Dr. Kirkland concurred with the diagnosis offered by Dr. Vinyard 
but opined that claimant sustained a 19 percent permanent functional impairment rating 
of the left upper extremity as a result of the work injury.  
 
Ultimately, I conclude neither of the physicians rendered a completely accurate 
impairment rating. Claimant challenges the impairment rating offered by Dr. Vinyard 
because it does not include impairment for the distal clavicle excision he performed on 
claimant’s left shoulder. Indeed, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner held, 
“The AMA Guides direct the physician to assign a rating for a distal clavicle excision.”  Jay 
v. Archer Skid Loader Service, L.L.C., File No. 19003586.01 (Appeal August 2022). 

BROWN V. ESTES EXPRESS 
Page 6 
 
 
Therefore, I find and conclude that Dr. Vinyard’s impairment rating is not complete 
because it does not include an impairment rating for the distal clavicle excision. 
 
On the other hand, defendants challenge the impairment rating offered by Dr. 
Kirkland for the distal clavicle excision because Dr. Kirkland does not utilize a multiplier 
mandated by the Guides. Indeed, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has 
similarly held, “The AMA Guides also require application of a 25 percent multiplier. This 
results in a 2.5 percent impairment for a distal clavicle excision under the plain text of the 
AMA Guides.”  Jay, File No. 19003586.01 (Appeal August 2022). Given this agency-level 
precedent, I conclude that the impairment rating by Dr. Kirkland is also erroneous and is 
inflated because it does not reduce the impairment rating for the distal clavicle excision 
by the 25 percent multiplier. 
 
Defendants contend that the undersigned cannot utilize or apply the erroneous 
impairment rating offered by Dr. Kirkland. Claimant contends that there is no medical 
evidence in this record to permit a reduction of that impairment rating. However, in Jay, 
the Commissioner made the necessary modification to the impairment rating resulting 
from a distal clavicle excision. Relying upon Jay v. Archer Skid Loader Service, L.L.C., 
File No. 19003586.01 (Appeal August 2022), I conclude that claimant proved entitlement 
to 2.5 percent permanent impairment of the left arm for the distal clavicle excision. Having 
found Dr. Kirkland’s range of motion impairment rating to be most convincing and 
accurate in this case, I found claimant proved by a preponderance of the evidence that 
he sustained a 10 permanent functional impairment for loss of range of motion. Using the 
AMA Guides’ Combined Values Chart, I found that claimant proved a 13 percent 
permanent functional impairment of the left upper extremity as a result of the November 
13, 2020 work injury to his left shoulder.   
 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or for loss of earning capacity under section 85.34(2)(v). The 
extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is 
determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is "limited to the loss of 
the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 
502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998). 
In all scheduled member injuries: 
 
[T]he extent of loss of percentage of permanent impairment shall be 
determined solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent 
impairment, published by the American Medical Association, as adopted by 
the workers’ compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A.  
Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not be utilized in determining loss 
or percentage of permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” through 
“u”. 
 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x). 

BROWN V. ESTES EXPRESS 
Page 7 
 
 
Having found that Dr. Kirkland utilized the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, and that Dr. Kirkland’s impairment rating is the most credible 
and accurate (after application of the multiplier for the distal clavicle excision), I conclude 
claimant proved a 13 permanent functional impairment. When a functional disability of 
less than 100 percent is found, an award of permanent partial disability benefits is made 
proportional to the number of weeks assigned for each scheduled member injury. Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(w). 
 
A shoulder injury is compensated on a 400-week schedule. Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(n). Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(w), claimant is entitled to 13 percent 
of 400 weeks. Therefore, I conclude claimant proved entitlement to 52 weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n), (w). 
 
The second disputed issue is the weekly rate at which benefits should be paid to 
claimant. There are two issues that must be determined to resolve this disputed issue. 
The first issue to be determined is claimant’s gross average weekly wage at the time of 
his injury.   
 
 Section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the 
employee at the time of the injury. The section defines weekly earnings as the gross 
salary, wages, or earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the 
employee worked the customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee was 
injured as the employer regularly required for the work or employment. The various 
subsections of section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings depending 
upon the type of earnings and employment. 
 
 If the employee is paid on a daily or hourly basis or by output, weekly earnings 
are computed by dividing by 13 the earnings over the 13-week period immediately 
preceding the injury. Any week that does not fairly reflect the employee’s customary 
earnings is excluded, however. Section 85.36(6). 
 
The parties concur on the vast majority of the weekly earnings to be utilized in 
claimant’s gross average weekly wage calculation. The real difference is that defendants 
include earnings for the week ending November 14, 2020. Claimant contends this week 
should be excluded because his injury occurred on November 13, 2020. Instead, claimant 
utilizes earnings for the week ending August 8, 2020.  
 
All parties appear to concur that the applicable statutory section is Iowa Code 
section 85.36(6), which provides that the claimant’s weekly earnings shall be computed 
using “the last completed period of thirteen consecutive calendar weeks immediately 
preceding the injury.” In this case, defendants include weekly earnings for a calendar 
week that ends the day after Mr. Brown’s injury. According to the plain language of the 
statute, the applicable earnings to be used are “completed” weeks “immediately 
preceding the injury.” Iowa Code section 85.36(6). Claimant’s application of the statutory 
language is most consistent and accurate. Therefore, I concur with claimant’s gross 

BROWN V. ESTES EXPRESS 
Page 8 
 
 
weekly wage calculations and conclude that claimant’s gross average weekly wages at 
the time of his injury were $1,168.99. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 14)   
 
The parties stipulate that claimant was married at the time of his injury. (Hearing 
Report) However, the parties dispute claimant’s entitlement to exemptions. Claimant 
contends that he and his wife were both over the age of 65 at the time of his injury and 
that he is entitled to claim two additional exemptions as a result of their age. Defendants 
challenge this claim and further challenge whether claimant established his wife was over 
the age of 65 at the time of his injury. 
 
Iowa Code section 85.37 provides, “The weekly benefit amount payable to any 
employee for any one week shall be upon the basis of eighty percent of the employee’s 
weekly spendable earnings.”  Iowa Code section 85.61(9) defines “spendable earnings” 
as “that amount remaining after payroll taxes are deducted from gross weekly earnings.”  
Iowa Code section 85.61(6) defines “payroll taxes.” Section 85.61(6) provides claimant is 
entitled to the maximum number of exemptions he could claim, including any exemptions 
for “old age.”   
 
Claimant was clearly over the age of 65 when he was injured in November 2020.  
He is entitled to a personal exemption, as well as an additional exemption for his age.  
The parties stipulated that claimant was married so he is entitled to a third exemption for 
his wife. The remaining question is whether claimant is entitled to a fourth exemption for 
his wife based on her age at the time of his injury. Having found that claimant’s wife was 
over the age of 65 when he was injured, I conclude claimant is entitled to four exemptions 
for purposes of calculating his weekly rate. 
 
Having concluded that claimant’s average gross weekly wage is $1,168.99 and 
that he was married and entitled to four exemptions at the time of his injury, I consult the 
Commissioner’s website and rate information. (https://www.iowaworkcomp.gov/ratebook-
spreadsheet-july-1-2020%E2%80%93june-30-2021).  
 
According to the Commissioner’s Ratebook spreadsheet for injuries occurring 
between July 1, 2020 and June 30, 2021, claimant’s applicable weekly worker’s 
compensation rate is $769.59. I conclude all weekly compensation benefits should be 
awarded at this rate.  
 
The final disputed issue is whether costs should be assessed against either party. 
Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency. Iowa Code section 86.40. In this case, 
claimant receives an award of permanent disability benefits and has prevailed on the 
exemption issue and weekly benefit rate issue. Exercising the agency’s discretion, I 
conclude that it is appropriate to assess claimant’s costs in some amount. Iowa Code 
section 86.40. 
 
Claimant seeks assessment of his filing fee ($103.00). (Cl. Ex. 5) This is a 
reasonable cost that is specifically permitted by 876 IAC 4.33(7). I conclude it is 
reasonable and appropriate to assess claimant’s filing fee as a cost.   

BROWN V. ESTES EXPRESS 
Page 9 
 
 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant fifty-two (52) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits commencing on June 21, 2021. 
 
All weekly benefits shall be payable at the rate of seven hundred sixty-nine and 
59/100 dollars ($769.59) per week. 
 
Defendants are entitled to the stipulated credit against the award of permanent 
partial disability benefits. 
 
If additional past weekly benefits are owed after the aforementioned credit is taken 
and applied, interest shall be payable at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury 
constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled 
as of the date of injury, plus two percent. See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 
5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018). 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of one hundred three 
and 00/100 dollars ($103.00). 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this     6th     day of September, 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
James M. Ballard (via WCES) 
Aaron Oliver (via WCES) 
 

BROWN V. ESTES EXPRESS 
Page 10 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days from 
the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal must be 
filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been granted, the notice of 
appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ 
Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal must be received by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be extended to 
the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
