Case Number: 5068601.01
Case Title:  SCHMIDT, BRANDON V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Schmidt Brandon-5068601.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
BRANDON SCHMIDT, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                  File No.  5068601.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC,   : 
      ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
 
  : 
GREAT AMERICAN ALLIANCE  
  : 
INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  : 
Headnotes:  1108, 1108.20, 1402.30, 
 
 
  : 
1402.40, 1402.60, 1803, 1804, 2206, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
2907, 3002, 4100 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Claimant Brandon Schmidt filed a petition in arbitration on November 19, 2020, 
alleging he sustained injuries to his head, cervical spine, and mental health while 
working for Defendant Agri Star Meat & Poultry, LLC (“Agri Star”) on November 19, 
2018.  Agri Star and its insurer, Defendant Great American Alliance Insurance Company 
(“Great American”), filed an answer on December 22, 2020. 
 
An arbitration hearing was held via Zoom video conference on December 7, 
2021.  Attorney Ben Roth represented Schmidt.  Schmidt appeared and testified.  Debra 
Schmidt, Schmidt’s wife, testified on her husband’s behalf.  Attorney Lori Scardina 
Utsinger represented Agri Star and Great American.  Brice Evans and Nolan Nelson 
appeared and testified on behalf of Agri Star and Great American.  Joint Exhibits (“JE”) 
1 through 9, and Exhibits 1 through 11 and A through N were admitted into the record.  
The record was held open through February 18, 2022, for the receipt of post-hearing 
briefs.  The briefs were received and the record was closed. 
 
At the start of the hearing the parties submitted a Hearing Report, listing 
stipulations and issues to be decided.  Agri Star and Great American waived all 
affirmative defenses.  The Hearing Report was approved at the conclusion of the 
hearing. 
STIPULATIONS 
 
1. 
An employer-employee relationship existed between Agri Star and 
Schmidt at the time of the alleged injury. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Apr-28  09:02:13     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 2 
 
 
2. 
Schmidt sustained an injury on November 19, 2018, which arose out of 
and in the course of his employment with Agri Star. 
 
3. 
The alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery. 
 
4. 
Temporary benefits are no longer in dispute. 
 
5. 
The alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
 
6. 
The disability is an industrial disability.   
 
7. 
At the time of the alleged injury Schmidt was married and entitled to two 
exemptions. 
 
8. 
Prior to the hearing Schmidt was paid 25 weeks of compensation at the 
rate of $567.98 per week. 
 
9. 
Costs have been paid. 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
What is the nature of the injury? 
 
2. 
What is the extent of disability? 
 
3. 
Has Schmidt established he is permanently and totally disabled under the 
common law or odd-lot doctrine? 
 
4. 
What is the commencement date? 
 
5. 
What is the rate? 
 
6. 
Is Schmidt entitled to payment of medical expenses set forth in Exhibit 10? 
 
7. 
Is Schmidt entitled to mileage? 
 
8. 
Is Schmidt entitled to an award of penalty benefits? 
 
9. 
Should costs be assessed against either party? 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
Schmidt lives in Decorah with his wife.  (Exhibits 2:95, 4:121)  At the time of the 
hearing he was 61.  (Tr.:9) 
 
Schmidt graduated from high school in Decorah.  (Exs. J:111, 4:121; 
Transcript:9)  After high school, Schmidt completed an electrician certification program 
and he is a certified electrician.  (Ex. J:111; Tr.:10)  Schmidt completed a massage 
therapist program and he has been a licensed massage therapist since 1990.  (Ex. 
J:111; Tr.:10, 65-66)  Schmidt also studied computer technology network administration, 
but he did not complete a degree.  (Ex. J:111; Tr.:10)  Schmidt holds certificates as a 
green builder, boiler technician, home inspector, and he holds various solar and wind 
site assessment certifications.  (Tr.:10)  Schmidt is a licensed master plumber.  (Tr.:11)  

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 3 
 
Schmidt has a valid driver’s license, a chauffer’s license, and a motorcycle license.  
(Tr.:65)   
 
From 2001 through 2018, Schmidt operated Twin Oaks Energy Solutions where 
he installed solar systems for space heating and domestic hot water using his training 
as a licensed master plumber, certified electrician, certified boiler technician, certified 
green builder, and NABCEP certified solar thermal installer.  (Exs. J:112, 4:122)  
Schmidt also operated Twin Oaks Home Inspection from 2003 through 2018.  (Exs. 
J:112, 4:122)  While operating his businesses he also worked briefly for Slumberland 
Furniture as a retail furniture sales associate, and part-time sales clerk for Winneshiek 
True Value.  (Exs. J:112, 4:122)   
 
Schmidt has a cavernous angioma of his brain stem, which resulted in a brain 
bleed in November 2007.  (JE 1:1)  Schmidt experienced intermittent dizziness, double 
vision, and tinnitus and ringing in his ears following his brain bleed.  (JE 1:1, 10, 16; JE 
2:56)  Schmidt initially received treatment locally and he sought a second opinion from 
the Mayo Clinic.  Most of Schmidt’s symptoms resolved, with the exception of his double 
vision.   
 
In July 2012, Schmidt attended an appointment with Jimmy Fulgham, M.D., at 
the Mayo Clinic.  (JE 2:57)  Dr. Fulgham noted in 2007 Schmidt had been seen at the 
Mayo Clinic for a second opinion regarding a hemorrhage in his midbrain with weakness 
in his left eye and right face and diplopia.  (JE 2:57)  Dr. Fulgham documented diplopia 
was his main deficit that persisted and he recommended a referral to an 
ophthalmologist for consideration of strabismus surgery.  (JE 2:57-58)   
On August 1, 2012, Schmidt attended an appointment with Giuseppe Lanzino, 
M.D. with the Mayo Clinic, complaining of “on-and-off” headaches.  (JE 2:60)  Dr. 
Lanzino noted magnetic resonance imaging showed evidence of an old hemorrhage 
with possible associated developmental venous anomaly, but no evidence of a fresh 
bleed or growth of the presumed cavernous malformation.  (JE 2:60)  Dr. Lanzino listed 
an impression of a stable brainstem cavernous malformation.  (JE 2:60)  Later that 
month Schmidt underwent eye surgery for his diplopia, which was successful.  (JE 2:61) 
 
Schmidt also has a preexisting history of obstructive sleep apnea with CPAP and 
hand tremors treated by his family medical provider, Kurt Swanson, D.O.  (JE 1:25-26)  
On February 20, 2018, he sought treatment from Dr. Swanson for depression and he 
reported having muscle spasms in his back and neck and difficulty sleeping.  (JE 1:27)  
 
In July 2018, Agri Star hired Smith as a maintenance specialist.  (Tr.:25)  Agri 
Star initially planned to use Smith for electrical matters, but given he is a master 
plumber, he focused on plumbing issues in the plant.  (Ex. J:112; Tr.:25)  
 
Schmidt testified on November 19, 2018,  
I and my supervisor, Nolan Nelson were in the parts shop at Agri Star 
Meat & Poultry, and I tripped on a pallet, and while stumbling forward 
trying to catch myself, I basically did a running headbutt into a piece of 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 4 
 
equipment called a jetter, which is a steel trailer.  It’s a big pump is what it 
is. 
 
So I was stumbling trying to catch yourself, trying to catch yourself, 
and I don’t know, I’m guessing I was probably three feet off the ground, 
more horizontal just falling and hit my head straight on and my hard hat 
flew off.  That’s kind of what I remember then. 
(Tr.:20-21)  Schmidt knows he fell because he was dirty following the incident, but he 
could not remember falling to the ground at hearing.  (Tr.:22)  Schmidt’s supervisor 
asked him how he felt and Schmidt told him he thought he was “okay.”  (Tr.:22)  After 
work Schmidt drove himself home and he went to bed.  (Tr.:22, 77) 
 
Schmidt testified the next day he went to work and he was reading a service 
manual and realized he was not retaining any of the information.  (Tr.:23)  Schmidt went 
to his supervisor and another employee and told them something was not right because 
he was not understanding the manual.  (Tr.:23) 
 
Schmidt completed an incident report on November 20, 2018, stating he 
injured his head, neck, shoulder, and hip by a “trip and fall” when he was 
“walking” and “looking for parts, trip on pallet, hit my head on the jetter.”  (Ex. 
7:128)  Schmidt reported feeling “dizzy, light headed” and that he was “not 
feeling himself.”  (Ex. 7:129) 
 
Schmidt’s employer sent him to Winneshiek Medical Center and he was 
examined by Kent Svestka, M.D.  (JE 3:103)  Schmidt reported he tripped the day 
before on a pallet and hit his head, right shoulder, and hip, and complained of light 
sensitivity, lightheadedness, and some nausea.  (JE 3:103)  Schmidt complained of a 
mild headache, which worsened, and neck discomfort.  (JE 3:103)   
Dr. Svestka ordered a head and neck computerized tomography exam.  (JE 
3:105)  The reviewing radiologist listed an impression of “[a]ge indeterminate 
compression fractures with mild anterior wedging of the C6 and C7 vertebral bodies, 
although favored chronic with increased sclerosis,” multilevel degenerative changes of 
the cervical spine, and no acute head findings.  (JE 3:105)  Dr. Svestka listed an 
impression of concussion without loss of consciousness, neck muscle strain, right 
shoulder strain, and right hip contusion.  (JE 3:108)  Dr. Svestka discharged Schmidt 
and ordered him to rest from physical and mental activities until released by his medical 
doctor, to ice the areas of discomfort and to take Tylenol or ibuprofen as needed, and 
directed him to follow up with occupational health the next day.  (JE 3:107)   
On November 21, 2018, Schmidt attended an appointment with John Evelsizer 
Olson, PA-C with Winneshiek Medical Center Family Practice.  (JE 3:108)  Schmidt 
complained of ringing in his ears, feeling very thirsty, tingling in his hands, some 
difficulty with concentration, and a headache aggravated by bright light and loud 
sounds.  (JE 3:108-10)  Evelsizer Olson assessed Schmidt with a concussion without 
loss of consciousness, neck strain, and right shoulder contusion, imposed restrictions of 
light duty with no lifting over 20 pounds and to avoid working at elevated heights and 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 5 
 
with electronic screens or activities that require concentration, and he told Schmidt to 
rest.  (JE 3:111)   
 
On November 28, 2018, Schmidt attended an appointment with Winneshiek 
Medical Center Occupational Health, where he was examined by Kristen Heffern, 
ARNP.  (JE 4:121)  Schmidt complained of having a nagging and shooting headache in 
his forehead that is worse with light and not improving.  (JE 4:121)  Schmidt reported his 
headaches are persistent and worsen and move intermittently to the left of his forehead 
between his eyes with tingling, light sensitivity, sleeplessness, intermittent nausea, 
irritability and agitation.  (JE 4:121)  He also reported having a right shoulder bruise with 
pain with rotation and palpation, right elbow tenderness, and swelling and tenderness in 
his right hip.  (JE 4:121)  Heffern diagnosed Schmidt with a head contusion, right hip 
pain, right elbow contusion, and right shoulder pain, directed him to apply ice or heat for 
15 minutes a few times per day as needed and to take Tylenol for pain, and released 
him without restrictions.  (JE 4:122)   
 
Schmidt testified he was frustrated with the workers’ compensation process.  
(Tr.:28)  He spoke with his supervisors and people in the safety department and told 
them he was still having headaches and he asked for help because he was not getting 
better.  (Tr.:28) 
 
On January 29, 2019, Schmidt returned to Winneshiek Medical Center Family 
Practice and he was examined by Samantha Reicks, ARNP.  (JE 3:112)  Schmidt 
reported his joint pain had resolved, but that he was having ongoing concussive 
symptoms, including a daily headache, chronic tinnitus, intermittent light and sound 
sensitivity, difficulty falling asleep, irritability, and difficulty focusing.  (JE 3:112)  Schmidt 
relayed he was experiencing a daily right-sided headache with tingling sensation that 
worsens from a chronic dull ache throughout the day.  (JE 3:112)  Reicks assessed 
Schmidt with chronic intractable headache, unspecified type, a history of concussion, 
and insomnia, prescribed trazodone, continued his citalopram, and ordered magnetic 
resonance imaging, noting his case is complex due to his history of venous 
malformation causing hemorrhage in the fourth ventricle with surgical repair.  (JE 3:113)  
Schmidt underwent additional magnetic resonance imaging that did not show any acute 
findings.  (JE 3:119-20) 
 
On February 28, 2019, Schmidt attended an appointment with Brian 
O’Shaughnessy, M.D., a neurologist.  (JE 5:123)  Dr. O’Shaughnessy noted Schmidt 
had a past medical history of cavernous angioma in the temporal region with bleeding 
and surgery in 2007, anxiety, essential tremor, eye muscle surgery for strabismus, and 
left rotator cuff surgery.  (JE 5:123)  Dr. O’Shaughnessy opined Schmidt has 
posttraumatic headaches or posttraumatic migraine headaches, and documented he 
may have a cervical strain from the injury that is aggravating his headaches and post-
concussion syndrome.  (JE 5:126)  Dr. O’Shaughnessy stopped Schmidt’s trazodone 
because it was not helping him sleep, prescribed amitriptyline, prescribed physical 
therapy, and released him without restrictions.  (JE 5:126) 
 
Schmidt returned to Dr. O’Shaughnessy on March 28, 2019, reporting he was 
sleeping well with 25 mg of amitriptyline, but his headaches had not improved.  (JE 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 6 
 
5:127)  Schmidt reported physical therapy had improved his neck range of motion, but 
he was still having headaches.  (JE 5:127)  Dr. O’Shaughnessy noted Schmidt had 
some mild decrease in ability to turn his head to the left on exam and he complained of 
some discomfort in the mid to upper cervical paraspinal region and cervical occipital 
region left greater than right.  (JE 5:127)  Dr. O’Shaughnessy prescribed Topamax and 
reported that if he continued to have headaches at his next visit he may try trigger point 
injections.  (JE 5:127)   
 
On April 10, 2019, Schmidt attended a follow-up appointment with Dr. 
O’Shaughnessy.  (JE 5:129)  Schmidt reported he could not tolerate the Topamax and 
stopped it.  (JE 5:129)  Dr. O’Shaughnessy administered trigger point injections and 
noted if the injections did not help, he did not have anything else to offer him.  (JE 
5:129)   
 
On June 20, 2019, Schmidt attended an appointment for a second opinion with 
Kenneth McMains, M.D. with Allen Occupational Health.  (JE 7:132)  Dr. McMains 
reviewed Schmidt’s medical records, examined him, and released Schmidt to return to 
work without any restrictions.  (JE 7:133; Ex. A)   
Dr. McMains issued an opinion letter on June 25, 2019.  (Ex. A)  Dr. McMains 
noted on exam Schmidt complained of daily headaches, some more severe than others, 
but usually occurring in the frontal area and then radiating to bitemporal with pain 
behind his eyes and on occasion in the occipital region.  (Ex. A:1)  Dr. McMains noted 
Schmidt had also complained of tinnitus following the work injury.  (Ex. A:1)   
Dr. McMains diagnosed Schmidt with closed head trauma with cephalgia and 
bilateral tinnitus.  (Ex. A:2)  Dr. McMains opined he found no objective findings 
supporting the need for ongoing treatment noting Schmidt had a negative workup, 
showing no evidence of any trauma to his brain or spinal cord.  (Ex. A:2)  Dr. McMains 
placed Schmidt at maximum medical improvement on June 20, 2019.  (Ex. A:2)  Using 
the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (AMA Press, 5th Ed. 2001) 
(“AMA Guides”), Dr. McMains opined Schmidt had sustained no permanent or partial 
impairment based on no objective evidence of injury and recommended no additional 
treatment.  (Ex. A:2)   
 
After Schmidt filed a pro se petition for alternate care, Agri Star and Great 
American arranged an appointment for Schmidt with a pain management specialist.  On 
July 2, 2019, Schmidt attended an appointment with Ashar Afzal, M.D., complaining of 
headaches and neck pain.  (JE 8:134)  Dr. Afzal documented Schmidt reported he has 
primarily headaches in the temple, frontal, and occipital regions he describes as 
stabbing and associated with numbness, tingling, a sharp sensation, and knifelike pain.  
(JE 8:134)  He also reported having dorsal neck pain, noting his symptoms are quite 
constant and were not present before his work injury.  (JE 8:134)  Dr. Afzal listed an 
impression of bilateral greater occipital neuralgia and cervical degenerative spondylosis 
with cervical facet arthropathy, noted Schmidt may benefit from a trial of greater 
occipital nerve blocks or blocking the innervation of the upper cervical facets.  (JE 
8:135)  Dr. Afzal recommended Schmidt not wear a hard hat and use a soft pillow at 
night.  (JE 8:135)   

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 7 
 
 
Dr. Afzal administered the occipital nerve blocks on August 15, 2019.  (JE 8:136)  
When Schmidt returned on September 6, 2019, he reported he did not receive much 
relief from the occipital nerve blocks and reported having pain at the site of the injection 
for a couple of weeks.  (JE 8:137)  Dr. Afzal prescribed baclofen, stated Schmidt could 
resume wearing a hard hat, and recommended diagnostic C2 and C3 medial branch 
blocks.  (JE 8:137)   
 
Agri Star disciplined Schmidt following his work injury and ultimately terminated 
him on September 10, 2019.  (Ex. D:42)  Agri Star disciplined Schmidt for driving the 
wrong way as he exited the parking lot and almost collided with a safety vehicle.  (Ex. 
D:42)  After he was issued a suspension for the incident, he left the human resources 
office and he made a vulgar comment about a colleague.  (Ex. D:42, 46)  He had made 
an inappropriate comment in the past as well.  The employer called him back and 
terminated his employment for “creating an intimidating, offensive or hostile 
environment.”  (Ex. D:42)  Schmidt applied for unemployment benefits.  (Ex. D)  Iowa 
Workforce Development denied his application, finding Agri Star had discharged him for 
disqualifying misconduct.  (Ex. D) 
 
On September 26, 2019, Schmidt attended a follow-up appointment with Dr. 
Afzal complaining of continued headache and neck pain.  (JE 8:138)  Schmidt stated he 
was frustrated and upset because his symptoms were not improving.  (JE 8:138)  Dr. 
Afzal listed an impression of chronic headaches and cervicogenic headaches, 
prescribed tramadol, and recommended diagnostic medial branch blocks.  (JE 8:139)  
Dr. Afzal administered diagnostic medial branch blocks on October 23, 2019.  (JE 
8:140)   
 
Jonathan Fields, M.D., an occupational medicine physician, conducted an 
independent medical examination medical records review for Agri Star and Great 
American on November 15, 2019.  (Ex. C)  Dr. Fields diagnosed Schmidt with chronic 
idiopathic headache pain.  (Ex. C:16)  Dr. Fields agreed with Dr. McMains that Schmidt 
reached maximum medical improvement in June 2019.  (Ex. C:16)  Dr. Fields opined, 
based on his review of the records, no reported objective findings, noting Schmidt’s 
magnetic resonance imaging showed no acute findings and there was no basis for an 
impairment under the AMA Guides, opining Schmidt’s current symptoms are not related 
to the work injury.  (Ex. C:16)   
 
On January 7, 2020, Schmidt attended an appointment with Dr. Swanson.  (JE 
1:31)  Schmidt told Dr. Swanson he tripped over a pallet at work while wearing a hard 
hat and he hit a steel beam with his head with no loss of consciousness, and since the 
injury he was experiencing daily headaches, tinnitus, and concentration problems.  (JE 
1:31)  Schmidt relayed he had received physical therapy, trigger point injections, and an 
occipital nerve block with no relief, and he requested a referral to the Mayo Clinic.  (JE 
1:31)  Dr. Swanson made a referral to the Mayo Clinic for Schmidt’s post-concussion 
headaches noting the treatment would not be part of the workers’ compensation case.  
(JE 1:33)   
 
On April 21, 2020, Schmidt attended a telemedicine appointment with Carrie 
Robertson, M.D., a neurologist with the Mayo Clinic.  (JE 2:65)  Dr. Robertson noted in 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 8 
 
2007 Schmidt was treated for a left-sided mid brain hemorrhage thought to be related to 
a cavernous hemangioma and he presented with left eye weakness, right facial 
weakness, and diplopia, and later underwent surgery for his diplopia in 2012.  (JE 2:65)  
Schmidt reported no real history of headaches until the November 2018 work injury.  
(JE 2:65)  Schmidt reported after a fall in 2018 he developed daily headaches and 
tinnitus after he “tripped while running forward causing him to hit the top of his head on 
heavy equipment – hard enough to blow his hardhat off.”  (JE 2:65)  The initial incident 
report Schmidt completed did not state he was running.  Schmidt reported he was 
walking when he tripped.  (Ex. 7:128)   
Schmidt reported having some type of headache every day with more severe 
headaches four days per week.  (JE 2:65)  Dr. Robertson assessed Schmidt with 
chronic migraine, likely post-traumatic, possible superimposed bilateral supraorbital 
neuralgia, and mid-brain cavernous hemangioma.  (JE 2:66)  Dr. Robertson noted 
Schmidt’s headaches fit best with post traumatic headaches with a chronic migraine 
phenotype, prescribed amitriptyline, and noted he might benefit from bilateral 
supraorbital and greater/lesser occipital nerve blocks.  (JE 2:66)   
 
Schmidt attended a telemedicine visit with Halena Gazelka, M.D., a pain 
management specialist with the Mayo Clinic on August 20, 2020.  (JE 2:70)  Schmidt 
reported he had no real history of headaches before the November 2018 work injury.  
(JE 2:70)  Schmidt reported having daily headaches and tinnitus and described having a 
severe headache four days per week that is frontal and extends up his forehead and 
onto the top of his head and in the temporal region.  (JE 2:70)  Dr. Gazelka assessed 
Schmidt with chronic daily headaches, bilateral supraorbital neuralgia, and history of 
midbrain cavernous hemangioma, recommended supraorbital nerve blocks, and 
recommended he discontinue amitriptyline and substitute nortriptyline for sleep.  (JE 
2:71)   
 
Schmidt underwent a left and right supraorbital nerve block injection on 
September 2, 2020.  (JE 2:73-77)  Schmidt did not find the injection helpful.  (JE 2:80)  
when he returned to Dr. Swanson on September 16, 2020, Schmidt reported the 
supraorbital block he received caused an exacerbation of his headaches and caused 
him to miss work.  (JE 1:37) 
 
On January 6, 2021, Chad Abernathey, M.D., a neurosurgeon, issued an opinion 
letter for Agri Star and Great American.  (Ex. B)  Dr. Abernathey diagnosed Schmidt 
with post-concussive syndrome with subjective complaints without objective findings, 
noting Schmidt had intact neurologic function, and recommending no additional medical 
management.  (Ex. B:4)  Dr. Abernathey opined Schmidt reached maximum medical 
improvement on November 19, 2020, and found he did not sustain a specific 
impairment from a neurosurgical standpoint.  (Ex. B:4)   
 
Schmidt underwent Botox injections through the Mayo Clinic for his migraine 
headaches on January 7, 2021.  (JE 2:84-86)  He also requested mental health 
treatment. 
 
On March 2, 2021, Schmidt attended an appointment with Ronald Hougen, 
Ph.D., a psychologist.  (JE 9:142)  Dr. Hougen diagnosed Schmidt with a severe 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 9 
 
episode of recurrent major depressive disorder without psychotic features and 
intractable chronic post-traumatic headaches and recommended individual therapy.  (JE 
9:142)   
 
On March 10, 2021, Schmidt attended a telemedicine visit with Dr. Robertson, 
reporting he felt a little worse for days after the injections, and reported a possible 
improvement for a week where he felt like his brain fog lifted.  (JE 2:88)  Schmidt 
relayed he was experiencing daily headaches with more severe headaches 
approximately 15 days per month and reported he had started working with a local 
psychiatrist.  (JE 2:88) 
 
On March 18, 2021, Schmidt attended an appointment with Dr. Swanson 
complaining of chronic headaches and migraines.  (JE 1:41)  Dr. Swanson assessed 
Schmidt with persistent headaches and possible bilateral supraorbital neuralgia, stated 
he would prescribe Maxalt with Aleve as recommended by the headache specialist, and 
provided Schmidt with a note to be off work for six weeks due to his chronic migraines 
and persistent headaches.  (JE 1:42, 44-48)   
 
On April 1, 2021 and June 23, 2021, Schmidt underwent additional Botox 
injections through the Mayo Clinic.  (JE 2:91-99)  
 
During an appointment with Dr. Swanson on August 19, 2021, Schmidt 
complained of daily headaches since 2018 with occasional dizziness and photophobia, 
noting prescribed pain control medication had not offered any significant improvement.  
(JE 1:50-51)   
 
On August 20, 2021 and August 21, 2021, Schmidt underwent a 
neuropsychological examination with Karla Brennscheidt, Psy.D.  (Ex. 2)  Dr. 
Brennscheidt noted Schmidt underwent a neuropsychological evaluation in December 
2007, which identified no neurocognitive deficits.  (Ex. 2:91)  Dr. Brennscheidt 
documented Schmidt’s wife reported he had “shallow irritability.”  (Ex. 2:91)  Dr. 
Brennscheidt documented Schmidt acknowledged having a long-standing and chronic 
history of anxiety, taking 20 mg citalopram, an antidepressant, for a while before the 
accident.  (Ex. 2:96)  She also documented Schmidt’s medical records documented in 
February 2018 he was experiencing elevated stress and having “some anger issues 
and difficulty dealing with it appropriately,” and that Dr. Swanson had prescribed 
citalopram and trazodone for sleep.   (Ex. 2:92)   
 
Dr. Brennscheidt found Schmidt is cognitively intact and his overall intellectual 
abilities are well-preserved, ranging from low average to average and superior.  (Ex. 
2:99)  She noted he had: 
[m]arked variability within and across cognitive domains, likely the result of 
anxiety.  Executive substrates of attention suggest that Mr. Schmidt 
experiences difficulty when trying to balance speed with accuracy.  During 
testing, high cognitive load conditions resulted in mild decrements in 
functioning and triggered impulsive responding. 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 10 
 
 
On tasks that are susceptible to and commonly adversely affected 
by anxiety (i.e., attention domain and cognitive processing speed), mild 
inefficiencies were noted.  A preoccupation with somatic symptoms and 
anxious thought patterns appears to have adversely affected attentional 
resources and resulted in a narrowed attentional focus.  Given Mr. 
Schmidt’s variable attention and intermittent slowed processing of 
information, specifically complex information, he may require more time to 
function effectively, most notably in situations that place high demands on 
attention and concentration.  Although Mr. Schmidt had reported 
significant anxiety and had in fact opened the assessment by stating “I 
have a lot of anxiety”, this was not reported on the MMPI-2-RF. 
 
Mr. Schmidt had reported being forgetful and having lost portions of 
his photographic memory.  Test results suggest that verbal and visual 
memory domains are well-preserved.  As subjective memory complaints 
do not typically predict actual memory problems on testing, Mr. Schmidt’s 
subjective complaints appear to correlate with depression and even more 
so with pain.  This is a well-established pattern according to the literature 
and consistent with Mr. Schmidt’s presentation and history.  Given Mr. 
Schmidt’s migraine headaches and preoccupation with somatic 
symptoms, currently, he appears to function at a less than optimal level 
from a physical, cognitive and emotional standpoint. 
(Ex. 2:99)   
 
Dr. Brennscheidt listed a diagnostic impression of post-concussive 
headaches/migraines, moderate anxiety, and preoccupation with somatic and cognitive 
difficulty.  (Ex. 2:100)  Dr. Brennscheidt recommended Schmidt continue with 
psychotherapy and that hypnosis should be considered for the treatment of his pain.  
(Ex. 2:99-100)   
Dr. Brennscheidt opined the work injury substantially aggravated Schmidt’s pre-
existing anxiety and caused him to develop depression.  (Ex. 2:100)  Dr. Brennscheidt 
opined Schmidt’s “[c]urrent cognitive limitations include aspects of attention, working 
memory, and cognitive processing speed along with variability in overall performance,” 
appear to be related to anxiety, noting magnetic resonance imaging following the 
accident “did not show any acute intracranial abnormalities but foci within the mid brain 
compatible with hemosiderin deposition which was felt related to a known cavernoma.”  
(Ex. 2:100)  Dr. Brennscheidt opined “[o]ther emotional difficulties, such as frustration, 
anger, and irritability, were reported and observed but did not meet diagnostic 
thresholds.”  (Ex. 2:100)  A few months later, pursuant to an inquiry from Schmidt’s 
counsel, Dr. Brennscheidt opined Schmidt does not meet the diagnostic criteria for 
somatic symptom and related disorders.  (Ex. 2:102) 
 
On September 24, 2021, Schmidt underwent a head magnetic resonance 
venography.  (JE 1:54)  The reviewing radiologist listed an impression of no evidence of 
dural venous thrombosis.  (JE 1:54-55)    

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 11 
 
 
David Segal, M.D., conducted an independent medical examination for Schmidt 
on September 25, 2021, and issued his report on October 18, 2021.  (Ex. 1)  Dr. Segal 
reviewed Schmidt’s medical records and examined him.  (Ex. 1)   
Dr. Segal diagnosed Schmidt with a closed head injury with traumatic brain injury 
and concussion, post-concussion syndrome with cognitive deficits, memory deficits, 
vestibular dysfunction, tinnitus with decreased hearing, sleeping disturbance, post-
traumatic headache, nausea, psychiatric sequelae of brain injury with depression, 
anxiety, and emotional lability, post-traumatic migraine with trigeminal nerve dysfunction 
and supraorbital neuralgia, post-concussive vestibular dysfunction, post-traumatic sleep 
disorder, traumatic cervical facet arthropathy, occipital neuralgia, and trochanteric 
bursitis caused by the work injury.  (Ex. 1:20)   
With respect to his head trauma, Dr. Segal opined: 
[t]o gauge the impact of Mr. Schmidt’s head we can estimate that he 
weighs about 180 pounds, the acceleration was about half the force of 
gravity because he was falling and running, and the distance was about 6 
meters.  This would give a force impact of 188N.  This converts to a g-
force of 20,000.  To put that in perspective, most concussions occur with 
95 g’s, and the average football player receives 103 g’s when hit during a 
game.  The force by which Mr. Schmidt propelled into the side of the trailer 
was a significant impact and was well above the range of impact that 
would cause traumatic brain injury. 
(Ex. 1:21-22)  Dr. Segal opined Schmidt sustained a “mild to moderate traumatic brain 
injury,” and found that his “cognitive function is moderately impaired, which causes 
substantial difficulty in his participation in all activities of daily living.”  (Ex. 1:24)   
 
Dr. Segal opined Schmidt suffers from frequent headaches that can be 
debilitating and are associated with photophobia, phonophobia, and occasional nausea, 
vestibular dysfunction, noting Schmidt reported he feels dizzy, often loses his balance, 
and has suffered falls, and tinnitus and hearing difficulties.  (Ex. 1:25-26, 28)  Dr. Segal 
found Schmidt has a sleep disorder, noting Schmidt reported he is in bed 12 to 14 hours 
per day, but gets three to four hours of uninterrupted sleep per night.  (Ex. 1:28)  Dr. 
Segal found Schmidt has emotional and behavioral impairments caused by his 
traumatic brain injury, noting Schmidt testified he is more irritable and less patient, 
“quick to anger, quick to cry, and his moods are off the chart.”  (Ex. 1:29)   
 
Dr. Segal noted Schmidt reported having pain in the posterior neck and base of 
his skull, across to the lateral sides, and down into the upper and mid trapezius 
bilaterally, his neck always feels stiff, and any movement in his neck or lifting increases 
his pain.  (Ex. 1:29)  Dr. Segal opined the injury caused damage to Schmidt’s cervical 
facet joints causing pain.  (Ex. 1:29)  He also opined the injury caused him to develop 
occipital neuralgia, noting “[o]ccipital neuralgia is a known etiology of headaches and 
may stem from trauma to the neck, such as with a concussion or whiplash injury.”  (Ex. 
1:30)  Dr. Segal found Schmidt has right hip trochanteric bursitis.  (Ex. 1:30)   

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 12 
 
 
Dr. Segal noted Schmidt’s last Botox injection was on June 23, 2021, and it did 
not work enough to continue that treatment.  (Ex. 1:38)  As a result, Dr. Segal found 
Schmidt reached maximum medical improvement for his post-concussion syndrome 
and cervical symptoms on June 23, 2021.  (Ex. 1:38)  He also found Schmidt had not 
received sufficient treatment for his right hip, but no treatment was planned, so he 
reached maximum medical improvement with respect to his hip on November 19, 2019, 
one year after the injury.  (Ex. 1:38)   
 
Dr. Segal found Schmidt sustained a permanent cognitive impairment using the 
Clinical Dementia Rating Scale (“CDR Scale”) found in Chapter 13 of the AMA Guides 
at page 320.  (Ex. 1:39)  Under the CDR Scale the practitioner assigns impairments on 
a scale of 0 to 3 for Memory, Orientation, Judgment and Problem Solving, Community 
Affairs, Home and Hobbies, and Personal Care and may assign impairments based on 
ranges within four classes.  Dr. Segal assigned Schmidt:  (1) 1.0 for Memory finding he 
has moderate memory loss, more marked for recent events, which interferes with daily 
activities; (2) 0.5 for Orientation finding he is fully oriented except for slight difficulty in 
time relationships; (3) 0.5 for Judgment and Problem Solving because he has a slight 
impairment in solving problems, similarities and difference; (4) 0.5 for Community Affairs 
concluding he has a “slight impairment in these activities;” (5) 0.5 for Home and 
Hobbies, finding he has a “mild but definite impairment of function at home; more 
difficult chores abandoned; more complicated hobbies and interests abandoned; and (6) 
0.5 for Personal Care finding he is fully capable of self-care. (Ex. 1:39)  Based on his 
findings, Dr. Segal concluded Schmidt falls in the higher range of a Class 1 impairment 
and assigned him an 11 percent whole person impairment.  (Ex. 1:39) 
 
Dr. Segal documented Schmidt told him he is “quick to anger, quick to cry, and 
his moods are off the chart,” and that he and his wife indicated his emotional changes 
have affected their relationship.  (Ex. 1:40)  Using the Criteria for Rating Impairment 
Due to Emotional or Behavioral Disorders, Dr. Segal found Schmidt has “mild limitation 
of activities of daily living and daily social and interpersonal functioning,” and he 
assigned Schmidt a four percent whole person impairment for emotional or behavioral 
disorders. (Ex. 1:40)   
Dr. Segal found Schmidt has a sleep disorder and assigned him a five percent 
whole person impairment.  (Ex. 1:28, 41-42)  In reaching his conclusion, Dr. Segal 
found Schmidt wakes up a few times per night and gets three to four hours of 
uninterrupted sleep, noting Schmidt reported he is in bed 12 to 14 hours per day, but 
gets three to four hours of uninterrupted sleep per night.  (Ex. 1:28, 41-42)   
Dr. Segal assigned Schmidt a seven percent whole person impairment for 
vestibular dysfunction causing a gait and station impairment.  (Ex. 1:41)  Dr. Segal 
noted on exam Schmidt had a positive Romberg test supporting his vestibular 
dysfunction finding.  (Ex. 1:41)  Dr. Segal also assigned Schmidt a two percent 
impairment for tinnitus.  (Ex. 1:41)   
 
Dr. Segal assigned Schmidt a three percent permanent impairment for a 
diagnosis of right trochanteric bursitis with an abnormal gait.  (Ex. 1:42)  Dr. Segal found 
Schmidt has a cervical traumatic facet disorder and occipital neuralgia with limitations in 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 13 
 
range of motion and palpable muscle spasm, noting Schmidt has difficulty with standing, 
sitting, reclining, and climbing stairs, and he assigned him an eight percent whole 
person impairment.  (Ex. 1:42)  Dr. Segal assigned Schmidt a combined 44 percent 
whole person impairment for his brain injury with associated impairments, cervical 
injury, and trochanteric bursitis.  (Ex. 1:43)   
 
For his cognitive impairments, Dr. Segal assigned permanent restrictions of 
working one to two days per week, for a maximum of six hours with breaks, a work 
environment free of loud noise or a “busy” atmosphere, a limit of 30 minutes per day for 
tasks involving intense concentration, up to 10 minutes of prolonged static neck position 
before a break, never operating complex and/or very loud machinery, occasional driving 
due to cognitive deficit and dizziness, ability to use whiteboards to assist with memory 
impairment, assistance from fellow workers with memory and complex tasks, never use 
ladders due to balance, occasionally use stairs holding onto a handrail due to balance, 
never walk on uneven surfaces or at heights due to balance, rest as needed, and return 
home as needed.  (Ex. 1:43-44)   
 
For his cervical spine and hip impairments, Dr. Segal assigned permanent 
restrictions of working one to two days per week, sitting 40 minutes in a total shift of six 
hours, standing 20 minutes in a total shift of six hours, occasional overhead reaching, 
occasional lifting and carrying 20 to 30 pounds, occasional pushing and pulling up to 40 
pounds, using a handrail for stairs, never using ladders, rarely working with neck 
extended or flexed, and never crawl.  (Ex. 1:44)   
 
Dr. Segal reviewed surveillance conducted by Agri Star and Great American and 
reported the activities Schmidt engaged in were consistent with his restrictions.  (Ex. 
1:84)  He also opined “Schmidt does appear confused at times, and simple tasks, such 
as pumping gas, take him longer than average.”  (Ex. 1:84)   
Schmidt attended a three-week pain rehabilitation program with the Mayo Clinic 
Rehabilitation Center from September 27, 2021 through October 18, 2021, to help him 
manage his chronic pain.  (JE 2:100-02)   
On November 10, 2021, Dr. Fields conducted a second independent medical 
examination for Agri Star and Great American.  (Ex. C:17)  Dr. Fields reviewed 
Schmidt’s medical records and examined him.  (Ex. C:17)  Dr. Fields opined he had 
changed his medical opinion.  (Ex. C:21)  Dr. Fields opined he believed Schmidt 
sustained a mild traumatic brain injury as a result of the work injury, which resulted in a 
mild concussion with no evidence of any acute changes on imaging.  (Ex. C:21)  Dr. 
Fields acknowledged Schmidt struck his head, but opined the forces discussed by Dr. 
Segal in his report “appear to be out of proportion to what one would expect based on 
the discussed mechanism of injury and description of events.”  (Ex. C:22)  Dr. Fields 
noted he did not have an explanation of why Schmidt is reporting his symptoms were 
worsening, which is not the natural course of a mild concussion, especially three years 
from the incident.  (Ex. C:22)   
 
Dr. Fields opined Schmidt’s mild traumatic brain injury is the result of the trauma 
when he struck his head on a steel object and he believed he had sustained a 
permanent impairment due to his chronic headaches as a result of the traumatic brain 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 14 
 
injury.  (Ex. C:22)  Dr. Fields further opined his right hip pain and cervical/trapezius pain 
were temporary in nature and that his chronic cervical degenerative disease and 
trapezius pain, and right hip pain are personal in nature and not related to the work 
injury.  (Ex. C:22)  Dr. Fields opined his complaints of “10 out of 10 pain” are not 
consistent with his conversational demeanor throughout the examination, and aside 
from some reported tenderness to palpation across his bilateral upper trapezius and 
right lateral thigh, his examination was essentially normal with no deficits noted in his 
cranial nerves.  (Ex. C:22)  Dr. Fields recommended no additional treatment.  (Ex. C:22) 
 
Dr. Fields opined Schmidt is capable of working, noting he confirmed on the 
health assessment questionnaire that he can perform all activities of daily living.  (Ex. 
C:22)  Dr. Fields found Schmidt reached maximum medical improvement on June 20, 
2019, six months from his alleged injury, and opined he does not require any permanent 
restrictions.  (Ex. C:23)  Using Table 13-11 on page 331 of the AMA Guides, Dr. Fields 
classified Schmidt as in the middle of class 1, noting he is performing all activities of 
daily living without issue, and assigned him a 5 percent whole person impairment.  (Ex. 
C:23)   
 
Dr. Fields commented on Dr. Brennscheidt’s report, which notes Schmidt is 
cognitively intact and his overall intellectual abilities are well-preserved, ranging from 
low average to average and superior.  (Ex. C:23)  With respect to Dr. Segal’s report, Dr. 
Fields found: 
Dr. Segal notes that Mr. Schmidt has a diagnosis of right trochanteric 
bursitis, yet notes on page 7 of his IME report that “walking seems to 
help.”  This would be inconsistent with this diagnosis.  In my medical 
opinion, if Mr. Schmidt had sustained a contusion of the right hip (noted in 
his Nov 20, 2018 ER visit) this would have been expected to resolve within 
6 weeks.  In my medical opinion, Mr. Schmidt’s pain in his right 
hip/trochanter is chronic in nature and unrelated to any work injury from 
Nov. 19, 2018.  I would not consider this condition work-related. 
 
Regarding Mr. Schmidt’s neck and shoulder pain, Dr. Segal 
speculates on page 29 of his IME report that “When Mr. Schmidt fell to the 
ground, likely his head turned.”  He goes on to describe how this may 
result in injury to the cervical spine.  In my medical opinion, this is mere 
speculation and Mr. Schmidt himself cannot recall how he fell.  In addition, 
CT of the head and cervical spine performed immediately after the injury 
on 11/20/2018 showed no acute findings, but was consistent with 
multilevel degenerative changes in the cervical spine.  Dr. Swanson noted 
issues with muscles spasms in Mr. Schmidt’s back and neck back in 
February 2018, nine months before the alleged work injury at AgriStar.  In 
my medical opinion, Mr. Schmidt has chronic upper trapezius pain and 
degenerative changes in the cervical spine which are unrelated to the 
alleged work event from 11/19/2018.  I would not consider his current 
cervical and upper trapezius chronic symptoms work-related. 
(Ex. C:24) 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 15 
 
 
Dr. Fields noted Dr. Segal calculated Schmidt may have experienced a “g-force 
of 20,000,” and stated it is unclear how he arrived at this calculation through the online 
calculator tool mentioned in his report.  (Ex. C:24)  Dr. Fields opined, a force of that 
magnitude would have likely resulted in Schmidt’s “instant demise,” and according to 
Schmidt’s own report, he was able to get up on his own and return to work, there was 
no loss of consciousness and his helmet was not cracked, it fell off when he landed on 
the floor or from the impact to his head on the steel Jetter.  (Ex. C:24)  Dr. Fields noted 
“a typical median acceleration (g) force for a car crash that would result in traumatic 
brain injury is 75 g’s according to studies of motorsport crashes.  Football players may 
have hits commonly resulting in acceleration forces of up to 63 g’s.”  (Ex. C:24)   
 
Dr. Fields further opined he does not believe Schmidt meets the criteria for an 
impairment from page 320 Table 13-5 because according to his own report he does not 
have any deficits in activities of daily living and neuropsychological testing noted him to 
be cognitively fully intact with intellectual abilities well preserved.  (Ex. C:25)  With 
respect to emotional and behavioral disorders on Table 13-25, in his opinion Schmidt 
has a known history of anger issues, anxiety and depression which he was treating 
before the work injury, noting on February 20, 2018, Dr. Swanson noted he was having  
a hard time dealing with anger issues and managing his anger appropriately and he had 
been taking escitalopram 20 mg for quite some time.  (Ex. C:25) 
 
Dr. Fields found under Table 13-13, on page 334, vestibulocochlear nerve, he did 
not find a basis for an equilibrium impairment based on his clinical exam, noting 
Schmidt had a negative Romberg and normal finger-to-nose test and as noted on his 
intake sheet, he reported tinnitus did not interfere with his activities of daily living.  (Ex. 
C:25)  Likewise, Dr. Fields did not find he met the criteria for impairment due to sleep 
and arousal disorders under Table 13-4, page 317, noting according to his own 
statements he typically sleeps 7 hours a night, and perhaps 5 hours in a bad night and 
he uses a CPAP machine for his chronic personal medical condition.  (Ex. C:25) 
 
Dr. Fields opined the surveillance videos from July 14, 2020 and July 16, 2020, 
support Schmidt’s own statements that he has no issues performing activities of daily 
living, noting he appears to be adjusting the guide of a table saw while not wearing 
sunglasses in one portion, which seems inconsistent with Dr. Segal’s statements on 
page 4 of his report where he notes bright light increases his headache and that he 
wears sunglasses when he can.  (Ex. C:25)   
 
Dr. Abernathey issued a second opinion letter for Defendants on December 1, 
2021.  (Ex. B:5)  Dr. Abernathey found his opinions had not changed and from a 
neurosurgical standpoint Schmidt did not have any objective findings of injury, noting his 
imaging studies are unrevealing and his neurologic function is normal.  (Ex B:5)  Dr. 
Abernathey opined his complaints appeared to be primarily psychological and 
behavioral.  (Ex. B:5)   
Defendants provided Dr. Abernathey with surveillance material.  Dr. Abernathey 
opined the surveillance material clearly demonstrates Schmidt is capable of higher 
cognitive function noting the degree of intellect required to drive a car, comparison shop 
at a store, and interact with people is enormous and found Schmidt demonstrates no 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 16 
 
difficulty with complex activities.  (Ex. B:5)  Dr. Abernathey noted Dr. Segal’s 
assessment is expansive and delves into areas outside of his expertise as a 
neurosurgeon, whereas his opinions are based on quantifiable and objective 
assessment.  (Ex. B:5)  Dr. Abernathey opined Schmidt’s complaints are primarily 
associated with psychological and behavioral issues, noting he suffered from those 
types of issues prior to the work incident.  (Ex. B:5)  Dr. Abernathey further opined he 
agreed the subjective complaint of “10 out of 10” pain is not confirmed by real world 
surveillance, as Schmidt seemed quite comfortable with his daily activities and stated he 
concurred with Dr. Fields’ assessment.  (Ex. B:5-6)   
 
Schmidt testified there is not a day when he does not have a headache he rates 
as a “10 out of 10” in terms of pain.  (Tr.:51, 55)  Schmidt described his headache as 
“[t]he knife in the forehead, twisted,” which may last 10 seconds, one minute, or 10 
minutes.  (Tr.:51)  Schmidt relayed he learned to breathe through his headaches at the 
Mayo Clinic Pain Clinic.  (Tr.:51)  Schmidt testified he experienced a “10 out of 10” 
headache during the hearing, reporting “[w]ell, I had one just while we were talking, and 
it was right here.  It doesn’t necessarily have to be right there,” pointing to the left side of 
his head above his ear.  (Tr.:52)  I did not observe Schmidt grimace, squint, have any 
word-finding problems, speech or thought problems, or any other observable behaviors 
while he was testifying.   
 
Schmidt relayed he has pain that is the knife pain, a feeling of a band squeezing 
his head, and a dull ache at the base of his skull every day.  (Tr.:53)  Schmidt reported 
the intensity of his headache varies all the time.  (Tr.:54)  Schmidt testified he has a 
headache all the time, noting at the moment he was testifying it was like “a band 
squeezing my head,” and he gave it a rating of a six or seven out of 10.  (Tr.:53)  I again 
did not observe Schmidt grimace, squint, have any word-finding problems, speech or 
thought problems, or any other observable behaviors while he was testifying.   
 
Schmidt testified he experiences ringing in both of his ears all of the time.  
(Tr.:57)  He described it as a high pitch ringing in the ear that is sometimes pulsating 
and associated with dizziness or vertigo.  (Tr.:57)   
Schmidt reported he has neck pain “[p]retty much all the time.”  (Tr.:57)  Schmidt 
rated his neck pain to be a five or six all the time, and relayed it becomes worse with 
“overdoing it.”  (Tr.:58)  Schmidt testified he has right hip pain “most of the time,” and 
relayed it is aggravated by standing a long time, walking long distances, hiking, and 
driving long distances.  (Tr.:58) 
Schmidt testified his memory “is not what it used to be,” including his short-term 
and long-term memory.  (Tr.:58)  He also reports he has problems with word 
association, where he cannot find the words, which is very frustrating.  (Tr.:58)  During 
the hearing I did not observe Schmidt had problems with word association.  His speech 
seemed fluid throughout the hearing.  I did not observe he had problems with short-term 
and long-term memory while testifying.  
Schmidt believes he becomes angry easily.  (Tr.:58)  While Schmidt was 
diagnosed with depression before his work injury, he believes it is worse because he is 
grieving his former self and relayed he has anxiety and sadness.  (Tr.:59)  Schmidt also 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 17 
 
reported he has problems getting to sleep and testified he sleeps about five hours, but 
wakes up because of “the pain” and he sleeps a total of six hours.  (Tr.:60) 
 
The Depot Outlet, a thrift shop in Decorah, hired Schmidt as a part-time sales 
clerk in November 2019.  (Ex. J:112)  Schmidt prices items for sale.  (Tr.:60)  He 
worked an average of 20 hours per week, but reported he was working one to two five-
hour days per week at the time of the hearing.  (Tr.:61)  Schmidt earns $12.50 per hour.  
(Tr.:61)  Schmidt reported he is not able to work two days in a row because it is “[t]oo 
much.  It’s just I’m wiped out.  I crash.  You know, I look normal, but you know, it’s hard 
to work while you’re sick, you know.  You say, ‘Okay.  Here’s a guy that eats his food, 
look normal.’”  (Tr.:61)  The Depot Outlet is the only job Schmidt has applied for since 
Agri Star terminated his employment.  (Tr.:80-81) 
 
Schmidt testified he would not be able to return to doing site assessments or 
home inspections because he should not climb ladders or open up electrical panels 
because he is a danger to himself due to his fatigue and brain fog.  (Tr.:62-63)  Schmidt 
stated that he could not return to home construction because it took him four weeks to 
do trim work in a bedroom and bathroom because of his fatigue and no one would hire 
him if it would take him four weeks to do two rooms.  (Tr.:63)  Schmidt reported he could 
not do massage because his palpation skills are not there.  (Tr.:63) 
 
Schmidt is able to drive, shop, run errands, pump gas, use money to pay for 
items, go to his bank, go for walks with his wife, and complete his activities of daily 
living, including showering, dressing, and preparing meals.  (Tr.:81-82) 
 
Evans was one of Schmidt’s supervisors when he worked for Agri Star.  (Tr.:89)  
Evans interacted with Schmidt on a daily basis and supervised the plumbers.  (Tr.:89, 
93)  Evans testified during Schmidt’s employment Schmidt worked as the facility 
maintenance plumber where he would evaluate and solve plumbing maintenance issues 
plant-wide, including installing and modifying equipment.  (Tr.:89)  After his work injury 
Schmidt returned to his position within the plant.  (Tr.:91)  Evans testified he did not 
notice Schmidt was having any performance issues in getting work done after the work 
injury.  (Tr.:91) 
 
Nelson was a lead foreman for Agri Star during Schmidt’s employment.  (Tr.:95-
96)  Nelson worked for Agri Star for 10 years.  (Tr.:95)  At the time of the hearing he 
was not working for Agri Star.  (Tr.:95)  Nelson interacted with Schmidt for 
approximately four hours per day during his employment with Agri Star.  (Tr.:96)  Nelson 
was present during his work injury.  (Tr.:97)  Following his work injury Schmidt returned 
to his position on a full-time basis.  (Tr.:98)  Nelson testified he did not notice Schmidt 
had any performance issues before and after the injury.  (Tr.:98)  Nelson reported his 
demeanor was the same before and after the work injury.  (Tr.:99)  Nelson agreed 
Schmidt was frustrated with his treating physicians after the work injury because he 
“wasn’t getting anywhere.”  (Tr.:100) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
I. 
Nature of the Injury 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 18 
 
 
The parties agree Schmidt sustained a permanent impairment, chronic 
headaches, as a result of the November 19, 2018, work injury.  In addition to his chronic 
headaches, Schmidt alleges he sustained permanent impairments to his brain, cognitive 
functioning, mental health, tinnitus, vestibular function, cervical spine, and right hip as a 
result of the work injury.  Agri Star and Great American dispute his contention. 
To receive workers’ compensation benefits, an injured employee must prove, by 
a preponderance of the evidence, the employee’s injuries arose out of and in the course 
of the employee’s employment with the employer.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 
N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 1995).  An injury arises out of employment when a causal 
relationship exists between the employment and the injury.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 
552 N.W.2d 143, 151 (Iowa 1996).  The injury must be a rational consequence of a 
hazard connected with the employment, and not merely incidental to the employment.  
Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000).  The Iowa Supreme Court has 
held, an injury occurs “in the course of employment” when: 
it is within the period of employment at a place where the employee 
reasonably may be in performing his duties, and while he is fulfilling those 
duties or engaged in doing something incidental thereto.  An injury in the 
course of employment embraces all injuries received while employed in 
furthering the employer’s business and injuries received on the employer’s 
premises, provided that the employee’s presence must ordinarily be 
required at the place of the injury, or, if not so required, employee’s 
departure from the usual place of employment must not amount to an 
abandonment of employment or be an act wholly foreign to his usual work.  
An employee does not cease to be in the course of his employment 
merely because he is not actually engaged in doing some specifically 
prescribed task, if, in the course of his employment, he does some act 
which he deems necessary for the benefit or interest of his employer. 
Farmers Elevator Co., Kingsley v. Manning, 286 N.W.2d 174, 177 (Iowa 1979).   
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 
N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 1997).  When considering the weight of an expert 
opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination occurred shortly after the 
claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the nature and extent of the 
examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and practice, and “all other 
factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  Rockwell Graphic Sys., 
Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985). 
It is well-established in workers’ compensation that “if a claimant had a 
preexisting condition or disability, aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or ‘lighted up’ by 
an injury which arose out of and in the course of employment resulting in a disability 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 19 
 
found to exist,” the claimant is entitled to compensation.  Iowa Dep’t of Transp. v. Van 
Cannon, 459 N.W.2d 900, 904 (Iowa 1990).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held, 
a disease which under any rational work is likely to progress so as to 
finally disable an employee does not become a “personal injury” under our 
Workmen’s Compensation Act merely because it reaches a point of 
disablement while work for an employer is being pursued.  It is only when 
there is a direct causal connection between exertion of the employment 
and the injury that a compensation award can be made.  The question is 
whether the diseased condition was the cause, or whether the 
employment was a proximate contributing cause. 
Musselman v. Cent. Tel. Co., 261 Iowa 352, 359-60, 154 N.W.2d 128, 132 (1967).  
 
A. 
Traumatic Brain Injury with Headaches 
Dr. Fields and Dr. Segal both opined Schmidt sustained a traumatic brain injury 
with no evidence of any acute findings on imaging, which caused him to develop 
chronic, permanent headaches.  (Ex. C:22)  Dr. Segal assigned Schmidt a 15 percent 
whole person impairment and Dr. Fields assigned Schmidt a five percent whole person 
impairment.  The record evidence supports the traumatic brain injury he experienced 
caused him to develop chronic, permanent headaches.   
 
B. 
Anxiety and Depression 
The record also supports Schmidt sustained an aggravation of his preexisting 
anxiety and depression as supported by Dr. Brennscheidt’s opinion.  The record does 
not support Dr. Segal’s conclusory opinions concerning Schmidt’s emotional and 
behavioral impairment. 
Dr. Segal documented Schmidt told him he is “quick to anger, quick to cry, and 
his moods are off the chart,” and that he and his wife indicated his emotional changes 
have affected their relationship.  (Ex. 1:40)  Using the Criteria for Rating Impairment 
Due to Emotional or Behavioral Disorders, Dr. Segal found Schmidt has “mild limitation 
of activities of daily living and daily social and interpersonal functioning,” and he 
assigned Schmidt a four percent whole person impairment.  (Ex. 1:40)  His conclusions 
make no reference to Dr. Brennscheidt’s testing and opinions and do not reference her 
diagnoses.  (Ex 1:40) 
Schmidt retained Dr. Brennscheidt to conduct a full neuropsychological 
examination in August 2021.  (Ex. 2)  Dr. Brennscheidt used objective testing in 
reaching her conclusions and I find her report credible.  (Ex. 2)  Contrary to Schmidt’s 
allegation of cognitive problems affecting his short-term and long-term memory and 
ability to read, Dr. Brennscheidt found Schmidt cognitively intact and that his overall 
intellectual abilities are well-preserved, ranging from low average to average and 
superior.  (Ex. 2:99)   
Dr. Brennscheidt opined Schmidt’s “[c]urrent cognitive limitations in aspects of 
attention, working memory, and cognitive processing speed along with variability in 
overall performance,” appear to be related to anxiety, noting magnetic resonance 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 20 
 
imaging following the accident “did not show any acute intracranial abnormalities but 
foci within the mid brain compatible with hemosiderin deposition which was felt related 
to a known cavernoma.”  (Ex. 2:100)  Dr. Brennscheidt opined “[o]ther emotional 
difficulties, such as frustration, anger, and irritability, were reported and observed but 
did not meet diagnostic thresholds.”  (Ex. 2:100)  No other neuropsychological testing or 
other testing based on objective indicators of psychological functioning were 
administered by any other expert.  I find Dr. Brennscheidt’s opinion persuasive and 
consistent with the other evidence I believe.  I do not find Dr. Segal’s opinion 
persuasive. 
C. 
Dementia/Cognitive Changes Unrelated to Anxiety and Depression 
Unlike the opinion of Dr. Brennscheidt, I do not find the opinion of Dr. Segal 
persuasive, credible, or consistent with the other evidence I believe with respect to his 
dementia/cognitive impairment findings and opinions. 
With respect to Schmidt’s head trauma, Dr. Segal opined: 
[t]o gauge the impact of Mr. Schmidt’s head we can estimate that he 
weighs about 180 pounds, the acceleration was about half the force of 
gravity because he was falling and running, and the distance was about 6 
meters.  This would give a force impact of 188N.  This converts to a g-
force of 20,000.  To put that in perspective, most concussions occur with 
95 g’s, and the average football player receives 103 g’s when hit during a 
game.  The force by which Mr. Schmidt propelled into the side of the trailer 
was a significant impact and was well above the range of impact that 
would cause traumatic brain injury. 
(Ex. 1:21-22)  Dr. Segal opined Schmidt sustained a “mild to moderate traumatic brain 
injury,” and found that his “cognitive function is moderately impaired, which causes 
substantial difficulty in his participation in all activities of daily living.”  (Ex. 1:24)  I do not 
find Dr. Segal’s opinion persuasive, as supported by Dr. Fields’s second independent 
medical examination.  Dr. Segal does not explain how Schmidt accelerated from the trip 
on the pallet to support his finding.  A review of the website he used says: 
This versatile impact force calculator is useful for estimating the impact 
forces involved in collisions of different kinds.  For example, it can be used 
to calculate the impact force of a vehicle (car, truck, train), plane, football, 
of birds hitting a plane or wind mill, as well as for falling bodies that crash 
into the ground. 
https://www.gigacalculator.com/calculators/impact-force-calculator.php (last visited on 
April 6, 2022).  The website does not indicate that it can be used for the type of incident 
in this case.  The website does not refer to any professional peer-reviewed publications 
supporting the conclusions reached.  According to Dr. Segal, a direct hit during a 
football game results in an average receipt of 95 g’s.  He does not explain why the trip 
and collision into the jetter would be 210 times greater.  Nor does he indicate what the g 
force would be in a head-on car collision.  There is no evidence Dr. Segal has any 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 21 
 
special training in engineering or accident scene investigation to give such an opinion.  I 
do not find his opinion credible or trustworthy.   
 
Moreover, Dr. Segal’s opinions concerning the force of the accident are not 
consistent with the accident report Schmidt prepared after the work injury.  Schmidt 
completed an incident report on November 20, 2018, stating he injured his head, neck, 
shoulder, and hip by a “trip and fall” when he was “walking” and “looking for parts, trip 
on pallet, hit my head on the jetter.”  (Ex. 7:128)   
 
Dr. Segal found Schmidt sustained a permanent cognitive impairment using the 
CDR Scale for dementia found in Chapter 13 of the AMA Guides at page 320.  (Ex. 
1:39)  Under the CDR Scale the practitioner assigns impairments on a scale of 0 to 3 for 
Memory, Orientation, Judgment and Problem Solving, Community Affairs, Home and 
Hobbies, and Personal Care and may assign impairments based on ranges within four 
classes .  Dr. Segal assigned Schmidt:  (1) 1.0 for Memory finding he has moderate 
memory loss, more marked for recent events, which interferes with daily activities; (2) 
0.5 for Orientation finding he is fully oriented except for slight difficulty in relationships; 
(3) 0.5 for Judgment and Problem Solving because he has a slight impairment in solving 
problems, similarities and difference; (4) 0.5 for Community Affairs concluding he has a 
“slight impairment in these activities;” (5) 0.5 for Home and Hobbies, finding he has a 
“mild but definite impairment of function at home; more difficult chores abandoned; more 
complicated hobbies and interests abandoned; and (6) 0.5 for Personal Care finding he 
is fully capable of self-care. (Ex. 1:39)  Based on his findings, Dr. Segal concluded 
Schmidt falls in the higher range of a Class 1 impairment and assigned him an 11 
percent whole person impairment.  (Ex. 1:39) 
 
No other physician or practitioner has opined Schmidt has sustained a 
permanent cognitive impairment independent from his mental health conditions as a 
result of the traumatic brain injury he sustained.  Dr. Segal’s findings are contrary to the 
credible, objective findings of Dr. Brennscheidt, which are supported by objective 
neuropsychological testing.  None of the treatment records from Schmidt’s self-selected 
treatment at the Mayo Clinic support he has a permanent cognitive impairment 
independent from his mental health conditions as a result of the traumatic brain injury 
he sustained.  Dr. Segal makes conclusory statements in support of his bare opinions, 
which are not supported by the record.  While Schmidt experienced interpersonal 
difficulties at work and with his spouse, those difficulties are attributable to his 
psychological conditions, not a cognitive impairment caused by the traumatic brain 
injury.  Shortly after the work injury he was released without restrictions and performed 
his normal duties until his termination.   
Dr. Segal also opined Schmidt’s “cognitive function is moderately impaired, which 
causes substantial difficulty in his participation in all activities of daily living.”  (Ex. 1:24)  
As correctly pointed out by Dr. Fields, Schmidt testified he is able to perform his 
activities of daily living.  Dr. Segal’s opinion is also inconsistent with the testimony from 
Schmidt’s supervisors, including a supervisor that no longer works for Agri Star.  
Following the work injury Schmidt returned to work without restrictions.  His supervisors 
testified he did not have any difficulties performing his job.  Schmidt has not proven he 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 22 
 
sustained a permanent cognitive impairment independent from his mental health 
conditions as a result of the traumatic brain injury he sustained. 
 
D. 
Sleep Disorder 
Dr. Segal found Schmidt has a sleep disorder and assigned him a five percent 
whole person impairment.  (Ex. 1:28, 41-42)  Dr. Fields opined Schmidt does not meet 
the criteria for a sleep disorder.  (Ex. C:28)   
In reaching his conclusion, Dr. Segal found Schmidt wakes up a few times per 
night and gets three to four hours of uninterrupted sleep, noting Schmidt reported he is 
in bed 12 to 14 hours per day, but gets three to four hours of uninterrupted sleep per 
night.  (Ex. 1:28, 41-42)  Dr. Fields noted that Schmidt reported he typically sleeps 
seven hours per night, and perhaps five hours in a bad night.  (Ex. C:25)  Dr. Segal’s 
finding is inconsistent with Schmidt’s testimony and the record evidence.  The record 
evidence supports Schmidt has difficulty getting to sleep, not staying asleep.  His 
medical records document he had sleep disturbance problems and obstructive sleep 
apnea and was using a CPAP machine before the work injury.  (JE 1:25)  When treating 
at the Mayo Clinic and with Dr. Swanson Schmidt reported his sleep was fine or 
improved.  (JE 2:75, 83; JE 9:143)  I do not find Schmidt has established he sustained a 
permanent impairment related to a sleep disorder caused by the work injury. 
E. 
Tinnitus and Vestibular Dysfunction 
Dr. Segal assigned Schmidt a seven percent whole person impairment for 
vestibular dysfunction causing a gait and station impairment.  (Ex. 1:41)  Dr. Segal 
noted on exam Schmidt had a positive Romberg test supporting his vestibular 
dysfunction finding.  (Ex. 1:41)  Dr. Fields examined Schmidt later in time and found he 
had a negative Romberg and normal finger-to-nose test, noting he did not find a basis 
for an equilibrium impairment.  (Ex. C:21, 25)  No treating physician has diagnosed 
Schmidt with vestibular dysfunction, including the Mayo Clinic, a tertiary care center.  I 
do not find Schmidt has established he sustained permanent vestibular dysfunction 
caused by the work injury.   
Dr. Segal assigned Schmidt a two percent impairment for tinnitus.  (Ex. 1:41)  Dr. 
Fields did not address or challenge this finding in his report.  (Ex. C)  While Schmidt 
complained of tinnitus following his brain bleed in 2007, the record does not report he 
continued to complain of ongoing tinnitus, rather he continued to have problems with 
double vision.  After the November 2018 work injury he continued to complain of tinnitus 
up through the time of the hearing.  The record evidence supports Dr. Segal’s findings 
Schmidt sustained permanent tinnitus caused by the work injury.   
 
F. 
Right Hip 
 
Dr. Segal assigned Schmidt a three percent permanent impairment for a 
diagnosis of right trochanteric bursitis with an abnormal gait.  (Ex. 1:42)  This finding is 
not supported by the record.  During his appointment with Reicks on January 29, 2019, 
Schmidt reported his joint pain had resolved, but he was having ongoing concussive 
symptoms, including daily headaches, chronic tinnitus, intermittent light and sound 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 23 
 
sensitivity, difficulty falling asleep, irritability, and difficulty focusing.  (JE 3:112)  There is 
no mention of ongoing hip pain or any gait dysfunction during any of his appointments 
with Dr. Swanson, with the pain specialist, Dr. Afzal, or with his providers at the Mayo 
Clinic, a tertiary care center.  Schmidt tries to explain the absence of any such 
complaints with his assertion that he was focused on his headache pain.  I do not find 
his testimony credible, or consistent with the other evidence I believe.  No treating 
physician in this case has diagnosed Schmidt with permanent trochanteric bursitis, any 
permanent hip condition, or any permanent gait dysfunction.  I do not find Dr. Segal’s 
opinions persuasive, also taking into consideration my concerns with his opinions 
discussed above.  I do not find Schmidt has established he sustained a permanent 
impairment to his right hip caused by the work injury. 
 
G. 
Cervical Spine 
 
Dr. Segal found Schmidt has a cervical traumatic facet disorder and occipital 
neuralgia with limitations in range of motion and palpable muscle spasm, noting 
Schmidt has difficulty with standing, sitting, reclining, and climbing stairs, and he 
assigned him an eight percent whole person impairment.  (Ex. 1:42)  Dr. Fields found 
Schmidt had full range of motion for the cervical spine and that he had sustained no 
permanent impairment caused by the work injury.  (Ex. C:21, 24)  Dr. Fields correctly 
noted a computerized tomography scan taken shortly after the work injury found no 
acute findings, but was consistent with multilevel degenerative changes.  (Ex. C:24; JE 
3:105)   
Dr. Fields challenged Dr. Segal’s finding noting in his report Dr. Segal stated, 
“[w]hen Mr. Schmidt fell to the ground, likely his head turned”  (Ex. 1:29)  Dr. Fields 
noted Dr. Segal’s finding is based on mere speculation because Schmidt could not 
recall exactly how he fell.  (Ex. C:24)  At hearing Schmidt testified he knows he fell 
because he was dirty following the incident, but he could not remember falling to the 
ground at hearing.  (Tr.:22)  I find Dr. Segal’s opinion based on speculation. 
Schmidt complained of occasional spasms in his back and neck to Dr. Swanson 
in February 2018.  (JE 1:27)  The record evidence supports Schmidt complained of 
cervical spine pain and range of motion difficulties immediately following the work injury 
and through his medical treatment through September 26, 2019.  (JE 3:103, 108, 111-
12; JE 4:121; JE 5: 123-24, 127; JE 8:134-35, 137-38)  He did not report any cervical 
spine problems or pain to his treating physicians at the Mayo Clinic, including during the 
three-week pain rehabilitation program he participated in at the Mayo Clinic from 
September 27, 2021 through October 18, 2021, to help him manage his chronic pain.  
(JE 2:100-02)  The record evidence supports Schmidt sustained a temporary, but not a 
permanent aggravation of his preexisting cervical spine problems.  I do not find Schmidt 
has met his burden of proof he sustained a permanent impairment to his cervical spine 
or permanent aggravation to a preexisting condition in his cervical spine caused by the 
work injury.   
 
 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 24 
 
II. 
Rate 
The parties stipulated at the time of the injury Schmidt was married and entitled 
to two exemptions, but disagree on the amount of his rate based on whether the 
individual weeks leading up to the injury are representative or not.    
Iowa Code section 85.36 sets forth the basis for determining an injured 
employee’s compensation rate.  Mercy Med. Ctr. v. Healy, 801 N.W.2d 865, 870 (Iowa 
Ct. App. 2011).  The basis of compensation shall be the “weekly earnings of the injured 
employee at the time of the injury.”  Iowa Code § 85.36.  The statute defines “weekly 
earnings” as  
gross salary, wages, or earnings of an employee to which such employee 
would have been entitled had the employee worked the customary hours 
for the full pay period in which the employee was injured, as regularly 
required by the employee’s employer for the work or employment for 
which the employee was employed . . . rounded to the nearest dollar. 
Id.  The term “gross earnings” is defined as “recurring payments by employer to the 
employee for employment, before any authorized or lawfully required deduction or 
withholding of funds by the employer, excluding irregular bonuses, retroactive pay, 
overtime, penalty pay, reimbursement of expenses, expense allowances, and the 
employer’s contribution for welfare benefits.”  Id. § 85.61.  Weekly earnings for 
employees paid on an hourly basis 
shall be computed by dividing by thirteen the earnings, including shift 
differential pay but not including overtime or premium pay, of the 
employee earned in the employ of the employer in the last completed 
period of thirteen consecutive calendar weeks immediately preceding the 
injury.  If the employee was absent from employment for reasons personal 
to the employee during part of the thirteen calendar weeks preceding the 
injury, the employee’s weekly earnings shall be the amount the employee 
would have earned had the employee worked when work was available to 
other employees of the employer in a similar occupation.  A week which 
does not fairly reflect the employee’s customary earnings shall be 
replaced by the closest previous week with earnings that fairly represent 
the employee’s customary earnings. 
Id. § 85.36(6).  Thus under the statute, overtime is counted hour for hour, and 
shift differential, vacation, and holiday pay are also included.   
 
The parties produced competing rate calculations.  (Exs. 5:124; H:105)  
Schmidt avers the weeks ending August 11, 2018, August 18, 2018, September 
22, 2018, September 29, 2018, and October 6, 2018, should be excluded 
because the weeks are not representative.  (Ex. 5:124)  Agri Star and Great 
American did not include the weeks ending August 11, 2018, September 22, 
2018, and October 6, 2018 in the rate calculation, but included the weeks ending 
August 18, 2018 and September 29, 2018.   

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 25 
 
The parties did not produce Schmidt’s wage records for all of 2018.  
Schmidt did not provide 13 weeks in his rate calculation.  Agri Star and Great 
American included the weeks he earned overtime in their rate calculation, and 
argued the weeks ending September 29, 2018, where he worked 39.67 hours, 
August 18, 2018, where he worked 34.67 hours, and July 28, 2018, where he 
worked 36.42 hours are representative.  I find these three weeks Defendants 
included weeks representative, just as the weeks he worked overtime are 
representative and adopt Defendants’ rate calculation.  Schmidt’s average 
weekly wage is $865.92 and his rate based on married status with two 
exemptions is $567.98.1  
III. 
Extent of Disability 
 
Compensation for an unscheduled injury through the industrial method is 
determined by evaluating the employee’s earning capacity.  Westling v. Hormel Foods, 
810 N.W.2d 247, 251 (Iowa 2012); Pease, 807 N.W.2d at 852.  In considering the 
employee’s earning capacity, the deputy commissioner evaluates several factors, 
including “consideration of not only the claimant’s functional disability, but also [his] age, 
education, qualifications, experience, and ability to engage in similar employment.”  
Swiss Colony, Inc. v. Deutmeyer, 789 N.W.2d 129, 137-38 (Iowa 2010).  The inquiry 
focuses on the injured employee’s “ability to be gainfully employed.”  Id. at 138.  
The determination of the extent of disability is a mixed issue of law and fact.  
Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 525 (Iowa 2012).  Compensation for 
permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the healing period.  Iowa 
Code § 85.34(2).  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Id. § 85.34(2)(u).  When considering the extent of 
disability, the deputy commissioner considers all evidence, both medical and 
nonmedical.  Evenson v. Winnebago Indus., Inc., 881 N.W.2d 360, 370 (Iowa 2016). 
 
The Iowa Supreme Court has held, “it is a fundamental requirement that the 
commissioner consider all evidence, both medical and nonmedical.  Lay witness 
testimony is both relevant and material upon the cause and extent of injury.”  Evenson, 
881 N.W.2d 360, 369 (Iowa 2016) (quoting Gits Mfg. Co. v. Frank, 855 N.W.2d 195, 199 
(Iowa 2014)).  Schmidt avers he is permanently and totally disabled under the statute 
and under the odd-lot doctrine.  Agri Star and Great American allege he is not. 
 
In Iowa, a claimant may establish permanent total disability under the statute, or 
through the common law odd-lot doctrine.  Michael Eberhart Constr. v. Curtin, 674 
N.W.2d 123, 126 (Iowa 2004) (discussing both theories of permanent total disability 
under Idaho law and concluding the deputy’s ruling was not based on both theories, 
rather, it was only based on the odd-lot doctrine).  Under the statute, the claimant may 
establish the claimant is totally and permanently disabled if the claimant’s medical 
impairment together with nonmedical factors totals 100 percent.  Id.  The odd-lot 
doctrine applies when the claimant has established the claimant has sustained 
                                                 
1  http://www.iowaworkcomp.gov/sites/authoring.iowadivisionofworkcomp.gov/files/2018ratebook.pdf. 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 26 
 
something less than 100 percent disability, but is so injured that the claimant is “unable 
to perform services other than ‘those which are so limited in quality, dependability or 
quantity that a reasonably stable market for them does not exist.’”  Id. (quoting Boley v. 
Indus. Special Indem. Fund, 130 Idaho 278, 281, 939 P.2d 854, 857 (1997)).   
 
“Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness.”  Wal-Mart 
Stores, Inc. v. Caselman, 657 N.W.2d 493, 501 (Iowa 2003) (quoting IBP, Inc. v. Al-
Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 621, 633 (Iowa 2000)).  Total disability “occurs when the injury 
wholly disables the employee from performing work that the employee’s experience, 
training, intelligence, and physical capacities would otherwise permit the employee to 
perform.”  IBP, Inc., 604 N.W.2d at 633.   
 
As analyzed above, I rejected many of Dr. Segal’s opinions finding his opinions 
not credible or consistent with the other evidence I believe.  I also reject his permanent 
restrictions.  No treating provider, including Schmidt’s treating providers at the Mayo 
Clinic have imposed any permanent restrictions for Schmidt.  I did not find Schmidt met 
his burden of proof he sustained a permanent cognitive impairment independent from 
his mental health conditions, a permanent sleep disorder or permanent impairments to 
his right hip, cervical spine, or vestibular system caused by the work injury.  I did find he 
met his burden of proof the work injury caused him to develop permanent headaches 
and tinnitus, and permanently aggravated his preexisting depression and anxiety.   
 
Schmidt is a high school graduate.  Following high school he completed an 
electrician certification and a massage therapist program.  (Ex. J:111; Tr.:10, 65-66)  
Schmidt continues to be a certified electrician, a licensed massage therapist, and he is 
a master plumber.  Schmidt holds certificates as a green builder, boiler technician, 
home inspector, and he holds various solar and wind site assessment certifications.  
(Tr.:10)  He also has a valid driver’s license, a chauffer’s license, and a motorcycle 
license.  (Tr.:65)  
 
I rejected Dr. Segal’s opinion Schmidt has a cognitive impairment independent 
from his depression and anxiety caused by the work injury, relying on Dr. 
Brennscheidt’s credible opinion.  I also reject Schmidt’s testimony that he has difficulty 
reading and has a cognitive impairment independent from his mental health conditions.  
I did not observe Schmidt struggling with word finding, that he had any problems with 
short-term or long-term memory, or any difficulty testifying during the hearing.  I believe 
Schmidt is capable of retraining.   
 
Neither party presented a vocational rehabilitation opinion concerning Schmidt’s 
employability.  Schmidt operated his own businesses for many years.  He also has 
experience working in sales.  I believe he is capable of working more than two days per 
week, contrary to his testimony.  I do not find Schmidt is motivated to work.  I do not find 
Schmidt is permanently and totally disabled under the statute or odd-lot doctrine.  
Considering all the factors of industrial disability, I find Schmidt has sustained a 40 
percent industrial disability, entitling him to 200 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits. 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 27 
 
The parties disagree on the commencement date for permanency.  Schmidt 
avers the commencement date is September 11, 2019.  Agri Star and Great American 
aver the commencement date is either June 19, 2019 or June 20, 2019.  Under the 
statute, “[c]ompensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is medically 
indicated that maximum medical improvement from the injury has been reached and 
that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be determined” using 
the AMA Guides.  Iowa Code § 85.34(2).  Schmidt continued to receive treatment for his 
headaches after June 19, 2019 and June 20, 2019.  I do not find he was at maximum 
medical improvement at that time.  On September 25, 2021, Dr. Segal conducted his 
independent medical examination and agreed Schmidt had reached maximum medical 
improvement.  Under the statute, I find September 25, 2021, to be the commencement 
date for permanency.  Schmidt is entitled to 200 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits at the rate of $567.98, commencing on September 25, 2021. 
IV. 
Medical Mileage 
 
Schmidt seeks to recover medical expenses and medical mileage set forth in 
Exhibits 9 and 10.  Agri Star and Great American aver they did not authorize the 
treatment and are not responsible for paying for the cost of the treatment and mileage. 
An employer is required to furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, 
osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, hospital 
services and supplies, and transportation expenses for all conditions compensable 
under the workers’ compensation law.  Iowa Code § 85.27(1).  The employer has the 
right to choose the provider of care, except when the employer has denied liability for 
the injury.  Id.  “The treatment must be offered promptly and be reasonably suited to 
treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.”  Id. § 85.27(4).  If the 
employee is dissatisfied with the care, the employee should communicate the basis for 
the dissatisfaction to the employer.  Id.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on 
alternate care, the commissioner “may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care.”  Id.  The statute requires the employer to 
furnish reasonable medical care.  Id. § 85.27(4); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 
122, 124 (Iowa 1995) (noting “[t]he employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the 
question of reasonable necessity, not desirability”).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held 
the employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except when the employer 
has denied liability for the injury, or has abandoned care.  Iowa Code § 85.27(4); Bell 
Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 204 (Iowa 2010).   
As discussed above, I found Schmidt established he sustained permanent 
headaches caused by the work injury and the work injury permanently aggravated his 
preexisting anxiety and depression.  Agri Star and Great American are responsible for 
all causally related medical bills, including medical mileage, related to his headaches, 
anxiety, and depression.  I find the treatment Schmidt received set forth in Exhibits 9 
and 10 for his headaches, depression, and anxiety that while not authorized, the 
treatment was reasonable and beneficial.  Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning, 779 
N.W.2d at 206; Brewer-Strong v. HNI Corp. 913 N.W.2d 235 (Iowa 2018).  Agri Star and 
Great American are responsible for all causally related medical bills, including medical 
mileage, set forth in Exhibits 9 and 10.  Agri Star and Great American are not 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 28 
 
responsible for any other medical conditions Schmidt received treatment for in Exhibits 
9 and 10.   
V. 
Penalty Benefits 
 
On the Hearing Report Schmidt alleged he was entitled to penalty benefits.  
Schmidt did not address his penalty claim in his post-hearing brief.  Agri Star and Great 
American aver Schmidt is not entitled to penalty benefits.   
Iowa Code section 86.13 governs compensation payments.  Under the statute’s 
plain language, if there is a delay in payment absent “a reasonable or probable cause or 
excuse,” the employee is entitled to penalty benefits, of up to fifty percent of the amount 
of benefits that were denied, delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse.  Iowa Code § 86.13(4); see also Christensen v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 
554 N.W.2d 254, 260 (Iowa 1996) (citing earlier version of the statute).  “The application 
of the penalty provision does not turn on the length of the delay in making the correct 
compensation payment.”  Robbennolt v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229, 236 
(Iowa 1996).  If a delay occurs without a reasonable excuse, the commissioner is 
required to award penalty benefits in some amount to the employee.  Id.   
The statute requires the employer or insurance company to conduct a 
“reasonable investigation and evaluation” into whether benefits are owed to the 
employee, the results of the investigation and evaluation must be the “actual basis” 
relied on by the employer or insurance company to deny, delay, or terminate benefits, 
and the employer or insurance company must contemporaneously convey the basis for 
the denial, delay, or termination of benefits to the employee at the time of the denial, 
delay, or termination of benefits.  Iowa Code § 86.13(4).  An employer may establish a 
“reasonable cause or excuse” if “the delay was necessary for the insurer to investigate 
the claim,” or if “the employer had a reasonable basis to contest the employee’s 
entitlement to benefits.”  Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260.  “A ‘reasonable basis’ for 
denial of the claim exists if the claim is ‘fairly debatable.’”  Burton v. Hilltop Care Ctr., 
813 N.W.2d 250, 267 (Iowa 2012).  “Whether a claim is ‘fairly debatable’ can generally 
be determined by the court as a matter of law.”  Id.  The issue is whether the employer 
had a reasonable basis to believe no benefits were owed to the claimant.  Id.  “If there 
was no reasonable basis for the employer to have denied the employee's benefits, then 
the court must ‘determine if the defendant knew, or should have known, that the basis 
for denying the employee's claim was unreasonable.’”  Id. 
Benefits must be paid beginning on the eleventh day after the injury, and “each 
week thereafter during the period for which compensation is payable, and if not paid 
when due,” interest will be imposed.  Iowa Code § 85.30.  In Robbennolt, the Iowa 
Supreme Court noted, “[i]f the required weekly compensation is timely paid at the end of 
the compensation week, no interest will be imposed . . . . As an example, if Monday is 
the first day of the compensation week, full payment of the weekly compensation is due 
the following Monday.”  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 235.  A payment is “made” when the 
check addressed to the claimant is mailed, or personally delivered to the claimant.  
Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502, 505 (Iowa 1996) (abrogated by 
Keystone Nursing Care Ctr. v. Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 299 (Iowa 2005) (concluding the 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 29 
 
employer’s failure to explain to the claimant why it would not pay permanent benefits 
upon the termination of healing period benefits did not support the commissioner’s 
award of penalty benefits)). 
When considering an award of penalty benefits, the commissioner considers “the 
length of the delay, the number of the delays, the information available to the employer 
regarding the employee’s injuries and wages, and the prior penalties imposed against 
the employer under section 86.13.”  Schadendorf v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 757 N.W.2d 
330, 336 (Iowa 2008).  The purposes of the statute are to punish the employer and 
insurance company and to deter employers and insurance companies from delaying 
payments.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 237.   
 
I find Schmidt waived his penalty claim by failing to address it in his post-hearing 
brief.  Even assuming Schmidt did not waive his claim by failing to address it, I find his 
claim was fairly debatable initially, based on the opinions of Drs. McMains, Fields, and 
Abernathey.  After Dr. Fields received additional evidence and changed his opinion, Agri 
Star and Great American paid Schmidt his rating.  Schmidt is not entitled to an award of 
penalty benefits.   
VI. 
Independent Medical Examination 
 
Schmidt seeks to recover the $4,500.00 cost of Dr. Segal’s independent medical 
examination and the $3,375.00 cost of Dr. Brennscheidt’s neuropsychological 
evaluation and report.  (Ex. 11)   
Iowa Code section 85.39(2) provides: 
2.  If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and 
upon delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its 
insurance carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, 
and reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for the 
examination. . . . An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for 
the cost of an examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the 
injury for which the employee is being examined is determined to be 
compensable under this chapter or chapter 85A or 85B. An employer is 
not liable for the cost of such an examination if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined not to be a compensable 
injury.  A determination of the reasonableness of a fee for an examination 
made pursuant to this subsection, shall be based on the typical fee 
charged by a medical provider to perform an impairment rating in the local 
area where the examination is conducted.   
 
Drs. McMains and Abernathey, and Dr. Fields, in his initial evaluation, found Schmidt 
did not sustain a permanent impairment.  Schmidt disagreed with their opinions and 
sought an independent medical examination with Dr. Segal.   
 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 30 
 
The Iowa Court of Appeals recently addressed this issue in Kern v. Fenchel, 
Doster & Buck, P.L.C., No. 20-1206, 2021 WL 3890603 (Iowa Ct. App. Sept. 1, 2021).  
In Kern, the defendants’ expert found there was no causation.  Kern disagreed with the 
opinion and sought an independent medical examination at the defendants’ expense.  
The Commissioner found Kern was not entitled to recover the cost of an independent 
medical examination.  The Court of Appeals reversed, finding the “opinion on lack of 
causation was tantamount to a zero percent impairment rating,” which is reimbursable 
under Iowa Code section 85.39.  Under Kern, I find Schmidt is entitled to recover the 
$4,500.00 cost of Dr. Segal’s independent medical examination. 
Iowa Code section 86.40, provides, “[a]ll costs incurred in the hearing before the 
commissioner shall be taxed in the discretion of the commissioner.”  Rule 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 4.33, provides costs may be taxed by the deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner for:  (1) the attendance of a certificated shorthand reporter 
for hearings and depositions; (2) transcription costs; (3) the cost of service of the 
original notice and subpoenas; (4) witness fees and expenses; (5) the cost of doctors’ 
and practitioner’s deposition testimony; (6) the reasonable cost of obtaining no more 
than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports; (7) filing fees; and (8) the cost of persons 
reviewing health service disputes.  The rule allows for the recovery of an expert report.  
Dr. Brennscheidt’s bill is itemized.  She charged $1,750.00 for the evaluation, and 
$1,625.00 for the report.  Under the rule Schmidt is entitled to recover the cost of her 
report, or $1,625.00, but not the cost of the evaluation. 
ORDER 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, THAT: 
Defendants shall pay Claimant two hundred (200) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the stipulated rate of five hundred sixty-seven and 98/100 dollars 
($567.98) per week, commencing on September 25, 2021. 
Defendants are entitled to a credit for all benefits paid to date.  
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. 
Defendants are responsible for all causally connected medical bills, including 
medical mileage, related to treatment Claimant received for his headaches, anxiety, and 
depression set forth in Exhibits 9 and 10.   
Defendants shall reimburse Claimant four thousand five hundred and 00/100 
dollars ($4,500.00) for the cost of Dr. Segal’s independent medical examination, and 
one thousand six hundred twenty-five and 00/100 dollars ($1,625.00) for the cost of Dr. 
Brennscheidt’s report.   
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 

SCHMIDT V. AGRI STAR MEAT & POULTRY, LLC 
Page 31 
 
Signed and filed this __28th __ day of April, 2022. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           HEATHER L. PALMER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
 
Benjamin Roth (via WCES) 
 
Lori Scardina Utsinger (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
  
