Case Number: 5067358
Case Title:  HANEY, DANIEL R V. ARCONIC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Haney Daniel-5067358D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DANIEL HANEY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
     File No. 5067358 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
ARCONIC, INC., 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                         
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE COMPANY 
  : 
OF NORTH AMERICA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
      Head Notes: 1108.50, 1402.30,  
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
      1403.30, 1803, 2208, 2402, 2501 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Daniel Haney filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ compensation 
benefits from employer Arconic, Inc. and insurance carrier Indemnity Insurance 
Company of North America for alleged occupational hearing loss and tinnitus.  
The agency held a hearing in Davenport, Iowa. The undersigned presided. 
Haney participated personally and through attorney Brian T. Fairfield. The defendants 
participated through attorney Jane V. Lorentzen. 
ISSUES 
Under agency rule 876 IAC 4.19(3)(f), the parties jointly submitted a hearing 
report identifying the following disputed issues: 
1) Did Haney sustain injuries, in the form of occupational hearing loss and 
tinnitus, which arose out of and in the course of his employment with Arconic 
on May 7, 2018? 
2) Did Haney timely commence this action under Iowa Code section 85.26? 
3) If the alleged injuries arose out of and in the course of his employment with 
Arconic, what is the nature and extent of Haney’s permanent disability 
relating to the injuries, if any? 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Oct-05  14:44:01     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 2 
 
4) Is Haney entitled to payment of medical expenses relating to the alleged 
injuries? 
5) Are costs taxed against Haney or the defendants? 
 After discussion of the disputed issues at hearing, the undersigned issued an 
order adopting the hearing report as part of the record in this case because it accurately 
reflects the disputed issues submitted to the agency for determination. 
STIPULATIONS 
 
In the hearing report, the parties also entered into the following stipulations: 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between Haney and Arconic at 
the time of the alleged work injury. 
2) At the time of the alleged work injuries: 
a) Haney’s gross earnings were one thousand two hundred thirty-five and 
42/100 ($1,235.42) per week. 
b) Haney was married. 
c) Haney was entitled to two exemptions. 
3) With respect to the disputed medical expenses: 
a) Although disputed, the medical providers would testify as to the 
reasonableness of their fees and/or treatment set forth in the listed 
medical expenses and the defendants are not offering contrary 
evidence. 
b) Although causal connection of the medical expenses to a work injury 
cannot be stipulated, the listed expenses are at least causally 
connected to the medical condition upon which Haney’s claim of injury 
is based. 
The parties’ stipulations in the hearing report are accepted and incorporated into 
this arbitration decision. This decision contains no discussion of any factual or legal 
issues relative to the parties’ stipulations unless necessary for clarity. The parties are 
bound by their stipulations. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The evidentiary record in this case consists of the following:  
 Joint Exhibits 1 through 3; 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 5;  
 Defendants’ Exhibits A through E; and 
 Hearing testimony by Haney and Adrianne Stoltenberg, an industrial hygienist 
employed by Arconic.  
 
After careful consideration of all evidence in the record and the parties’ post-
hearing briefs, the undersigned makes the following findings of fact. 
Haney was 57 years old at the time of hearing. (Hrg. Tr. p. 10) He has achieved 
a GED. (Hrg. Tr. p. 10) Haney has taken some postsecondary courses, but has not 
earned a postsecondary degree or certificate. (Hrg. Tr. p. 10) 
In Haney’s younger years, he liked to attend concerts. (Ex. C, p. 15) He attended 
concerts primarily in the 1980s. (Ex. C, p. 15; Hrg. Tr. p. 44) The concerts were mostly 
outdoors. (Ex. C, p. 15) Usually, he stayed in the back. (Ex. C, p. 16) 
Haney mowed lawns growing up. (Ex. C, p. 17; Hrg. Tr. p. 45) He lived in an 
apartment for several years before buying his first house in the 1990s. (Ex. C, p. 17; 
Hrg. Tr. p. 45) Haney has been mowing the lawns of his houses since that time. For the 
12 or 13 years before the hearing, Haney has worn hearing protection while mowing. 
(Ex. C, p. 18; Hrg. Tr. pp. 42–43) 
Haney infrequently fired guns in his youth and has not done so in over 25 years. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 41) Haney uses a chainsaw to cut down trees on his property, but less often 
than once per year on average in the roughly 16 years he has lived at his current 
residence. (Ex. C, Hrg. Tr. pp. 41–42) He also has saws that he uses on occasion 
around the house, while wearing hearing protection. (Ex. C, p. 19) 
Haney’s mother has had no issues with her hearing. (Hrg. Tr. p. 40) Neither have 
his three siblings. (Hrg. Tr. p. 40) Haney’s father sustained hearing loss that led to him 
getting hearing aids after the age of 70. (Hrg. Tr. p. 39) There is insufficient evidence in 
the record from which to conclude Haney’s father sustained hearing loss due to a 
genetic condition. 
The weight of the evidence shows Haney has had multiple jobs during his career, 
but none with a work environment as consistently as loud as the one at Arconic, which 
specializes in aluminum manufacturing. (Ex. B, p. 5; Cl. Ex. 1, Depo Ex. E, p. 34; Hrg. 
Tr. p. 11) Haney worked for Iowa Beef Processing in Joslin, Illinois, for about nine 
years. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 11–12) He began working on the kill floor, where he wore plastic 
earplugs for protection, and worked his way up the organizational ladder to the job of 
supervisor. (Hrg. Tr. p. 12) Haney credibly testified he did not notice any problems with 
his hearing while working for Iowa Beef Processing. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 12–13) After Iowa 
Beef Processing, Haney installed lawn sprinklers for Suburban Landscape for the 
summer of 1994. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 11–12) 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 4 
 
Arconic hired Haney in or around 1995. (Hrg. Tr. p. 11) Prior to going to work 
with Arconic, Haney did not seek a doctor’s care for hearing-related issues. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
13) The work environment at Arconic is loud enough that the company has implemented 
a hearing protection program, which Stoltenberg oversees. (Hrg. Tr. 60) As part of the 
program, Arconic has set standards defining what is acceptable noise exposure for its 
workforce:  exposure over a 12-hour period to 83 decibels and over an eight-hour period 
to 85 decibels. (Hrg. Tr. p. 61)  
Arconic requires employees to wear hearing protection in certain parts of its 
facility as part of its hearing protection program. (Hrg. Tr. p. 45) Haney wore molded or 
fitted earplugs and foam earplugs for protection throughout his employment with 
Arconic. (Hrg. Tr. p. 16) The molded hearing protection is customized to the individual 
worker so that it cannot be worn incorrectly. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 62–63)  
Despite Arconic’s hearing-protection mandate, employees regularly remove 
hearing protection when they need to talk to one another about how to address issues 
on the floor. (Hrg. Tr. p. 25) According to the questionnaire Haney filled out for Richard 
Tyler, Ph.D., he removed his hearing protection to talk with others six to 20 times per 
day for time periods of less than a minute to as many as 10 minutes at a time. (Cl. Ex. 
1, Depo. Ex. E, p. 31) 
Haney initially worked in the conventional end of the Arconic aerospace 
department, which had some noise but nothing like what he experienced on the job after 
changing positions in 2002. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 13–14) In 2002, He moved to the department’s 
continuance end, processing coil. (Hrg. Tr. p. 14) In the continuance end of the 
department, Haney worked on the one and two 84-inch line, the continuous skin pass 
mill, the 86-inch continuous heat treat, the 12-coil slitter, and 4 prep. (Hrg. Tr. p. 14)  
Haney was exposed to loud noise on a “fairly consistent” basis between 2002 
and 2018. (Hrg. Tr. p. 15) The degree of Haney’s exposure depended on his assigned 
duties. (Hrg. Tr. p. 15) For example, working on the 84-inch shears, he experienced 
loud noises all day because that is where the metal is cut. (Hrg. Tr. p. 15) In contrast, 
Haney explained, the entry had more periodic loud noise: 
On the entry end, when we finish a coil, it falls off of a mandril, which is a 
device that holds the coil in place. When we finish, the coil falls off of 
there, and depending on how heavy a gauge it is, it slams against the 
equipment like a plate. And as it goes in, it is usually fairly loud. You can 
pretty much hear it throughout the whole end of the department. 
(Hrg. Tr. pp. 15–16) 
Arconic ran noise tests at the machines Haney and his coworkers used. On 
August 8, 2014, Arconic sent a memo to staff, including Haney, regarding the noise 
levels it measured. (Cl. Ex. 1, Depo. Ex. B) The memo contained a time weighted 
average (TWA) for the machines the employees worked during the years 2006, 2007, 
and 2008 (Historical) and 2014 (Current): 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 5 
 
PC 
Historical 
Current 
12 Slitter 
89.6 
85.3 
2 Slitter 
85.7 
81.9 
60” 
85.3 
81 
4 Coil Prep 
88.4 
85.1 
1-84” 
89.6 
86.8 
86” 
86 
85.2 
(Cl. Ex. 1, Depo. Ex. B, p. 9)  
The reduction in noise exposure is due largely to changes Arconic made in its 
use of compressed air. (Cl. Ex. 1, Depo. Ex. B, p. 9) It is more likely than not Haney was 
exposed to higher noise levels from 2002 through at least 2008, the last year of the 
“Historical” measurements cited by Arconic in the memo.  
Arconic also tracked Haney’s personal exposure to noise during part of his 
employment. 
Start Date 
End Date 
Job 
Maximum 
TWA dbA 
Average 
TWA, dbA 
12/13/2005 
2/29/2008 
Flat Sheet Coil Operator 
87.8 
84.5 
3/1/2008 
3/1/2008 
Flat Sheet Coil Operator 
92.9 
88.9 
3/2/2009 
3/15/2009 
Coil Finishing Operator 
92.1 
88.7 
3/16/2009 
10/30/2016 
Sheet Finish Coil Operator 
88.0 
85.4 
10/31/2016 
4/9/2017 
Sheet 84 Operator 
85.1 
79.4 
4/10/2017 
12/31/2018 
Sheet 86 Operator 
85.8 
81.8 
 (Ex. C; Cl. Ex. 1, Depo. Ex. A) 
There is no data in the evidentiary record from Haney’s early years of 
employment with Arconic. Nonetheless, the record shows Haney worked around 
pneumatic shears during this time. Defense expert Mark Zlab, M.D., noted, “This 
entailed a great deal of noise. Hearing protection was provided.” (Ex. B, p. 5) 
Prior to 2006, Arconic employees worked eight hours daily from Monday through 
Friday. (Hrg. Tr. p. 17) In 2006, Arconic changed the schedule to a 12-hour workday. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 17) Haney typically worked 12-hour days during a 36- or 48-hour week. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 17) If he worked overtime, he would work about 56 hours in a week. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 17) 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 6 
 
Generally, Arconic does not unilaterally assign employees to work in specific 
jobs. (Hrg. Tr. p. 46) Arconic has a seniority system in place for when incumbent 
employees change jobs. (Hrg. Tr. p. 46) An employee may choose to bid on an open 
job. (Hrg. Tr. p. 46) The decision to bid for a job is voluntary. (Hrg. Tr. p. 46) If the 
employee bids and has the most seniority, the employee gets to work that job. (Hrg. Tr. 
p. 46) Based on the totality of the evidence, it is more likely than not a collective 
bargaining agreement (CBA) with a union governs employee transfers. 
On May 7, 2018, Haney bid into a different job. (Hrg. Tr. p. 28) Haney moved 
from working on the floor, in close proximity to noise-producing machinery, to the pulpit 
of the 86-inch line, which is inside. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 28–29, 45–46) He runs a machine 
inside that controls speed and tension and monitors quality using cameras. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
28) The job is less noisy. (Hrg. Tr. p. 29) Haney does not have to wear hearing 
protection while performing duties in the pulpit. (Hrg. Tr. p. 29) 
Despite bidding into a job based in the pulpit, Haney still experiences loud noise 
while working. He testified he occasionally has to go to the floor to work through 
problems with the crew. (Hrg. Tr. p. 29) Haney testified this can take anywhere from 45 
minutes to an entire workday. (Hrg. Tr. p. 49) He estimated he had to work an entire 
workday on the floor about a dozen times in his two years working the pulpit job. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 56) Haney is also exposed to noise when walking to and from break, during which 
time Arconic requires him to wear ear protection. (Hrg. Tr. p. 47)  
Haney was still working in the position based primarily in the pulpit on the date of 
hearing. (Hrg. Tr. p. 28) In response to a question about whether he hoped the job 
would be permanent, Haney testified, “I’m hoping, yes.” (Hrg. Tr. p. 30). But it is 
possible another worker with more seniority could bump Haney out of the pulpit job 
under the Arconic transfer system. (Hrg. Tr. p. 49)  
Neither Haney’s hearing loss nor his tinnitus has impacted his earnings at 
Arconic. (Hrg. Tr. p. 52) He testified that he received raises under the contract. (Hrg. Tr. 
p. 52) Haney was earning higher pay at the time of hearing than he was in May of 2018. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 52) There is no indication he has worked fewer hours due to either his 
hearing loss or tinnitus.  
As part of Arconic’s hearing protection program, it annually tests the hearing of 
employees, including Haney. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 25–26) With respect to the disputed issues in 
this case, the record establishes David Tutor, M.D., the Arconic medical director, was 
the first medical professional to review Haney’s hearing tests and offer an opinion on 
the cause of the hearing loss they reflect.  
On April 27, 2018, Dr. Tutor performed an audiometric review and work 
relatedness determination of Haney’s hearing loss by reviewing the company testing of 
both ears from April 26, 1995, to February 15, 2018. (Ex. A, p. 1) Dr. Tutor did not 
address Haney’s tinnitus. (Ex. A, p. 1) As part of the review, Dr. Tutor noted (sic): 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 7 
 
[Haney] has a confirmed left ear 10dB STS with a 25 average. His left ear 
audiograms did show a “notch” in 3, 4, or 6K with recovery at 8K from 
1995-2006, but showed the employee to have “normal” hearing, that is no 
hearing loss. Hearing loss in the left ear is noted to have commenced 
around 2007 and has progressed rapidly over the interval 10 years in a 
SNHL pattern. There is no noise notch at 3, 4, or 6K plus no recovery at 
8K. In fact, 8K has “lead the way” with the loss. This represents a left ear 
accelerated asymmetrical hearing loss pattern over the past 10 years and 
should receive further audiology or ENT workup. The hearing loss now 
exceeds that which would be expected with noise exposure alone. 
(Ex. A, p. 1) 
It is Dr. Tutor’s impression that Haney “has diffuse sloping hearing loss left ear 
consistent with SNHL but in a pattern not consistent with NIHL. Consider age, genetic, 
or medical condition as cause.” (Ex. A, p. 1) Dr. Tutor further opined, “Work related 
determination is that this employee’s left ear hearing loss is not consistent with noise 
induced hearing loss and should be considered a potential medical exception case and 
not recorded on the OSHA log.” (Ex. A, p. 1) He recommended advising Haney to seek 
care from his personal physician or a specialist to rule out hearing loss due to a medical 
condition. (Ex. A, p. 1) 
In addition to hearing loss, Haney has experienced ringing in his ears. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
31) In Haney’s right ear, it manifests as a high-pitched buzzing noise since around 
2007. (Hrg. Tr. p. 32) He has experienced a similar buzzing in his left ear from 2015 or 
2016 forward. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 32–33) The ringing has grown louder with time. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 
31–32) 
Haney credibly described how the tinnitus has impacted his life. The tinnitus can 
be heavy on Haney’s mind. (Hrg. Tr. p. 34) It makes communicating frustrating because 
he has to be in the same room and facing the person with whom he is attempting to 
communicate. (Hrg. Tr. p. 35) This impacts him at work and at home. (Hrg. Tr. p. 34) 
Haney’s tinnitus makes it hard for him to understand certain parts of speech 
because they are similar in sound to the buzzing. (Hrg. Tr. p. 33) The problem is 
particularly pronounced when he attempts to listen to women and children talk and the 
noise when pronouncing certain sounds relating to letters and letter combinations like 
“s”, “ph”, and “th.” (Hrg. Tr. p. 33) Haney described an example of how this impacts him 
at work: 
[S]ometimes when I’m out on the floor or having to talk to somebody 
through the PA, understanding what they are saying can be difficult. If, 
like, we are trying to talk at a distance, like, 5 or 6 feet with my earplugs in, 
usually I can’t even understand what they are saying; whereas other 
people that I work with can usually understand what they are saying. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 34) 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 8 
 
In order to hear what coworkers are saying, Haney has to get closer to them or 
have another coworker repeat what was said. (Hrg. Tr. p. 34) He also feels compelled to 
remove his hearing protection to better communicate. (Hrg. Tr. p. 34) Haney believes he 
would not have to remove his hearing protection as often as he does if he did not 
experience the buzzing from tinnitus. (Hrg. Tr. p. 34) 
 
Dr. Tyler performed an assessment of Haney’s hearing loss. (Cl. Ex. 1) Dr. Tyler 
had Haney complete a questionnaire relating to hearing loss, tinnitus, and causation. 
(Ex. 1, Depo. Tr. pp. 5–6; Ex. 1, Depo. Ex. E, pp. 30–36) In Haney’s responses to the 
questionnaire, he stated his work included exposure to impulsive noise, like banging or 
clanging. (Cl. Ex. 1, Depo. Ex. E, p. 31) He also shared with Dr. Tyler that Arconic 
required hearing protection, but that he had to remove it to effectively communicate 
when speaking with other workers. (Cl. Ex. 1, Depo. Ex. E, p. 31) 
In addition to the answers to the questionnaire, Dr. Tyler reviewed records 
relating to Haney’s hearing and performed an interview by telephone. (Ex. 1, Depo. Tr. 
p. 7) Based on his review of the records, answers to the questionnaire, and phone 
conversation with Haney, Dr. Tyler issued a report dated January 5, 2019. (Cl. Ex. 1, 
Depo. Ex. D, p. 15) The evidence establishes this is the first time a medical professional 
informed Haney that his work at Arconic caused permanent hearing loss or tinnitus, and 
that the tinnitus resulted in a permanent disability.  
Dr. Tyler opined Haney’s years of working in an environment with a time-
weighted average (TWA) of 88 decibels was excessive. (Ex. 1, Depo. Tr. p. 10) After 
considering Haney’s work environment and other possible causes, he concluded the 
most likely primary cause of Haney’s hearing loss and tinnitus was noise exposure while 
working for many years at Arconic. (Ex. 1, Depo. Tr. p. 10) Dr. Tyler found Haney’s 
hearing tests at Arconic instructive on causation:  
[T]he audiogram back in 1995 is within normal limits. Normal limits are 
usually considered 0 to 25 dB hearing level. And over time the hearing 
became worse and became worse in the high frequencies. There is 
something called a noise-induced notch that happens with noise exposure 
when that’s the most probable cause, and what that means is that hearing 
is worse at 3 or 4 or 6,000 hertz and then gets better at 8,000 hertz. And 
the interesting thing is that it does not matter whether it’s low-frequency 
noise or high-frequency noise, it doesn’t matter if it’s continuous noise or 
impulsive noise, one always gets a noise-induced notch, and that’s likely 
as a result of the mechanics of the cochlea, of the inner ear, for hearing. 
(Ex. 1, Depo. Tr. p. 13)  
When asked why the notch is indicative of noise-induced hearing loss, Dr. Tyler 
explained human and animal studies have shown “that’s where hearing loss due to 
noise starts and any other cause of hearing loss, like the aging or medications or 
disease process, does not have a hearing loss audiogram that is shaped like that.” (Ex. 
1, Depo. Tr. pp. 13–14) In Dr. Tyler’s report, he opines Haney’s audiograms show a 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 9 
 
notch in his right ear beginning in 2000 and in his left ear in 2006. (Ex. 1, Depo. Ex. D, 
p. 18) Moreover, he states Haney’s 2018 audiograms “show a clear noise-induced 
notch in both ears” that is “non-disputable.” (Ex. 1, Depo. Ex. D, p. 18) 
Dr. Tyler has worked with people suffering from tinnitus for over 30 years. (Ex. 1, 
Depo. Tr. pp. 19–20) He explained, “Tinnitus is when you hear a sound in your ears on 
a regular basis that’s not associated with an acoustic stimuli on the outside.” (Ex. 1, 
Depo. Tr. p. 19) Tinnitus may impact a person’s hearing, sleep, concentration, thoughts, 
and emotions. (Ex. 1, Depo. Tr. p. 20) Dr. Tyler further opined that the most common 
cause of tinnitus is noise exposure. (Ex. 1, Depo. Tr. p. 20) In his expert opinion, the 
cause of Haney’s bilateral tinnitus is noise exposure while working at Arconic. (Ex. 1, 
Depo. Tr. p. 21) 
Dr. Tyler used a custom formula he devised for rating impairment caused by 
tinnitus to assess Haney. He did so using a scale from zero (least) to 100 (most) in the 
areas of concentration, emotional well-being, hearing, and sleep. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 21) He 
then averaged them and multiplied the average by .60 based on a valuation derived 
from comparing the maximum impairment ratings in the Fifth Edition of the American 
Medical Association (AMA) Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (Guides) 
for emotional or behavioral, mental status, two impaired upper extremities, and 
blindness, and then arriving at his own percentage rating for tinnitus, based on his 
professional experience. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 22–23) Based on this calculation, Dr. Tyler 
opined that Haney’s whole body impairment from tinnitus is 19 percent. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 23) 
During Dr. Tyler’s deposition, defense counsel asked him about the formula he 
used to determine Haney’s impairment relating to tinnitus: 
Q. 
Has your method calculating [impairment relating to] tinnitus been 
endorsed by the [Guides]? 
A. 
Absolutely not. 
Q. 
And in fact the [Guides] provide that on page 246, tinnitus in the 
presence of unilateral or bilateral hearing impairment may impair 
speech discrimination, therefore add up to 5 percent for tinnitus in 
the presence of measurable hearing loss if the tinnitus impacts the 
ability to perform activities of daily living. 
 
What was your impairment rating for tinnitus with Mr. Haney? 
A. 
Well, I’ll say the [Guides] – What you’re reading from is only in the 
chapter on hearing, and the [Guides] also allow calculations and 
contributions to people’s distress and emotional consequences, 
which can be added to the hearing loss rating in that guide. 
Q. 
Did you calculate impairment for emotional distress in accordance 
with the [Guides]? 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 10 
 
A. 
No. I don’t believe the [Guides] are appropriate and don’t 
specifically address tinnitus in a very appropriate way. 
I’ve been on committees from the National Academy of Science, for 
example, where they indicate that the consequences of tinnitus in 
some people can be much, much more severe than the 
consequences of hearing loss. There are people, for example that 
can – [. . .] 1 For example, people commit suicide because of 
tinnitus. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, Depo. pp. 44–45) 
Dr. Tyler co-authored “Noise-Induced Tinnitus,” AAOHN J. Sep 1987; 35(9) 403-
6. (Cl. Ex. 1, Depo. Ex. 1) The article states, “A complete history and physical 
examination must be performed to rule out the presence of other more life-threatening 
diseases, such as acoustic neuromas, meningiomas, and other central nervous system 
lesions. (Cl. Ex. 1, Depo. Ex. 1, p. 1) Further, according to Dr. Tyler and his co-author, 
an exam is “followed by a complete medical examination with blood pressure and 
consultation with an otolaryngologist for neurotologic examination.” (Cl. Ex. 1, Depo. Ex. 
1, p. 2) 
The article of which Dr. Tyler is a co-author also states tinnitus “is commonly 
reported by the victim of noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) but may represent the first 
symptom of a variety of disease processes. Tinnitus is directly related to noise 
exposure. There is a 70% increased risk of developing tinnitus with a positive history of 
occupational noise exposure when compared to those without a history of noise 
exposure.” (Cl. Ex. 1, Depo. Ex. 1, p. 1)  
Dr. Zlab, an otolaryngologist hired by Arconic for this case, examined Haney on 
January 7, 2020, and opined on the cause of his hearing loss and tinnitus, as well as its 
extent. (Ex. B, pp. 2–4) Dr. Zlab performed a physical examination of Haney, including 
his ears. (Ex. B, p. 6) Dr. Zlab issued a report based on the examination and a review of 
Haney’s records and the exam.  (Ex. B) 
In the report, Dr. Zlab noted Haney was exposed to “kitchen noise but nothing of 
significance” when he worked at a restaurant in the early ‘80s. (Ex. B, p. 5) Moreover, 
he stated “[m]andatory hearing protection was observed” when Haney worked for Iowa 
Beef Packers and Haney had “[n]o noise exposure” when installing sprinklers for 
Suburban Landscape. (Ex. B, p. 5) With respect to noise exposure outside of 
employment, Dr. Zlab stated: 
Noise outside of the work environment entails usual and routine 
lawnmowing. Minimal woodworking. He does report to me that he does 
wear hearing protection when yardwork is being completed. 
                                                 
1 Defense counsel objected to Dr. Tyler’s answer as unresponsive. That objection is overruled. 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 11 
 
(Ex. B, p. 5) 
Dr. Zlab did not directly address Dr. Tyler’s opinion or articulate why he 
disagreed with it. (Ex. B) He summarized Haney’s hearing tests at Arconic, viewing 
these as the most important records included in his review. (Ex. B, p. 5) He concluded, 
“At no time has the configuration of the hearing loss [been] consistent with noise 
damage.” (Ex. B, p. 7) He did not elaborate on what type of hearing loss configuration is 
consistent with noise damage. (Ex. B, p. 7)  
Dr. Zlab also offered the following opinion on causation (sic): 
After reviewing his history, past audiograms, [and] noise levels in the 
factory, I have come to the conclusion that while he does suffer a mild to 
moderate sensorineural hearing loss bilaterally, it does not appear to be 
as a result of noise exposure in the work environment. The tinnitus which 
he is experiencing would be associated with his hearing loss. There are no 
treatment options for tinnitus. Hearing aids with benefit him in day-to-day 
activities. As always, noise protection should be observed. 
(Ex. B, p. 7)  
Dr. Zlab did not further elaborate on the reasoning behind his causation opinion. 
Thus, he offered a conclusory statement on causation with regards to Haney’s hearing 
loss and tinnitus. Dr. Zlab did not identify any diseases that might have caused Haney’s 
tinnitus. (Ex. B) He provided no impairment rating relating to Haney’s tinnitus. (Ex. B) 
Haney’s personal physician referred him to Audiology Consultants. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
36) Audiology Consultants recommended hearing aids. (Hrg. Tr. p. 36) Haney ultimately 
obtained hearing aids. (Hrg. Tr. p. 36) He paid the bills for the care he received from 
Audiology Consultants ($120) and hearing aids ($4,900). (Hrg. Tr. p. 36; Cl. Exs. 3, 4) 
Haney does not wear his hearing aids while working because care providers 
advised him the effect would be too loud and intense, which would likely further damage 
his hearing. (Hrg. Tr. p. 37) He has experienced some improvement when wearing the 
hearing aids outside of work. (Hrg. Tr. p. 37) Haney does not have to have the volume 
turned up as high on the television or radio to hear and is better able to understand 
family members when they speak. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 37–38) However, the hearing aids do 
not reduce the buzzing Haney experiences due to tinnitus, though they are equipped to 
emit white noise, which Dr. Tyler opined may help combat the effects of his tinnitus. 
(Hrg. Tr. pp. 38, 51) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
In 2017, the Iowa legislature amended the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
See 2017 Iowa Acts, ch. 23. The 2017 amendments apply to cases in which the alleged 
date of injury is on or after July 1, 2017. Id. at § 24(1); see also Iowa Code § 3.7(1). 
Because the injuries or conditions at issue in this case are alleged to have occurred 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 12 
 
after July 1, 2017, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, as amended in 2017, applies. 
See, e.g., Smidt v. JKB Restaurants, LC, File No. 5067766 (App. Dec. 11, 2020). 
1. 
Timeliness. 
Arconic has asserted the affirmative defense that Haney did not timely initiate 
this case under Iowa Code section 85.26. During the review of the hearing report, the 
parties and undersigned affirmed Arconic was asserting this affirmative defense without 
further discussion. (Hrg. Tr. p. 5) Arconic makes one mention of the affirmative defense 
in its post-hearing brief, under the “Procedural” section. (Def. Brief, p. 2) Arconic did not 
include elsewhere in the brief any argument with respect to how the facts of the case or 
law support a finding in its favor on the statute of limits question. (See Def. Brief)  
By failing to brief on the timeliness issue, Arconic has effectively left it to the 
agency to comb through the evidence and research the law in support of its affirmative 
defense. It would be unjust for the agency to take on such a role. Consequently, Arconic 
waived its affirmative defense when it failed to brief the issue with citations to the 
evidentiary record and law. Arconic has therefore failed to meet its burden of proof on 
the affirmative defense of an untimely claim under Iowa Code section 85.26.  
Further, even assuming arguendo it is appropriate for a presiding deputy to 
consider a disputed issue in the hearing report that the party asserting it did not 
substantively address in its post-hearing brief, the evidence shows Haney’s claims are 
not untimely under the law. 
a. 
Occupational Hearing Loss. 
If Arconic meant to attack the timeliness of Haney’s occupational hearing loss 
claim, it has failed. As discussed in Section 2(b) below, the “date of occurrence” under 
Iowa Code section 85B.8(1) has not taken place in this case, so Haney’s occupational 
hearing loss claim is not ripe for determination and the statute of limitations has not yet 
begun to run. There is no basis under the law to conclude Haney’s occupational hearing 
loss claim is untimely. 
b. 
Tinnitus. 
This decision assumes arguendo Arconic intended to attack the timeliness of 
Haney’s tinnitus claim. As discussed below, Haney proved it is more likely than not his 
work at Arconic caused his tinnitus. Haney has shown his tinnitus is a cumulative injury, 
caused by years of working in a noisy environment at Arconic. 
“By their very nature, cumulative injuries develop over time and eventually result 
in a compensable disability.” Larson Mfg. Co., Inc. v. Thorson, 763 N.W.2d 842, 851 
(Iowa 2009) (citing McKeever, 379 N.W.2d at 373). Under the cumulative injury rule, the 
date of injury is the date on which the disability manifests itself. Larson, 763 N.W.2d at 
852; see also Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284, 287 (Iowa 2001). And the 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 13 
 
manifestation date of a cumulative injury is when the claimant, as a reasonable person, 
would be plainly aware that: 
1) The claimant suffers from a condition or injury; and 
2) This condition or injury was caused by the claimant’s employment. Id.; see 
also Herrera, 633 N.W.2d at 287 (quoting Orr v. Lewis Cent. Sch. Dist., 298 
N.W.2d 256, 257 (Iowa 1980). 
Under the discovery rule for cumulative injuries, the limitations period for giving 
notice to the employer does not begin to run until the claimant knows that the physical 
condition is serious enough to have a permanent adverse impact on the claimant’s 
employment or employability. Id. This is the point in time when the claimant, as a 
reasonable person, knew or should have known of the nature, seriousness, and 
probable compensable character of the injury or condition. Id.; see also Iowa Code 
§ 85.26(1) (defining the “date of occurrence of the injury” for statute of limitations 
purposes as “the date that the employee knew or should have known that the injury was 
work-related”). 
Haney worked for over a decade in a noisy environment at Arconic. He first 
noticed buzzing in his left ear in or around 2007 and in his right ear in or around 2015 or 
2016. But it was not unreasonable for him to believe the buzzing would cease after he 
stopped working in the noisy environment; after all, no doctor had told him he had 
permanent tinnitus or that it was caused by his work at Arconic. In May of 2018, Haney 
transferred out of the noisy environment, to the pulpit. Haney later saw Dr. Tyler, who 
issued a report dated January 5, 2019.  
Thus, Dr. Tyler was the first medical professional to tell him his tinnitus was 
caused by his employment and it had caused permanent damage. The evidence 
establishes the date of Dr. Tyler’s report is the date on which Haney knew or should 
have known his tinnitus was work-related and the cause of permanent disability under 
the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. Haney filed his petition within two years of the 
date of Dr. Tyler’s report. 
For these reasons, Arconic has failed to meet its burden of proof on the question 
of timeliness. The evidence does not show it is more likely than not Haney knew or 
should have known his tinnitus was caused by his employment and is permanent in 
nature more than two years before he filed his petition. Arconic’s affirmative defense 
fails. 
2. 
Occupational Hearing Loss. 
a. 
Causation. 
Haney seeks workers’ compensation benefits under the Iowa Occupational 
Hearing Loss Act, Iowa Code chapter 85B. The record shows the question of causation 
in this claim is intertwined with the same for his tinnitus claim. Further, the question of 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 14 
 
whether a transfer constitutes the “date of occurrence of the injury” under Iowa Code 
section 85B.8(1) and makes the claim ripe for determination on the question of 
permanent disability, requires a determination of whether the transfer is “from excessive 
noise exposure employment” under the statute. Therefore, it is appropriate to address 
the question of causation regarding Haney’s occupational hearing loss claim regardless 
of whether his occupational hearing loss claim is ripe under Iowa Code 85B.8(1). 
“The legislature responded to medical awareness of the potential for hearing loss 
due to prolonged exposure to excessive noise by enacting chapter 85B, removing many 
obstacles to proving an occupational hearing loss.” Muscatine Cty. v. Morrison, 409 
N.W.2d 685, 687 (Iowa 1987). Iowa Code section 85B.4(1) defines “excessive noise 
exposure” to mean “exposure to sound capable of producing occupational hearing loss.” 
Further, the statute includes a table outlining time and intensity exposure standards that 
create a presumption on the question of whether a claimant’s employment caused 
hearing loss. Id. at 686–88. 
By adopting time and intensity exposure standards, the legislature did not 
seek to rule out hearing losses that do not rise to those levels; rather, the 
legislature sought to simplify prior problems of proof by recognizing 
presumptive exposure levels for gradual noise-induced hearing loss. 
When the tables are not implicated, the claimant must prove the loss of 
hearing was due to exposure at work to sound capable of producing that 
loss. Duration and intensity of exposure will be helpful to prove the 
necessary link between noise at work and the hearing loss. Other causes 
of the hearing loss may be explored by the employer or its insurer in 
defense of the claim. 
Id. at 687–88. 
In the current case, the evidence does not establish Haney was exposed to noise 
levels working at Arconic that create a presumption under the statute that his 
employment caused his hearing loss. This is due in large part to the fact the tables 
codified by the legislature end at eight hours of exposure and Haney worked 12-hour 
shifts for about 12 years while working on the floor. Because the tables are not 
implicated, it is appropriate to consider the evidentiary record, including the duration and 
intensity of Haney’s noise exposure and the expert opinions on medical causation. 
“Medical causation ‘is essentially within the domain of expert testimony.’” Cedar 
Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 845 (Iowa 2011) (quoting Dunlavey 
v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 1995)). “With regard to 
expert testimony[,] [t]he commissioner must consider [such] testimony together with all 
other evidence introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the 
disability. The commissioner, as the fact finder, determines the weight to be given to 
any expert testimony. Such weight depends on the accuracy of the facts relied upon by 
the expert and other surrounding circumstances. The commissioner may accept or 
reject the expert opinion in whole or in part.’” Schutjer v. Algona Manor Care Ctr., 780 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 15 
 
N.W.2d 549, 560 (Iowa 2010) (quoting Grundmeyer v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 649 N.W.2d 
744, 752 (Iowa 2002)).  
The evidence shows Haney was exposed to noisy work conditions that produced 
sound capable of causing hearing loss. For the last 12 or so years of his time working 
on the floor, he was subject to noise levels during shifts lasting 12 hours, a time duration 
not listed in Iowa Code section 85B.5(1). And while Arconic took commonsense steps to 
reduce employee noise exposure, this took place after Haney had worked on the floor 
for several years—meaning it is more likely than not he was exposed to higher noise 
levels during the time he was working eight-hour shifts, though the measured noise 
levels were lower than those codified by the legislature for such duration. Lastly, there is 
the reality that Haney had to remove his hearing protection with regularity when 
performing his job duties on the floor in order to communicate with other employees. 
As an initial matter, Dr. Tutor’s opinion on causation with respect to Haney’s 
hearing loss is unavailing. He states Haney’s hearing loss was not caused by noise 
exposure at work because there was not a qualifying notch, even though there is plainly 
a notch. Dr. Tutor also suggested age as an alternative cause to Haney’s employment 
even though Iowa law requires an adjustment for age when determining occupational 
hearing loss. See 876 IAC 8.10. Put otherwise, hearing loss causation in Iowa is not an 
either-or proposition between age and noise exposure at work. The law accepts that 
both can be causes of hearing loss and requires an adjustment for an employee’s age-
related hearing loss when determining that which is attributable to employment.  
Dr. Zlab’s opinion is also unpersuasive on causation. He did not give a detailed 
explanation as to why the information he reviewed led him to believe Haney’s hearing 
loss is not caused by employment at Arconic. Instead, Dr. Zlab made a conclusory 
statement without mentioning Haney’s removal of hearing protection to communicate 
with coworkers multiple times in a given day for periods of time up to ten minutes, a fact 
included in the questionnaire answers Haney provided to Dr. Tyler. Moreover, Dr. Zlab 
did not explain why his opinion differed from Dr. Tyler’s regarding the observable 
“notch” in Haney’s audiograms. Presumably, if the foundation of Dr. Tyler’s opinion is off 
base, Dr. Zlab, as the expert retained by the defendants to opine on causation and 
disability, could have articulated why. Moreover, Dr. Zlab’s physical examination did not 
result in the finding of an articulated alternative cause. 
Dr. Tyler gave credible and persuasive testimony during his deposition on the 
cause of Haney’s occupational hearing loss. He gave a thorough explanation for why 
the notch shown on Haney’s audiograms led him to believe his hearing loss was caused 
by noise exposure, most likely from employment at Arconic. Dr. Tyler also explained 
that he believed it was likely Arconic did not properly measure impulsive noise to which 
Haney was exposed during his shifts working on the floor. Dr. Tyler’s opinion on the 
cause of Haney’s hearing loss is most persuasive based on the totality of the evidence.  
Haney has met his burden of proof. Noise exposure while working at Arconic is 
the primary factor causing Haney’s hearing loss. The evidence shows it is more likely 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 16 
 
than not that he has sustained hearing loss arising out of and in the course of his 
employment with Arconic.  
b. 
Ripeness. 
The Iowa Occupational Hearing Loss Act provides: 
A claim for occupational hearing loss due to excessive noise exposure 
may be filed beginning one month after separation from the employment in 
which the employee was subjected to excessive noise exposure. The date 
of the injury shall be the date of occurrence of any one of the following 
events: 
a. Transfer from excessive noise exposure employment by an employer. 
b. Retirement. 
c. Termination of the employer-employee relationship. 
Iowa Code § 85B.8(1). 
In the current case, Arconic employed Haney at the time of hearing, so neither 
retirement nor termination can be a qualifying occurrence. The question is whether 
Haney’s most recent transfer constitutes an occurrence under section 85B.8(1)(a).  
As an initial matter, Arconic contends it did not transfer Haney so his job change 
cannot qualify under section 85B.1(a). The evidence establishes it is more likely than 
not Arconic agreed to a seniority-based bidding system for jobs at the facility where 
Haney works. Haney transferred using this system. Thus, while Haney may have 
initiated the transfer and obtained it due to his seniority status, he did so via a system 
Arconic is at least in part responsible for putting in place and administering. Haney’s 
transfer is therefore of a type that constitutes a transfer “by an employer,” under the 
statute, because it occurred using a system to which Arconic agreed and helps 
administer. 
The analysis now shifts to whether the transfer is one “from excessive noise 
exposure employment.” The Iowa Supreme Court considered in John Deere Dubuque 
Works of Deere & Co. v. Weyant, 442 N.W.2d 101 (Iowa 1989), what constitutes the 
“date of occurrence” of a hearing loss injury when an employee transferred positions. 
After holding the earliest of the three alternative events under section 85B.8(1) triggers 
the statute of limitations, the court considered whether Weyant’s transfer qualified under 
section 85B.8(1)(a) to ripen his claim and trigger the statute of limitations. Weyant, 442 
N.W.2d at 104–05.  
With respect to Weyant’s employment with John Deere, the court recited the 
following findings of fact: 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 17 
 
During his employment with Deere, Weyant had been exposed to noise 
levels measured as high as 91 decibels (dBA) and held more than forty 
positions in the plant. The last position Weyant held was that of stores and 
tool crib attendant, which he held from November 15, 1982 until his 
retirement. While working as a tool crib attendant, Weyant was exposed to 
noise levels averaging 73 dBA. Prior to being assigned the tool crib 
position, Weyant had worked as a foundry inspector since December 17, 
1979. As a foundry inspector, Weyant was exposed to noise levels of 89 
dBA. 
Id. at 103.  
The court also quoted the Commissioner’s decision on appeal affirming the 
deputy’s decision:  
[T]he record reveals that claimant [Weyant] was subject to reassignment 
to varying levels of noise exposure. He experienced those transfers 
numerous times throughout his employment with defendant [Deere]. 
Claimant's move from the inspector position to the tool crib attendant 
position was not a transfer within the meaning of section 85B.8. Rather, 
such action was merely a reassignment within the same work force and 
subject to change. 
Id. at 104–05 (alterations in original). 
The court adopted the test articulated by the presiding deputy in the arbitration 
decision for determining whether a transfer qualifies as an occurrence under the statute, 
which consists of the following prongs: 
1) Did the change in employment result in a clearly recognizable change in 
employment status? 
2) Did the change provide a reduction of noise exposure to a level that is not 
capable of producing an occupational hearing loss? 
3) Was the change permanent or indefinite in the sense that there is no 
reasonable expectation that the worker will be returned to a position with 
excessive noise level exposure in the ordinary course of operations in the 
employer’s business? 
4) Did the change actually continue for at least six months? 
Id. at 105.  
The court adopted this framework because it “provides that the change of 
employment must be a specific change to a low noise area which is not part of a normal 
or periodic rotation of employees” and “takes into account the prevailing view that a 
permanent hearing loss cannot be validly measured until approximately six months’ 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 18 
 
separation from the noisy environment.” Id. (citing John Deere Dubuque Works of Deere 
& Co. v. Meyers, 410 N.W.2d 255, 257 (Iowa 1987)). 
 
With respect to the first prong of the Weyant test, Haney’s change in job resulted 
in a clearly recognizable change in employment status. He moved from the 84-inch to 
the 86-inch line. In Haney’s new job, he works primarily within the pulpit as opposed to 
the floor. Moreover, his job duties have substantively changed as a result even if he 
must work on the floor to perform some of them.  
The second factor cuts against Haney’s claim being ripe. Haney’s change in jobs 
caused a reduction in noise exposure. But Haney must still work on the floor, subject to 
the noise levels he alleges caused his occupational hearing loss. Thus, the evidence 
does not support the conclusion that he is six months’ removed from working in a noisy 
environment. It shows that, while Haney spends the majority of his time in his new job 
working in a relatively quiet environment, he must return to work in the noisy 
environment periodically when business need dictates. 
Combining the third and fourth elements, at the time of hearing, Haney had held 
his new position for more than six months. Unlike the claimant in Weyant, there is no 
indication Arconic had reassigned him multiple times to work other jobs. But that, 
standing alone, does not mean the record supports the conclusion Haney’s transfer is 
not subject to change. Rather, the evidence establishes Haney’s transfer would be 
subject to change if another Arconic employee, with more seniority, chose to bid into it. 
Consequently, the record does not support the conclusion there is no reasonable 
expectation Haney will not be returned to a position with excessive noise level exposure 
in the ordinary course of operations in Arconic’s business.  
For these reasons, Haney has failed to establish a qualifying transfer under the 
Weyant test. While Haney might have a ripe occupational hearing loss claim in the 
future, no “occurrence” has occurred under section 85B.8(1)(a) because Haney 
continues to work periodically in a noisy environment. Consequently, it is inappropriate 
to make a determination regarding the extent of Haney’s hearing loss at this time.  
3. 
Tinnitus. 
a. 
Causation. 
The law cited above regarding causation in workers’ compensation cases applies 
to Haney’s tinnitus claim just as to his occupational hearing loss claim. Dr. Tyler gave a 
detailed, well-reasoned explanation for why he believes Haney’s tinnitus was caused by 
his work. He credibly testified the most common cause of tinnitus is noise exposure. 
Further, Dr. Tyler’s questionnaire included questions about the frequency with which 
Haney removed his hearing protection while in a high noise environment at work and 
how long such removal lasted.  
Dr. Zlab’s opinion is not as detailed as Dr. Tyler’s. Dr. Zlab did not provide 
deposition testimony expanding on his written opinion like Dr. Tyler did. Dr. Zlab 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 19 
 
provided little analysis of Haney’s tinnitus, opining, “The tinnitus which he is 
experiencing would be associated with his hearing loss.” 
Dr. Tyler’s opinion on the cause of Haney’s tinnitus is most persuasive. Dr. Tyler 
gave a detailed explanation for why the noise levels Haney experienced while working 
for Arconic would cause his hearing loss and tinnitus. The detail and reasoning in Dr. 
Tyler’s opinions are more persuasive than the cursory assessment in Dr. Zlab’s report 
on causation.  
Moreover, Dr. Tyler’s opinion as an expert in this case is reinforced by the article 
he co-authored and that is in evidence. Specifically, the fact that tinnitus “is commonly 
reported by the victim of noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) but may represent the first 
symptom of a variety of disease processes. Tinnitus is directly related to noise 
exposure. There is a 70% increased risk of developing tinnitus with a positive history of 
occupational noise exposure when compared to those without a history of noise 
exposure.” (Cl. Ex. 1, Depo. Ex. 1, p. 1)  
Haney has met his burden of proof on causation. The evidence shows it is more 
likely than not Haney’s tinnitus arose out of and in the course of his employment due to 
noise exposure. The analysis now moves to whether Haney has proven his tinnitus 
caused a permanent disability. 
b. 
Permanent Disability. 
The “broad purpose of workers’ compensation” is “to award compensation (apart 
from medical benefits), not for the injury itself, but the disability produced by a physical 
injury.” Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, (Iowa 2010) 
(citing 4 Arthur Larson & Lex K. Larson, Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Law § 80.02, 
at 80–2 (2009)). With the 2017 amendments, the legislature altered how this is done 
under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. Multiple of these legislative changes are at 
issue in the current case. 
Tinnitus is an unscheduled injury under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
Ehteshamfar v. UTA Engineered Sys. Div., 555 N.W.2d 450, 453–54 (Iowa 1996). Prior 
to the 2017 amendments, unscheduled injuries such as tinnitus were automatically 
compensated based on the impact on the claimant’s earning capacity using the 
industrial disability framework. See, e.g., id. For injuries on or after July 1, 2017, 
however, the legislature codified at Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) a new requirement 
for industrial disability to be considered: 
If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or 
would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the 
employee received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment 
resulting from the injury, not in relation to the employee’s earning capacity. 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 20 
 
The record shows that at the time of hearing, Haney was still working for Arconic 
in the pulpit position into which he bid. There is no indication tinnitus has reduced the 
salary, wages, or earnings Haney receives. See McCoy v. Menard, Inc., File No. 
1651840.01 (App. Apr. 9, 2021). Therefore, under the statute, Haney’s entitlement to 
benefits must be determined based only upon his functional impairment resulting from 
tinnitus, not in relation to his earning capacity. 
Another requirement the legislature added to the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Act in 2017 governs the determination of Haney’s functional disability. Before the 2017 
amendments, the agency could use all evidence in the administrative record, as well as 
agency expertise, when determining the permanent disability of an injured worker. See, 
e.g., Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Under agency 
rules before the 2017 amendments, the Guides were considered a “useful tool in 
evaluating disability.” Seaman v. City of Des Moines, File Nos. 5053418, 5057973, 
5057974 (App. Oct. 11, 2019) (quoting Bisenius v. Mercy Med. Ctr., File No. 5036055 
(App. Apr. 1, 2013)).  
However, in cases involving injuries on or after July 1, 2017, the Guides are now 
more than a tool; they are dispositive. 
[W]hen determining functional disability and not loss of earning capacity, 
the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be 
determined solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent 
impairment, published by the American medical association, as adopted 
by the workers’ compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 
17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not be utilized in determining 
loss or percentage of permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity. 
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(x).  
Thus, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act now limits the determination of what, 
if any, permanent disability Haney has sustained due to only his functional impairment. 
In making that determination, the agency is prohibited from using lay testimony or 
agency expertise by Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x). Under the statute, that 
determination must be made “solely by utilizing” the Fifth Edition of the Guides. 
Chapter 11 of the Guides covers assessments of various conditions, including 
tinnitus. The introduction to the chapter advises, “Before using the information in this 
chapter, the Guides user should become familiar with Chapters 1 and 2 and the 
Glossary.” Guides at 246. The Glossary provides in pertinent part: 
Disability  Alteration of an individual’s capacity to meet personal, social, 
or occupational demands or statutory or regulatory requirements because 
of an impairment. Disability is a relational outcome, contingent on the 
environmental conditions in which activities are performed. 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 21 
 
**** 
Functional limitations  The inability to completely perform a task due to 
an impairment. In some instances, functional limitations may be overcome 
through modifications in the individual’s personal or environmental 
accommodations. 
**** 
Impairment  A loss, loss of use, or derangement of any body part, organ 
system, or organ function. 
**** 
Impairment evaluation  A medical evaluation performed by a physician, 
using a standard method as outlined in the Guides, to determine 
permanent impairment associated with a medical condition. 
**** 
Impairment percentages or ratings  Consensus-derived estimates that 
reflect the severity of the impairment and the degree to which the 
impairment decreases an individual’s ability to perform common activities 
of daily living as listed in Table 1-2 
Id. at 600–01. 
Chapter 1, “Philosophy, Purpose, and Appropriate Use of the Guides,” further 
provides: 
Impairment percentages or ratings developed by medical specialists are 
consensus-derived estimates that reflect the severity of the medical 
condition and the degree to which the impairment decreases an 
individual’s ability to perform common activities of daily living (ADL), 
excluding work. Impairment ratings were designed to reflect functional 
limitations and not disability. The whole person impairment percentages 
listed in the Guides estimate the impact of the impairment on the 
individual’s overall ability to perform activities of daily living, excluding 
work, as listed in Table 1-2. 
Id. at 4 (emphasis in original). Table 1-2 shows the activities of daily living as 
follows: 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 22 
 
Activity 
Example 
Self-care, personal hygiene 
Urinating, defecating, brushing teeth, combing 
hair, bathing, dressing oneself, eating 
Communication 
Writing, typing, seeing, hearing, speaking 
Physical activity 
Standing, sitting, reclining, walking, climbing 
stairs 
Sensory function 
Hearing, seeing, tactile feeling, tasting, smelling 
Nonspecialized hand activities 
Grasping, lifting, tactile discrimination 
Travel 
Riding, driving, flying 
Sexual function 
Organs, ejaculation, lubrication, erection 
Sleep 
Restful, nocturnal sleep pattern 
And Table 1-3 contains a list of scales for the measurement of instrumental activities of 
daily living and activities of daily living. Id. at 6–7.  
The Guides also explain why work is not considered in their framework for 
assessing impairment: 
The medical judgment used to determine the original impairment 
percentages could not account for the diversity or complexity of work but 
could account for daily activities common to most people. Work is not 
included in the clinical judgment for impairment percentages for several 
reasons: (1) work involves many simple and complex activities; (2) work is 
highly individualized, making generalizations inaccurate; (3) impairment 
percentages are unchanged for stable conditions, but work and 
occupations change; and (4) impairments intereact with such other factors 
as the worker’s age, education, and prior work experience to determine 
the extent of work disability. [ . . . ] 
As a result, impairment ratings are not intended for use as direct 
determinants of work disability. When a physician is asked to evaluate 
work-related disability, it is appropriate for a physician knowledgeable 
about the work activities of the patient to discuss the specific activities the 
worker can and cannot do, given the permanent impairment. 
Id. at 5. 
The Guides go on to emphasize: 
Impairment percentages derived from the Guides criteria should not 
be used as direct estimates of disability. Impairment percentages 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 23 
 
estimate the extent of the impairment on the whole person 
functioning and account for basic activities of daily living, not 
including work. The complexity of work activities requires individual 
analyses. Impairment assessment is a necessary first step for 
determining disability. 
Id. at 13 (emphasis in original). 
Now back to Chapter 11, where the Guides address the criteria for rating 
impairment due to hearing loss as follows: 
Criteria for evaluating hearing impairment are established through hearing 
threshold testing, which serves as the most reproducible of the measures 
of hearing. Therefore, estimate an impairment percentage based on the 
severity of the hearing loss, which accounts for changes in the ability to 
perform activities of daily living. Tinnitus in the presence of unilateral or 
bilateral hearing impairment may impair speech discrimination. Therefore, 
add up to 5% for tinnitus in the presence of measurable hearing loss if the 
tinnitus impacts the ability to perform activities of daily living. 
Id. at 246.  
Thus, the Guides set forth a clear framework for assessing what, if any, disability 
tinnitus has caused an affected worker. The question presented in the current case is 
whether Haney has proffered sufficient evidence to establish a functional disability 
under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, as amended in 2017. Put otherwise, does 
the record support a determination of permanent disability made “solely by utilizing” the 
Guides? 
The evidence shows Dr. Tyler did not follow the Guides for assessing disability 
relating to tinnitus in arriving at his rating for Haney. During Dr. Tyler’s deposition 
testimony, he explained that he believes the Guides do not provide a framework for 
assessing impairment relating to tinnitus that accurately reflects the impact the condition 
has on a worker. Thus, while Dr. Tyler referenced the Guides in his report, he did not 
utilize them as they are intended to be used by their own terms or as required under 
Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, as amended in 2017.  
Instead, Dr. Tyler compared what he believes to be the potential scope of the 
disability tinnitus can cause to the framework the Guides provide for assessing 
impairment caused by other conditions. In doing so, he rejected the Guides’ method for 
calculating disability relating to tinnitus and came up with his own. The Commissioner 
has previously considered Dr. Tyler’s approach and concluded, “‘Dr. Tyler appears to 
have crafted his own impairment rating system which diverges significantly from the 
AMA Guides.’” Seaman, File Nos. Files Nos. 5053418, 5057973, 505797 (quoting 
Ament v. Quaker Oats Company, File Nos. 5044298, 5044299 (App. Mar. 17, 2016)). 
During Dr. Tyler’s deposition in the current case, he confirmed the Commissioner’s 
impression of his system, testifying it is “[a]bsolutely not” endorsed by the Guides. 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 24 
 
For these reasons, the record shows Dr. Tyler did not determine Haney’s 
functional impairment relating to his tinnitus “solely by utilizing” the Guides, as required 
under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x). Haney has therefore failed to meet his burden of 
proof on the question of permanent disability under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Act, as amended in 2017. There is an insufficient basis in the evidence from which to 
conclude Haney had sustained a permanent functional impairment relating to the 
tinnitus caused by his employment with Arconic as of January 5, 2019, the date of Dr. 
Tyler’s report. 
4. 
Medical Benefits. 
The parties identify reimbursement for care as a disputed issue in the hearing 
report. Haney submitted a bill for $120 from Audiology Consultants and another for 
$4,900 for his hearing aids. Haney paid these bills. In the hearing report, the parties 
dispute whether: 
 The care is reasonable and necessary; 
 
 The fees or prices charged by providers are fair and reasonable; and 
 The expenses are causally connected to the work injury. 
While the defendants mention Haney submitted bills relating to care in the introduction 
of their brief, they did not advance an argument on whether he should be reimbursed for 
those expenses. 
Iowa Code section 85.27(1) states: 
The employer, for all injuries compensable under this chapter or chapter 
85A, shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and 
hospital services and supplies therefor and shall allow reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses incurred for such services. The 
employer shall also furnish reasonable and necessary crutches, artificial 
members and appliances but shall not be required to furnish more than 
one set of permanent prosthetic devices. 
As discussed above, Haney’s hearing loss and tinnitus arose out of and in the 
course of his employment with Arconic. Therefore, under the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act, Arconic must hold Haney harmless for reasonable care relating to 
the conditions. The parties dispute whether this includes costs relating to hearing aids. 
With respect to the reasonableness and necessity of Haney obtaining hearing 
aids, Dr. Tutor, Arconic’s medical director, recommended Haney see his personal 
physician regarding his hearing loss. Haney did just that. Haney’s personal physician 
then referred him to Audiology Consultants, an act from which it is reasonable to infer 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 25 
 
he believed the care was reasonable and necessary. Moreover, Dr. Zlab, the defense 
expert, opined, “Hearing aids will benefit [Haney] in day-to-day activities.”  
Thus, Haney acted in response to referrals from Dr. Tutor and his personal 
physician, as well as Dr. Zlab, regarding additional care for his hearing loss. The 
evidence shows Haney sought care that was reasonable and necessary. It was also 
beneficial, as demonstrated by the weight of the evidence establishing the hearing aids 
have benefited his ability to hear. 
For these reasons, Haney has met his burden on his right to be held harmless for 
the cost of care from Audiology Consultants and for his hearing aids. The evidence 
establishes the disputed care was reasonable, necessary, and beneficial. He is entitled 
to reimbursement for medical expenses as well as ongoing care relating to his hearing 
loss and tinnitus. 
5. 
Costs. 
“All costs incurred in the hearing before the [C]ommissioner shall be taxed in the 
discretion of the [C]ommissioner.” Iowa Code § 86.40. “Fee-shifting statutes using ‘all 
costs’ language have been construed ‘to limit reimbursement for litigation expenses to 
those allowed as taxable court costs.’” Des Moines Area Reg'l Transit Auth. v. Young, 
867 N.W.2d 839, 846 (Iowa 2015) (quoting Riverdale v. Diercks, 806 N.W.2d 643, 660 
(Iowa 2011)). Statutes and administrative rules providing for recovery of costs are 
strictly construed. Id. (quoting Hughes v. Burlington N. R.R., 545 N.W.2d 318, 321 (Iowa 
1996)).  
Under the administrative rules governing contested case proceedings before the 
Iowa workers’ compensation commissioner, hearing costs shall include: 
 Attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or presence of mechanical 
means at hearings and evidential depositions; 
 Transcription costs when appropriate;  
 Costs of service of the original notice and subpoenas; 
 Witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 
622.72; 
 Costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said 
costs do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 
622.72; 
 Reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports; 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 26 
 
 Filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees incurred by using 
the payment gateway on the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System 
(WCES); and 
 Costs of persons reviewing health service disputes. 
876 IAC 4.33.  
In the current case, both parties have asked the opposing side be taxed costs. 
Because Haney has prevailed on the majority of the disputed issues (and the question 
of ripeness also implicates the statute of limitations, which supports filing even if the 
issue is disputed to ensure the claim is not lost), Arconic is not entitled to a taxation of 
costs. That leaves the question of Haney’s costs, which consists of the bill for Dr. Tyler’s 
report. 
Dr. Tyler charged Haney for 9.2 hours of work at $195 per hour, for a total of 
$1,794. (Cl. Ex. 5) There is a note, “Reading documents, preparation of letter.” (Cl. Ex. 
5) But there is not a more detailed itemization regarding how many hours Dr. Tyler 
spent on his report as compared to reading documents. 
“[A] physician’s report becomes a cost incurred in a hearing because it is used as 
evidence in lieu of the doctor’s testimony. The underlying medical expenses associated 
with the examination do not become costs of a report needed for a hearing, just as they 
do not become costs of the testimony or deposition.” Young, 867 N.W.2d at 846. 
Activities such as “research and review of the file are akin to expenses associated with 
an examination and therefore cannot be taxed” as the cost of a report. Voshell v. 
Compass Group, USA, Inc./Chartwells d/b/a Au Bon Pain Café, File No. 5056857, p. 7 
(App. Sep. 27, 2019) (citing Young, 867 N.W.2d at 847, and Kirkendall v. Cargill Meat 
Solutions Corp., File No. 5055494 (App. Dec. 17, 2018)).  
Because the evidence does not allow for the determination of what time Dr. Tyler 
spent reviewing records and examining Haney as opposed to preparing the report, the 
costs relating to the report are unknown and cannot be taxed. The parties shall be 
responsible for paying their own costs. 
CONCLUSION 
It is therefore ordered: 
1) Haney shall take no benefits at this time. 
2) The defendants shall reimburse Haney for care as follows: 
a) One hundred twenty and 00/100 dollars ($120.00) for the care he 
received from Audiology Consultants; and 
b) Four thousand nine hundred and 00/100 dollars ($4,900.00) for 
hearing aids. 

HANEY V. ARCONIC, INC. 
Page 27 
 
3) The defendants shall hold Haney harmless for future reasonable care relating 
to his hearing loss or tinnitus. 
4) The defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by rule 876 
IAC 3.1(2). 
5) The parties shall be responsible for paying their own hearing costs. 
Signed and filed this ____5th _____ day of October, 2021. 
 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
          COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Brian Fairfield (via WCES) 
 
Jane Lorentzen (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
