Case Number: 5039421
Case Title:  THOMPSON, GARY V. MAIL CONTRACTORS OF AMER
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Thompson Gary-5039421d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
GARY THOMPSON, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                       File No. 5039421 
MAIL CONTRACTORS OF AMERICA,   : 
 
 
  :                   REVIEW-REOPENING  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                          DECISION 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
CHARTIS INSURANCE, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                    Head Note No. 2905 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Gary Thompson, filed a petition for review-reopening and seeks 
workers’ compensation benefits from Mail Contractors of America, employer, and 
Chartis Insurance Company, insurance carrier.  The claimant was represented by Jason 
Neifert.  The defendants were represented by Kelsey Paumer. 
The matter came on for hearing on August 5, 2020, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via CourtCall.  The 
record in the case consists of joint exhibits 1 through 4; and defense exhibits A through 
F.  The claimant testified under oath at hearing.  Kristi Miller was appointed and served 
as the court reporter.  The matter was fully submitted on September 14, 2020, after 
helpful briefing by the parties. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. The primary issue in this case is whether the claimant has proven the 
prerequisites to demonstrate he is entitled to review-reopening benefits under 
Iowa Code section 86.14.  The claimant is seeking permanent total disability 
benefits, which is disputed by the defendants. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated and/or established in the prior 
hearing: 
1.  The parties had an employer-employee relationship at the time of the injury. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Mar-03  14:31:17     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

THOMPSON V. MAIL CONTRACTORS OF AMERICA 
Page 2 
 
 
2. Claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on February 4, 2009. 
3. This work injury is a cause of both temporary and permanent disability. 
4. Temporary disability/healing period and medical benefits are not in dispute. 
5. The weekly rate of compensation is $639.54. 
6. Affirmative defenses have been waived. 
7. There is no issue regarding credit. 
PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND FINDINGS OF FACT 
This is a review-reopening case.  The first hearing/snapshot occurred on 
February 20, 2013.  An arbitration decision was filed on July 24, 2013, which awarded 
the claimant an 80 percent industrial disability.  The factual findings in that decision are 
preclusive. 
At the time of the first hearing, the deputy determined Mr. Thompson was 65 
years old.  He did not complete high school or receive a GED.  His work history was 
primarily as an over-the-road truck driver and he had virtually no computer skills.  The 
deputy described his work for the employer and his work injury as follows: 
He began working for Mail Contractors of America in 2002 hauling first 
priority mail from Des Moines to locations throughout the Midwest.  He 
underwent a pre-employment physical, which indicated that he had no 
limitations or accommodations required. 
The claimant sustained a low back injury on February 4, 2009.  This 
injury occurred when the air ride seat on which the claimant was sitting 
collapsed, causing him to drop approximately two and a half feet to the 
floor of the semi-tractor he was driving.  As a result of this accident, the 
claimant sustained a herniated disc to L4-5, which was surgically repaired 
by John Piper, M.D., on May 22, 2009.  The claimant initially experienced 
low back, right knee, leg, and hip pain after the injury.  When he first saw 
Dr. Piper on April 23, 2009, he was also experiencing numbness down his 
right leg.  The surgery was performed May 22, 2009.  
(Arbitration Decision, page 2, July 24, 2013) 
After the injury and the initial course of treatment, Mr. Thompson improved for a 
period of time although he was still having fairly significant right hip and leg pain.  Dr. 
Piper released Mr. Thompson from care in November, 2009, after a valid functional 
capacity evaluation which placed him in the medium work category.  Mr. Thompson, 
however, had been terminated from his employment because of a positive drug test 
following his work accident.  In April, 2011, his symptoms increased while he was at  

THOMPSON V. MAIL CONTRACTORS OF AMERICA 
Page 3 
 
 
home and he sought additional medical treatment.  The deputy described this as 
follows: 
On September 19, 2011, the claimant was taken to the emergency 
room at Iowa Lutheran Hospital for treatment for intractable low back pain 
with radiation into the right leg.  He was subsequently transferred to the 
Iowa Methodist Medical Center and evaluated by Dr. Piper.  Dr. Piper 
diagnosed recurrent radicular pain and foot drop, and recommended a 
repeat of his previous surgical intervention.  See Exhibit 2, page 30.  CT 
scan confirmed the presence of a recurrent L4-5 disc herniation.  On 
September 21, 2011, Dr. Piper performed a redo laminectomy, 
facetectomy, foraminotomy, and discectomy at L4-5 on the right side.  See 
claimant’s Exhibit 2, page 32. 
The claimant was fitted with an ankle-foot orthosis brace on his right 
foot after he was discharged from the hospital.  The claimant was still 
wearing this device at the time of the hearing.  Without this device, the 
claimant’s foot drags making it difficult for him to walk and susceptible to 
falling down.  The claimant required the use of a walker to ambulate post-
surgery but has been able to recover to the point that he only requires a 
cane. 
(Arb., pp. 3-4, July 24, 2013)  
Following the second surgery, Mr. Thompson eventually underwent a second 
FCE which detailed significant medical restrictions. 
   Mr. Blankespoor’s functional capacity evaluation performed at claimant’s 
attorney’s request identified significant deficits: 
Significant Deficits: 
1) Lifting/carrying 
2) Pushing/pulling 
3) Positional tasks – elevated work, forward bending, trunk rotation, 
squatting, crouching, kneeling and crawling 
4) Standing/walking tolerance 
5) Stair/step ladder climbing  
(Ex. 10, p. 135) 
Mr. Blankespoor placed the claimant in the sedentary category and 
recommended: 
 

THOMPSON V. MAIL CONTRACTORS OF AMERICA 
Page 4 
 
 
Recommendations: 
1) These projections are for 8 hours per day and 40 hours per 
week at the levels indicated with the FCE Test Results and 
Interpretation. 
2) The client’s capabilities are in the sedentary category (lifting up 
to 25 pounds on a rare basis and up to 20 pounds on an 
occasional basis with the front carry task) of physical demand 
characteristics.  Specific capabilities are noted with the FCE 
Test Results and Interpretation. 
3) Please contact me if you have any additional questions 
regarding this report. 
(Ex. 10, p. 135) (Arb. Dec., p. 4, July 24, 2013)  
Much of the evidence at the first hearing concerned whether claimant’s second 
surgery was causally connected to the work injury.  The deputy weighed all of the 
medical evidence and ultimately determined it was.  (Arb., p. 8, July 24, 2013)  
Following his recuperation from the second surgery, Mr. Thompson was approved for 
Social Security disability.  John Kuhnlein, D.O., evaluated Mr. Thompson for an 
independent medical examination and provided expert opinions regarding his condition. 
The claimant underwent an independent medical evaluation with John 
Kuhnlein, D.O., on September 12, 2011.  Dr. Kuhnlein opined that the claimant 
has 21 percent whole person impairment and recommended restrictions, but 
noted that he believed the functional capacity evaluation of Mr. Blankespoor 
underestimated the claimant’s actual physical abilities.  Dr. Kuhnlein proposed 
that the claimant would be restricted to lifting 25 pounds occasionally from floor 
to waist, 30 pounds occasionally from waist to shoulder, and 20 pounds 
occasionally over the shoulder.  Further, he believed the claimant would be 
capable of sitting, standing, or walking on an as-needed basis and that he could 
stoop, bend, or crawl at least on an occasional basis. 
(Arb., pp. 4-5, July 24, 2013) 
The deputy commissioner made the following additional findings: 
In 2011, the claimant realized he was not going to be able to return to 
employment like he had performed in the past, so he applied for and was 
approved for Social Security disability.   
In June 2012, the claimant had hip replacement surgery.  At the time of 
the hearing, the claimant complained that he still had some pain in his 
back.  He is able to sit for about two hours at a time and is able to walk for 
about a block.  He currently has a job driving new car dealer trades to 
other dealers for Karl Chevrolet.  He began this job in November 2012.  

THOMPSON V. MAIL CONTRACTORS OF AMERICA 
Page 5 
 
 
His son-in-law is the vice president of Karl Chevrolet, and apparently this 
probably helped him obtain this job.  He makes about two to three trips 
with new dealer trades per week varying in lengths.  He is paid 20 cents 
per mile.  The most that he estimates he has driven in one week is 1,000 
miles.  The claimant does not believe he could climb into a semi or use a 
clutch or lift much. 
(Arb., pp. 6-7, July 24, 2013) 
The deputy commissioner considered all of the evidence and found Mr. 
Thompson had sustained an 80 percent industrial disability as a result of his work injury 
for the employer. 
The claimant has significant permanent impairment.  The lowest rating 
of impairment in this record is 10 percent on account of this injury.  The 
claimant has significant limitations in his ability to perform work as the 
result of the work injury.  The claimant can still drive an automobile but his 
ability to drive a truck, as he did at the time of the injury, is foreclosed.  
The claimant has limited education and is not a good candidate for 
retraining.  Considering these and all factors of industrial disability, it is 
concluded that the claimant has sustained an 80 percent industrial loss 
entitling him to 400 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  The 
commencement date is February 23, 2012. 
(Arb., p. 8, July 24, 2013) 
The defendants appealed the arbitration decision.  Claimant cross-appealed 
arguing he was permanently and totally disabled.  On December 26, 2013, the 
Commissioner affirmed the 80 percent award and stated the following: 
Pursuant to Iowa Code sections 86.24 and 17A.15, I affirm and adopt 
as the final agency decision those portions of the proposed arbitration 
decision filed on July 24, 2013 that relate to issues properly raised on 
intra-agency appeal and cross-appeal.  The findings of the presiding 
deputy commissioner are supported by a preponderance of the evidence.  
The finding as to the extent of claimant’s loss of earning capacity is 
affirmed as claimant has sustained a significant, but not total loss of his 
earning capacity.  At the time of the arbitration hearing in this matter 
claimant was employed in a driver position on an as needed basis for Karl 
Chevrolet.  The employment position was a position he obtained in the 
competitive labor market, perhaps with assistance from his son.  
Regardless, claimant obtained and was capable of performing the driver 
position on the date of the arbitration hearing.  The sporadic nature of that 
position is inherent in the position, not in claimant’s ability to perform the 
work.  There is no evidence that claimant would not be able to perform his 
driver duties on a daily basis if such work became available.  As such, the 
findings of the presiding deputy commissioner as to the extent of loss of 
earning capacity is affirmed. 

THOMPSON V. MAIL CONTRACTORS OF AMERICA 
Page 6 
 
 
(Appeal Decision, pp. 1-2, December 26, 2013) 
This decision became a final decision.  To summarize, the arbitration decision 
determined Mr. Thompson had sustained a severe permanent partial disability as a 
result of his February 4, 2009, work injury.  The injury resulted in two surgeries, 
significant medical restrictions and prevented Mr. Thompson from performing his past 
employment of truck driving.  Mr. Thompson was gainfully employed at the time of the 
first snapshot, however, at Karl Chevrolet.  This prevented the agency from awarding a 
total disability. 
The second snapshot of Mr. Thompson’s condition occurred at hearing before 
the undersigned on August 5, 2020.  Mr. Thompson presented at this hearing live and 
provided testimony under oath.  His testimony was generally credible.  His testimony 
was consistent with other portions of the record and there was nothing about his 
demeanor which caused the undersigned any concern about his truthfulness.  His 
hearing testimony was compared to his sworn deposition testimony and the testimony is 
found to be consistent.  (See Def. Ex. B) 
At the time of his review-reopening hearing, Mr. Thompson described his 
condition as follows: 
Low back pain and the numbness and tingling sensation in my right calf 
and foot.  I wear a brace on my right foot to keep it from dragging because 
of the foot drop.  And nerve pain that really gets worse as the -- I have 
really bad swelling in my right foot --. 
(Tr., p. 14)  
Mr. Thompson credibly described how this condition had worsened gradually 
since his first hearing.  (Tr., p. 18)  In particular, he testified that if he is on his feet for 
any length of time he experiences a severe burning sensation in his right leg and 
significant swelling.  He also testified that he occasionally experiences a “lightning bolt” 
sensation that feels like an electric shock in his right foot for the past two or three years.  
(Tr., pp. 18-19) 
Mr. Thompson then testified that his driving position for Karl Chevrolet ended in 
the summer of 2013 shortly after his first hearing.  (Tr., p. 32)  As noted in the earlier 
arbitration decision, Mr. Thompson had secured this position with the help of his son.  
He was not given a specific explanation for his termination, but he testified to his opinion 
that is was likely a direct result of his work injury.  He testified that he wears a brace on 
his right leg.  While he typically wore long pants to work, he wore cargo pants to work 
instead, revealing the presence of the brace.  He testified that his supervisor looked 
“kind of shocked” when she saw the brace.  After that day, Mr. Thompson was never 
called back to work for Karl.  (Tr., p. 32)  Mr. Thompson did not complain because he 
did not want to cause any problems within the family.  I find this testimony to be credible 
and compelling. 
 

THOMPSON V. MAIL CONTRACTORS OF AMERICA 
Page 7 
 
 
Mr. Thompson did look for other work.  He contacted another local auto 
dealership about performing similar work and he also contacted a security company.  
His work search was not particularly extensive.  One employer told him he would need 
to fill out an application online.  Mr. Thompson testified he does not possess “any 
computer skills at all.”  (Tr., p. 37)  Again, this is believable.  I find it highly unlikely, 
given his age, education and work experience, that a more extensive work search would 
have yielded better results.  Mr. Thompson has not performed any gainful work since 
his employment ended with Karl.  Mr. Thompson testified that he did not believe he 
could perform the work as a driver for Karl any longer because of the increased 
symptoms in his right foot.  (Tr., pp. 29-31)  He testified specifically that when he drives 
now, he must take frequent breaks and elevate his leg to alleviate increased symptoms. 
Since the original hearing, Mr. Thompson has undergone some additional 
medical treatment primarily consisting of medication management.  His treating 
physician is now Saima Shahid, M.D.  (See Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 10-64)  In February 2019, she 
significantly increased his dosage of gabapentin.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 64)  It is noted that Mr. 
Thompson has a host of other health concerns commensurate with a man his age.  At 
that time, he presented, in part, for burning in his feet.  “He has neuropathy since the 
time of his back surgery and he has been taking gabapentin 300 mg 3 pills 3 times a 
day and that used to help him a little bit with the burning sensation and the numbness 
and the pain in the feet, but not anymore.”  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 62)  It is evident that his 
symptoms were worsening significantly during this timeframe. 
The defendants asked William Boulden, M.D., to prepare an expert opinion report 
prior to hearing in May 2019.  Dr. Boulden reviewed records and provided opinions and 
analysis.  (Jt. Ex. 4)  Dr. Boulden was specifically asked whether “Mr. Thompson has 
sustained a change in physical condition from his disability at the time of the Arbitration 
Decision and the present time, and whether that change in physical restriction (if any) 
relates solely to the initial work injury”.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 3)  In response to that question, Dr. 
Boulden opined that Mr. Thompson suffers from a host of non-work related conditions, 
which are the cause of his decreased activity levels, including COPD, hypertension, and 
angina.  He added “I do not believe that his increased physical disability is related to the 
initial work injury.”  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 8) 
It is noted that Dr. Boulden’s opinion regarding causation was rejected at the first 
hearing.  He did provide opinions based upon new information, namely Mr. Thompson’s 
host of non-work related health conditions, however, he did not directly address whether 
Mr. Thompson’s symptoms related to his work-related low back condition had worsened 
since the first hearing.  Instead, he focused on Mr. Thompson’s other health conditions 
as being the primary cause of the decrease in his activity level. 
On April 22, 2020, Dr. Kuhnlein interviewed Mr. Thompson for purposes of 
preparing expert opinions for the review-reopening hearing.  On July 6, 2020, he opined 
that based upon Mr. Thompson’s responses, “there has been a change of his condition 
since the arbitration hearing with the increased gabapentin dose and decreased 
physical endurance for activity.”  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 4) 
 

THOMPSON V. MAIL CONTRACTORS OF AMERICA 
Page 8 
 
 
Dr. Boulden provided a rebuttal opinion to this report on July 13, 2020.  (Jt. Ex. 4, 
pp. 14-16)  He opined, “If there is a true diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy, then that is 
from another disease process and is not related to the original disc herniation of 2009 or 
the recurrent disc in 2011.”  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 14)  He also reiterated his opinions regarding 
the other conditions. 
I believe there are many other reasons for why the patient has 
decreased physical endurance for activities.  I do not believe it has 
changed based on the musculoskeletal system as much as it has changed 
because of his underlying medical conditions.  I think I have pointed out 
reasons for that, especially chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) and other medical conditions that do not allow him to be very 
active.  In my opinion, this is not related to the 2009 injury by any means.  
It is due to other medical conditions, which I have previously discussed. 
 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 15) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first and primary question is whether the legal elements for review-reopening 
have been met in light of the findings of facts set forth above.  Mr. Thompson alleges he 
has proven the low back condition, including radiation into the right leg and foot, have 
worsened since his first hearing in February, 2013, causing permanent total disability.  
He further alleges an economic change of condition in the loss of his job at Karl 
Chevrolet which resulted from his disability.  The defendants argue that his condition 
has not changed significantly and that his activity is limited now because of other non-
work related chronic conditions. 
In a proceeding to reopen an award for payments or agreement for settlement as 
provided by section 86.14, inquiry shall be into whether or not the condition of the 
employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, or increase of compensation so 
awarded or agreed upon.  Iowa Code section 86.14(2) (2017).  In order to demonstrate 
eligibility for an increase of compensation under section 86.14(2), the claimant must 
demonstrate what his physical or economic condition was at the time of the original 
award or settlement.  At a subsequent review-reopening hearing, claimant has the 
burden to prove that there is a substantial difference in such condition which warrants 
an increase in compensation.  Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387 (Iowa 2009).  
The difference can be economic or physical.  Blacksmith v. All-American Inc., 290 
N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Henderson v. Iles, 250 Iowa 787, 96 N.W.2d 321 (1959).  
Essentially, two snapshots of the claimant’s condition are taken; one in each hearing or 
settlement.  The claimant must prove that there is something substantially different 
between the two snapshots such that it warrants an increase in benefits.  Gosek v. 
Garmer & Stiles Co., 158 N.W.2d 731, 735 (Iowa 1968).   
The principles of res judicata apply and the agency should not reevaluate facts 
and circumstances that were known or knowable at the time of the original action.  
Kohlhaas at, 392.  Review-reopening is not intended to provide either party with an 
opportunity to re-litigate issues already decided or to give a party a “second bite at the 

THOMPSON V. MAIL CONTRACTORS OF AMERICA 
Page 9 
 
 
apple.”  The agency, however, is forbidden from speculating as to what was 
contemplated at the time of the original snapshot.  Id.   
The burden remains upon the injured worker to prove by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the current condition is proximately caused by the original injury.  
Kohlhaas, 777 N.W.2d at 392.  When a work-related injury causes another injury to the 
worker, this new injury (sequela) may also be considered as a work-related injury under 
Iowa’s workers’ compensation laws. 
When an employee suffers from a compensable injury and another 
condition or injury arises that is the consequence or result of the previous injury, 
the sequelae rule applies.  If the employee suffers a compensable injury and later 
suffers further disability, which is the proximate result of the original injury, such 
further disability is compensable.  If the employee suffers a compensable injury 
and thereafter returns to work and, as a result, the first injury is aggravated and 
accelerated so that the employee is more greatly disabled than they were before 
returning to work, the entire disability may be compensable.  The employer is 
liable for all consequences that naturally and proximately flow from the accident.   
Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 767-68, 266 N.W. 480 (1936).  
In order to apply the facts to the law, the two snapshots must be contrasted and 
compared.  The first snapshot was taken at the time of the first hearing in February 
2013.  At that time, Mr. Thompson’s symptoms were already severe.  He had 
substantial work restrictions, significant impairment and significant restrictions.  It was 
determined at that time, however, that he was not permanently and totally disabled.  
This was primarily based upon the fact that Mr. Thompson had secured gainful 
employment as a driver for Karl Chevrolet.  The work was somewhat sporadic, and he 
likely only secured this employment due to a family connection, but it was determined, 
in fact, that this employment was gainful employment. 
After the February 2013, hearing, Mr. Thompson lost his job.  He credibly 
described the circumstances of how he lost his job.  His employer simply stopped 
providing him assignments.  While he did not make a far reaching job search, he did 
make a minimal effort to secure employment within his highly limiting work restrictions 
and job skills.  The reality is that he was not awarded a permanent total disability at the 
time of his February, 2013, arbitration hearing specifically because he was continuing to 
work in gainful employment.  He lost that job, likely as a direct result of his disability. 
Since then, his physical condition has deteriorated.  While Dr. Boulden may be 
correct that his condition has not changed “based on the musculoskeletal system,” I find 
that Mr. Thompson has credibly described a worsening of his symptoms, particularly the 
radicular symptoms in his right leg and foot, which is related back to his original work 
injury.  Mr. Thompson undoubtedly has other factors present now which would interfere 
with his activity level and his ability to work as noted by Dr. Boulden including COPD.  
This does not change the fact that Mr. Thompson’s description of the symptoms in his 
right leg and his ability to engage in activities is undoubtedly worse than it was at the 
time of the first arbitration hearing.  In the December, 2013, appeal decision, the 
Commissioner found that he not only was able to work as a driver for Karl Chevrolet, but 

THOMPSON V. MAIL CONTRACTORS OF AMERICA 
Page 10 
 
 
that the record demonstrated that he could have worked increased hours in that position 
if they became available.  (App. Dec., p. 2)  This is simply no longer the case.  Based 
upon the snapshot taken of claimant in August, 2020, I find that Mr. Thompson would be 
unlikely to be able to perform any type of gainful driving work on a sustained basis 
based upon the description of his low back, right leg and foot symptoms. 
Importantly, I have found Mr. Thompson to be a credible witness.  I believe him 
regarding the circumstances of his job loss as well as the gradual increase of his 
radicular symptoms culminating in a significant increase in his medications in 2019.  
Considering all of the appropriate factors set forth in Section 86.14, I find that the 
claimant has carried his burden of proof to show that his case warrants an increase in 
compensation.  The next question is whether he is permanently and totally disabled. 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the 
Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of 
the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34. 
Although claimant is close to a normal retirement age, proximity to retirement 
cannot be considered in assessing the extent of industrial disability.  Second Injury 
Fund v. Nelson, 544 N.W. 2d 258 (Iowa 1995).  However, this agency does consider 
voluntary retirement or withdrawal from the work force unrelated to the injury. Copeland 
v. Boones Book and Bible Store, File No. 1059319, Appeal Decision (November 6, 
1997). Loss of earning capacity due to voluntary choice or lack of motivation is not 
compensable.  Id. 
Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness.  Permanent total 
disability occurs where the injury wholly disables the employee from performing work 
that the employee's experience, training, education, intelligence, and physical capacities 
would otherwise permit the employee to perform.  See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 
288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Diederich v. Tri-City R. Co., 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 
(1935). 

THOMPSON V. MAIL CONTRACTORS OF AMERICA 
Page 11 
 
 
A finding that claimant could perform some work despite claimant's physical and 
educational limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total disability, 
however.  See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File No. 661698 (App. October 1987); 
Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 134 (App. 
May 1982). 
At the time of the review-reopening hearing, Mr. Thompson was 72 years old.  
He had not worked in any gainful employment since the summer of 2013.  He has no 
computer skills and has not learned any new marketable skills since the original 
hearing.  His restrictions have not changed per se, however, his symptoms are worse 
and he is no longer gainfully employed.  I find that even if he performed a more 
substantial work search, he would be unlikely to secure any type of meaningful, gainful 
employment in the competitive job market.  I find claimant is permanently and totally 
disabled. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay permanent total disability benefits at the rate of six hundred 
thirty-nine and 54/100 dollars ($639.54) per week commencing from the date the 
review-reopening petition was filed. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at the rate of ten percent for all weekly benefits payable and not paid when due 
which accrued before July 1, 2017, and all interest on past due weekly compensation 
benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, shall be payable at an annual rate equal to 
the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the Federal Reserve in the most 
recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent. See. Gamble v. AG 
Leader Technology File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018). 
Defendants shall be given credit for the weeks previously paid. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants. 
Signed and filed this _3rd_ day of March, 2021. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 

THOMPSON V. MAIL CONTRACTORS OF AMERICA 
Page 12 
 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Jason David Neifert (via WCES) 
Kelsey Paumer (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
