Case Number: 20700741.01
Case Title:  GAYE, BEATRICE V. HILTON WORLDWIDE, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Gaye Beatrice-20700741.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
BEATRICE GAYE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                   File No. 20700741.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
HILTON WORLDWIDE, INC., 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE COMPANY,   :               Head Note Nos.:  1803 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant Beatrice Gaye seeks workers’ compensation benefits from the 
defendants, employer Hilton Worldwide, Inc. (Hilton) and insurance carrier Indemnity 
Insurance Company (Indemnity). The undersigned presided over an arbitration hearing 
on October 12, 2021, held via internet-based video by order of the Commissioner. Gaye 
participated personally and through attorney Nicholas Platt. The defendants participated 
by and through Stephanie Techau. 
ISSUES 
Under rule 876 IAC 4.149(3)(f), the parties jointly submitted a hearing report 
defining the claims, defenses, and issues submitted to the agency. The undersigned 
issued and order approving the hearing report because it is a correct representation of 
the disputed issues and stipulations in this case. The parties identified the following 
disputed issues in the hearing report: 
1) Is Gaye entitled to a running award of temporary total disability (TTD) 
benefits? 
2) What is the nature and extent of permanent disability, if any, caused by the 
alleged injury? 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-May-11  12:27:14     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

GAYE V. HILTON WORLDWIDE, INC. 
Page 2 
3) If Gaye is entitled to permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits, what is the 
commencement date? 
4) If Gaye is entitled to workers’ compensation, what is the weekly rate? 
5) Is Gaye entitled to recover the cost of an independent medical examination 
(IME)? 
6) Is Gaye entitled to a penalty? 
7) Is Gaye entitled to taxation of costs against the defendants? 
STIPULATIONS 
 
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between Gaye and Hilton at the 
time of the alleged injury. 
2) Gaye sustained an injury on February 23, 2020, which arose out of and in the 
course of her employment with Hilton. 
3) The alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery. 
4) At the time of the stipulated injury: 
a) Gaye’s gross earnings were four hundred ninety-four and 56/100 
dollars ($494.56) per week. 
b) Gaye was married. 
c) Gaye was entitled to four exemptions. 
The parties’ stipulations in the hearing report are accepted and incorporated into 
this arbitration decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. This decision 
contains no discussion of any factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations 
except as necessary for clarity. 
FINDINGS OF FACTS 
The evidentiary record in this case consists of the following:  
 Joint Exhibits (Jt. Ex.) 1 through 10; 
 Claimant’s Exhibits (Cl. Ex.) 1 through 9;  
 Defendants’ Exhibits (Def. Ex.) A through F; and 

GAYE V. HILTON WORLDWIDE, INC. 
Page 3 
 Hearing testimony by Gaye and Travis Smith, a human resources manager at 
the Hilton hotel where she worked.  
After careful consideration of the evidence and the parties’ post-hearing briefs, the 
undersigned enters the following findings of fact. 
Gaye was born in Liberia, Africa. (Hrg. Tr. p. 1) Her first language is a dialect of 
Krahn. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 16) Gaye has limited English proficiency but is able to communicate 
effectively at the workplace. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 1–2, 67–68)  
In Liberia, Gaye owned and operated a restaurant. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 4–5) Since 
immigrating the United States, she has worked in housekeeping at hotels, in meat 
processing plants, in the Hy-Vee bakery, and caring for her husband after he sustained 
a stroke. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 16–20; Ex. B, p. 21) In September of 2019, Hilton hired Gaye to 
work in housekeeping at its hotel in Des Moines, Iowa. (Def. Ex. A, p. 4; Def. Ex. B, p. 
21) 
On February 23, 2020, Gaye slipped and fell while cleaning the bathroom of a 
Hilton guest room while working. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 1, 24; Def. Ex. A, p. 7) She struck her 
right knee when she hit the ground. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 2, 5) Gaye reported her injury to Hilton 
and Smith drove her to the emergency room (ER) for care. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 2, 25) 
Gaye returned to work on February 29, 2020. (Def. Ex. A, p. 16) She worked that 
day and the next four without any restrictions and did not report any issues to Hilton 
management. (Def. Ex. A, p. 16) Gaye had two scheduled days off from Hilton and then 
worked March 7 through 9. (Def. Ex. A, p. 17) After two more scheduled days off, she 
worked on March 12 and 13. (Def. Ex. A, p. 17) 
Smith credibly testified Gaye walked with a slight limp during this time because 
she was favoring her knee. (Hrg. Tr. p. 7) Gaye reported to her supervisor that she was 
still feeling pain in her right knee and requested a follow-up medical exam, which Hilton 
arranged.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 14) Brandon Penix, D.O., saw Gaye on March 13, 2020, and 
noted a “small hematoma . . . near the tibial insertion of patellar tendon where patient 
likely struck knee.” (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 16) He also stated: 
Inspection reveals no significant joint effusion or asymmetry. Tenderness 
to palpation over kneecap and tibial plateau. Range of motion was 
resisted by patient; however, patient able to ambulate down clinic 
hallways. Stability testing unable to be performed as patient would not 
allow me to touch her knee with anything other than light pressure; 
however, strength testing would be considered normal as patient was able 
to resist knee flexion/extension. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 16) 

GAYE V. HILTON WORLDWIDE, INC. 
Page 4 
Dr. Penix ordered x-rays and diagnosed her with tricompartmental osteoarthritis. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 16) He informed her that her symptoms were work related. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 16) 
Dr. Penix prescribed physical therapy, ibuprofen, and work restrictions. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 16) 
Shortly thereafter, COVID-19 hit the United States. Hilton laid off employees, 
including Gaye, because of the pandemic. She did not work from mid-March through 
May 19, 2020. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 8–9)  
In response to the impact of COVID-19, Congress enacted the Coronavirus Aid, 
Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES), which included among its provisions 
creation of the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) under which businesses could 
receive funds to pay to workers unable to work due the effect on business operations of 
COVID-19 and public health measures to mitigate the spread of the virus. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 
8–9) Hilton participated in PPP, which allowed it to put Gaye and other workers on its 
payroll despite limited operations and revenues due to the pandemic. (Hrg. Tr. p. 9) 
Gaye started physical therapy at Athletico on April 1, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 53) She 
complained of significant pain in her knee. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 24) Tanner Neuberger, P.T., 
was her therapist at Athletico from April 3, 2020, through August 12, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 
24–57) 
Neuberger testified in a deposition as part of the litigation of this case. (Def. Ex. 
C) He offered additional explanation for some of the notes in records from the care he 
provided Gaye. For example, on April 6, 2020, Neuberger noted: 
[Gaye] continues to display exaggerated pain behaviors. Hypersensitive to 
touch, over vocal about pain, appears to be agonizing when PT performs 
STM, but does not make same facial expressions and vocalizations with 
walking and work on NuStep Machine, indicating that pain does not match 
presentation. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 27) Neuberger testified in his deposition with respect to this note: 
So that was she would kind of jump around on the table and kind of 
squirm, in my opinion, a little much for just barely that I touched her. So 
that’s when that exaggerated pain behaviors come in, because it didn’t 
match with what I was seeing during the rest of the session. 
(Def. Ex. C, Depo. p. 9) 
Hilton scheduled Gaye to work on May 19, 2020. (Hrg. Tr. p. 9) Her manager 
noticed Gaye walking with a pronounced limp and sent her home because he did not 
think she could physically perform her job duties. (Hrg. Tr. p. 9) This was the first time 
Hilton management noticed Gaye walking with such a pronounced limp or sent her 
home due to concerns about her physical ability to work. 

GAYE V. HILTON WORLDWIDE, INC. 
Page 5 
Dr. Penix ordered magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of Gaye’s knee. (Jt. Ex. 3, 
p. 21) The MRI showed no ligament tears. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 21) Dr. Penix diagnosed chronic 
regional pain syndrome and referred Gaye to a specialist for her ongoing pain 
complaints. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 20) 
The defendants arranged care at Iowa Ortho with Joshua Kimelman, D.O., on 
June 24, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 61) Gaye complained of pain in her right knee, hip, and 
groin. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 61) Dr. Kimelman noted: 
When asked on a scale of 0-10, how much pain she has on an average 
day, she reported 10. When I described the criteria of 10 as severe pain 
with a stick in the eye screaming for an ambulance about to pass out from 
the pain, she reports it is the worst pain she has had despite the fact that 
she has had 7 children. She reports child birth was not as a severe as the 
pain she has in her knee, and that she has never been hospitalized or had 
surgery. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 61)  
After the exam, Dr. Kimelman prescribed physical therapy and work restrictions 
and ordered a bone scan. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 62) The bone scan did not reveal the cause of 
her pain complaints. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 63) Gaye returned on July 15, 2020, and Dr. 
Kimelman noted: 
She walks with an antalgic gait. No warmth or erythema. Noted diffuse 
tenderness to palpation diffusely in the lower leg. She points to the knee 
and the groin as the area of pain. She complains of pain with rotation of 
the hip, as well as flexion and extension of the knee. There is no warmth, 
erythema or swelling of the abdomen. Do not appreciate any effusion in 
the knee and cannot localize tenderness to her patella. 
**** 
Mrs. Gaye’s son accompanied her to the appointment. I asked him to step 
back into the room and did discuss with him that we had no other 
explanation for the pain that she is complaining about. I do not see 
evidence of sympathetic dystrophy, I not see evidence of pathology in the 
RIGHT hip to explain the pain in her groin, and the bone scan and x-ray 
today does not show evidence of fracture or abnormality regarding her 
RIGHT knee. Recommend evaluation by Dr. Klein in pain medicine. 
Follow up in 1 month. Note given for work that she could perform 
sedentary-type work. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 64) 
On September 3, 2020, Gaye saw Thomas Klein, D.O., at Iowa Ortho on referral 
from Dr. Kimelman for pain management. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 75) Dr. Klein noted Gaye’s 

GAYE V. HILTON WORLDWIDE, INC. 
Page 6 
complaints of pain in her right knee, hip, pelvis, thigh, and groin. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 75) He 
opined Gaye’s knee pain “appear[ed] to be altering her gait to the point of causing” her 
hip, pelvis, thigh, and groin issues. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 76) 
Gaye returned to see Dr. Kimelman on September 24, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 65–
66) He noted: 
She walks with marked antalgic gait with her foot supinated, her knee 
flexed and her hip flexed with an extreme quick step on the symptomatic 
RIGHT side. Despite that, her knee comes to nearly full extension with 
passive motion and she complains of pain with even light palpation in the 
front of the knee around the patella as well as the back of the knee. She 
does seem to have fairly good rotation in the hip. I do not see trophic 
changes at this time, however she continues to be extremely reactive. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 66) 
The defendants arranged for an investigator to surveille Gaye on September 24 
and 29, 2020. (Def. Ex. D) The investigator’s report is Defendants’ Exhibit D and the 
video footage is Defendants’ Exhibits E. Hours of surveillance resulted in several 
minutes of video showing Gaye walking both with and without a limp. (Def. Exs. D, E) 
The video shows Gaye was physically able to climb stairs, walk without a limp at times, 
carry what is apparently a trash bag full of clothes, and carry a container of laundry 
detergent. (Def. Ex. E) 
Dr. Kimelman saw Gaye for a follow-up exam on October 29, 2020, and again 
noted an antalgic gait and complaints of significant pain. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 67–68) He 
ordered an electromyography (EMG). (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 68) The EMG came back negative. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 69–70) 
Before Gaye’s next appointment with Dr. Kimelman, the defendants showed him 
the video of her walking, using stairs, carrying a trash bag full of laundry while walking, 
and carrying detergent while walking. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 70) Dr. Kimelman included the 
following note in the records from her December 18, 2020: 
I asked Beatrice if she can walk better sometimes or if she could do 
laundry and she denied that she can do that, stating she tried to go up 
stairs one day and had so much pain that the leg locked up and gave out 
on her. I did not discuss with her the video I saw which seems to indicate 
that she functions at a considerably higher level at least while being 
videoed outside of, I believe, her home. I told her I have nothing further to 
offer her and that Workers’ Compensation would be in touch. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 70) 
Gaye’s described waiting for an interpreter before seeing Dr. Kimelman, but the 
interpreter never arrived. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 1) She believed Dr. Kimelman was upset with 

GAYE V. HILTON WORLDWIDE, INC. 
Page 7 
her. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 1) While Gaye could not understand some of their conversation 
because of the language barrier, she recalled that he asked her if she could cook and 
do laundry. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 1)  
Thus, the weight of the evidence shows Dr. Kimelman asked her about her ability 
to do laundry and she denied she was able. He also asked her if she was occasionally 
able to walk better at times. Dr. Kimelman felt she provided a dishonest answer, given 
what the video shows. This interaction undermined Gaye’s credibility in his eyes with 
respect to her subjective complaints. Dr. Kimelman released her from his care as a 
result. 
In response to correspondence from defense counsel, Dr. Kimelman opined in a 
letter dated January 5, 2021, that Gaye had reached maximum medical improvement 
(MMI) from the work injury on December 18, 2020, and that her pain complaints were 
not related to her fall at Hilton. (Def. Ex. F, p. 41) He further opined he could not 
evaluate functional impairment because of Waddell signs. (Def. Ex. F, p. 41) Dr. 
Kimelman opined Gaye did not require permanent work restrictions. (Def. Ex. F, p. 41)  
The defendants refused to authorize additional treatment for Gaye’s work injury 
after Dr. Kimelman released her from his care. Gaye sought care at the East University 
Broadlawns Urgent Care on January 20, 2021, complaining of pain in her right knee and 
low back. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 85) There is no mention of hip, groin, or pelvis pain in the 
records from this exam. (Jt. Ex. 10, pp. 83–86) 
Two days later, Gaye returned to the East University Broadlawns Clinic. (Jt. Ex. 
10, p. 87) Lisa Klock, D.O., examined her and noted Gaye had a friend perform 
interpretation over the phone because she could not speak any English. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 
87) Dr. Klock recorded that Gaye, through her friend interpreting over the phone, 
“denie[d] any injury or fall specific that caused” her knee pain. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 87) She 
further noted: 
The pain is all around the knee and sharp pains down into the knee. She 
does not feel stable on that knee. She is unable to bend it more than a few 
degrees and she is having difficulty putting weight on it without feeling like 
it is g[oing to] give out and feels unstable. 
**** 
The right knee is slightly swollen. She is extremely tender to push knee in 
any direction whether it[‘]s medial lateral collateral ligament stressing or 
Lachman’s testing. She will not bend her knee in the office greater than 20 
degrees. She does straighten her knee. The knee is not hot to the touch. 
She even has severe pain if I try to move her patella. She has no lower leg 
edema. She will not put full weight on her knee. She has it wrapped in 
multiple knee braces for compression. 

GAYE V. HILTON WORLDWIDE, INC. 
Page 8 
(Jt. Ex. 10, p. 87–88) There is no indication Gaye complained of thigh, hip, or pelvis 
pain during her exam with Dr. Klock. (Jt. Ex. 10, pp. 87–89) Dr. Klock referred Gaye to a 
specialist. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 88) 
On January 29, 2021, Gaye saw Dr. Somisetty at the Broadlawns Ortho Clinic. 
(Jt. Ex. 10, p. 93) Dr. Somisetty noted: 
Overall she has diffuse pain around the right knee, more so along the 
medial joint line where she remains very tender. She was unable to extend 
her knee completely because of pain. She could flex to about 90 degrees. 
Overall the medial and the lateral collateral ligaments are stable to 
examination. 
(Jt. Ex. 10, p. 94)  
Dr. Somisetty diagnosed Gaye with a meniscus tear based on her presentation 
on examination. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 95) However, an MRI showed no tear to her meniscus. 
(Jt. Ex. 10, p. 97) Raviv Ramdial, M.D., interpreted the MRI to show degenerative 
changes in the patellofemoral compartment. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 97) Dr. Somisetty diagnosed 
her with primary osteoarthritis of the right knee and patellofemoral pain syndrome of the 
right knee and performed an injection. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 98–100) On June 11, 2021, Dr. 
Somisetty prescribed another injection. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 112) 
Defense counsel asked Dr. Kimelman to review care records from Sreedhar 
Somisetty, M.D. (Def. Ex. F, p. 43) Dr. Kimelman did so and opined in a letter dated July 
19, 2021: 
There is nothing in the notes that changes my opinion. I have not reviewed 
the x-rays that Dr. Somisetty has seen; however, I do not believe that 
degenerative arthritis of the knee is an explanation for her constellation of 
symptoms. I wonder if Dr. Somisetty has seen the video of her carrying 
laundry and climbing stairs, prior to his recommendation for treatment and 
opening the possibility she may require joint replacement. 
(Def. Ex. F, p. 44) There is an insufficient basis in the record from which to conclude Dr. 
Somisetty has viewed the surveillance video of Gaye. 
Claimant’s counsel arranged an independent medical examination (IME) with 
Sunil Bansal, M.D. (Cl. Ex. 1) Dr. Bansal reviewed records relating to Gaye’s work injury 
and medical care. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1–6) He also performed a physical examination. (Cl. 
Ex. 1, pp. 6–7) Dr. Bansal issued an IME report dated July 29, 2021, with his opinions. 
(Cl. Ex. 1) 
Dr. Bansal opined Gaye aggravated her patellofemoral joint disease when she 
fell at Hilton. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 8) He further stated the aggravation of her patellofemoral joint 
disease caused an altered gait that, in turn, caused sacroiliitis, the source of her back 
pain. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 9) With respect to the surveillance footage, Dr. Bansal stated: 

GAYE V. HILTON WORLDWIDE, INC. 
Page 9 
I have reviewed the approximately minute and a half of surveillance 
footage of Ms. Gaye from September 2020. In that footage, Ms. Gaye, 
during the first portion of the footage is clearly seen walking with an 
altered gait, shifting her weight. In another portion comprising several 
seconds, she is not. This is not unexpected as any lower extremity 
pathology will have waxing and waning inflammation, in turn affecting the 
gait pattern. I do find it significant that of the many hours that usually 
comprises the surveillance experience, only a minute and half was 
captured and in that she clearly presents with an altered gait for a portion 
of it, consistent with her testimony and exam. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10) 
 
Dr. Bansal was not present at the time of Dr. Kimelman’s examinations of Gaye. 
He therefore did not witness how Gaye was walking or how she reacted on examination 
to touching and movement of her injured leg. Dr. Bansal also was not present for the 
interaction between Dr. Kimelman and Gaye after he viewed the surveillance video and 
asked her if she was able to walk better at times or do laundry. Further, Dr. Bansal did 
not address Gaye’s actions during physical therapy or how the video reinforces 
Neuberger’s belief she was exaggerating her symptoms. Dr. Bansal’s assessment is 
therefore of limited probative values with respect to how it implicates Gaye’s statements 
and actions during the interactions Dr. Kimelman or Neuberger had with her. 
Gaye returned to Dr. Somisetty on August 27, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 107) He did 
not examine her knee because he believed she was undergoing surgery on it at an 
outside facility based on his communication with her during the exam. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 
108) Dr. Somisetty noted: 
She was more concerned about recent low back pain radiating along the 
posterior right gluteal area to the upper thigh. Examination done in sitting 
position showed negative straight leg raise test, intact motor and sensory 
examination both lower extremities. She has diffuse tenderness over the 
lumbosacral junction and adjoining sacroiliac joint. 
(Jt. Ex. 10, p. 108) He diagnosed her with chronic right-sided low back pain and referred 
her for consultation with a pain specialist. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 108) 
On September 24, 2021, Gaye saw Morgan Brown, A.R.N.P., for pain 
management. (Jt. Ex. 10, pp. 102–06) Brown noted: 
Patient presents to clinic with her cousin who is used as an interpreter at 
her appointment today. Patient states that she fell last year and this 
caused increased pain to her right knee and a month or 2 later started 
causing pain in her right low back and radiating down her right leg all the 
way to her foot. 

GAYE V. HILTON WORLDWIDE, INC. 
Page 10 
(Jt. Ex. 10, pp. 102) Brown further noted Gaye requested referral back to Dr. Somisetty 
“for her right knee pain as it continues to be excruciating and cause her a lot of pain as 
well as having to use crutches to walk.” (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 102) Gaye told Brown she 
continued “to have pain in her right low back that radiates down her right leg as well.” 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 102) 
The weight of the evidence shows Gaye’s description of her symptoms to care 
providers is inconsistent and exaggerated. This undermines the credibility of her 
representations to care providers, which in turn damages the persuasiveness of their 
medical opinions. Consequently, there is an insufficient basis in the evidence from 
which to conclude the stipulated work injured caused Gaye to sustain a compensable 
disability. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
In 2017, the Iowa legislature amended the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
See 2017 Iowa Acts, ch. 23. The 2017 amendments apply to cases in which the date of 
an alleged injury is on or after July 1, 2017. Id. at § 24(1); see also Iowa Code § 3.7(1). 
Because the injury at issue in this case occurred after July 1, 2017, the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act, as amended in 2017, applies. Smidt v. JKB Restaurants, LC, File 
No. 5067766 (App. Dec. 11, 2020). 
Disputes about medical causation are typically of two types under the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Act. One is whether the injury arises out of an actual risk of the 
claimant’s employment. See Bluml v. Dee Jay’s Inc., 920 N.W.2d 85, 85–86 (Iowa 
2018); see also Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 169, 173–74 (Iowa 2007); Meyer 
v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 223 (Iowa 2006); Almquist v. Shenandoah Nurseries, 254 
N.W. 35 (Iowa 1934). The other is whether the injury caused compensable disability. 
See Schutjer, 780 N.W.2d at 560 (quoting Grundmeyer v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 649 
N.W.2d 744, 752 (Iowa 2002).  
“Medical causation presents a question of fact.” Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. 
Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844 (Iowa 2011). The answer to this question lies “‘essentially 
within the domain of expert testimony.’” Id. at 845 (quoting Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire. & 
Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 1995)). The agency “has the duty to determine 
the credibility of the witnesses and to weigh the evidence, together with the other 
disclosed facts and circumstances, and then to accept or reject the opinion.” Dunlavey, 
526 N.W.2d at 853. The agency determines the weight to give an expert opinion based 
on consideration of: 
1) “[T]he accuracy of the facts relied upon by the expert,” Schutjer, 780 N.W2d 
at 560 (quoting Grundmeyer, 649 N.W.2d at 752); 
 
2) “[T]he completeness of the premise with which the expert is given,” Dunlavey, 
526 N.W.2d at 853; and 

GAYE V. HILTON WORLDWIDE, INC. 
Page 11 
3) “[O]ther disclosed facts and circumstances,” Id. 
The agency may accept or reject an expert opinion in whole or in part. Schutjer v. 
Algona Manor Care Ctr., 780 N.W.2d 549, 560 (Iowa 2010) (quoting Grundmeyer, 649 
N.W.2d at 752). 
As found above, Gaye has failed to meet her burden of proof in this case with 
respect to the question of whether the stipulated work injury caused temporary total 
disability (TTD) or permanent partial disability (PPD). Gaye’s inconsistent and 
exaggerated descriptions of her symptoms undermine the accuracy of the facts on 
which multiple doctors have relied when treating her. She is therefore not entitled to 
TTD or PPD benefits, payment for additional medical expenses, or penalty under the 
Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
However, Gaye has prevailed in the dispute about whether she is entitled to 
reimbursement for Dr. Bansal’s IME. Under Iowa Code section 85.39, a claimant may 
obtain an IME with a doctor of the claimant’s choice if the claimant disagrees with the 
opinion of a defense-chosen doctor regarding the permanent disability caused by the 
work injury. Here, Gaye did so after Dr. Kimelman refused to opine on the question of 
permanent disability. 
Before September 1, 2021, the Commissioner recognized a distinction between a 
medical opinion on causation and one on the nature and extent of permanent disability 
when determining whether the cost of an IME may be reimbursed to the claimant under 
Iowa Code section 85.39. Barnhart v. John Deere Dubuque Works of Deere & 
Company, File No. 5065851, p. 2 (App. Mar. 27, 2020) (citing Reh v. Tyson Foods, Inc., 
File No. 5053428 (App. Mar. 26, 2018)); see also Phillips v. Kimberley Farms, Inc., File 
No. 5057945, p. 15 (Arb. Apr. 24, 2019) (“The Commissioner has made it abundantly 
clear that a medical opinion on some other issue such as causation or restrictions is not 
the equivalent of an impairment rating.”). Under this agency precedent, an injured 
employee could only obtain reimbursement for an IME in response to an express 
opinion on permanent impairment by an employer-chosen doctor. Id.  
On September 1, 2021, the Iowa Court of Appeals issued its opinion in Kern v. 
Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 966 N.W.2d 326 (Iowa App. 2021) (Table). The court 
reversed an agency decision denying IME reimbursement because the employer-
chosen doctor had opined only on causation and had not addressed what, if any, 
disability the claimant had sustained. Id. at *2–*5. In doing so, the court determined the 
agency had erroneously interpreted Iowa Code section 85.39 and Iowa Supreme Court 
precedent construing it. See id. The court concluded that an employer-chosen doctor’s 
opinion finding that a workers’ alleged injury or condition did not arise out of and in the 
course of the workers’ employment constitutes an opinion of no disability and the cost of 
an IME sought due to disagreement with such an opinion is reimbursable under section 
85.39. See id.  

GAYE V. HILTON WORLDWIDE, INC. 
Page 12 
Here, Dr. Kimelman did not opine on whether Gaye’s injury arose out of and in 
the course of her employment with Hilton. Instead, he stated that he could not opine on 
the question of what, if any, permanent impairment Gaye sustained from her work 
injury. This refusal is effectively an opinion of no impairment similar to an opinion finding 
no causation. The court’s holding in Kern therefore governs. Gaye is entitled to 
reimbursement for the cost of Dr. Bansal’s IME under section 85.39. 
ORDER 
Based on the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) Gaye shall take nothing from this case with respect to her claims for 
reimbursement of medical expenses, penalty, or temporary, healing period, or 
permanent disability benefits. 
2) The defendants shall pay to Gaye two thousand nine hundred eight-six and 
00/100 ($2,986.00) for the cost of Dr. Bansal’s IME. 
3) The parties shall be responsible for paying their own hearing costs.  
Signed and filed this _11th _ day of May, 2022. 
 
 
 
                    BEN HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Nick Platt (via WCES) 
Stephanie Techau (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
