Case Number: 1664726.02
Case Title:  HUSMANN, BRENT V. BRUGGEMAN LUMBER INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Husmann Brent-1664726.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
BRENT HUSMANN, 
  : 
 
 
  :                     File No. 1664726.02 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
BRUGGEMAN LUMBER, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
HASTINGS MUTUAL INSURANCE 
  : 
COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :         Head Note Nos.:  1108, 1803 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Brent Husmann, filed a petition for arbitration on October 28, 2019.  
He seeks workers’ compensation benefits from Bruggeman Lumbar, Inc., employer, and 
Hastings Mutual Insurance Company, insurance carrier.  The claimant was represented 
by Channing Dutton.  The defendants were represented by Nathan McConkey. 
The matter came on for hearing on January 13, 2021, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Court Call 
videoconferencing system.  The record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 
8; Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 5; and Defense Exhibits A through F.  The record did 
remain open for a period of time following the hearing to allow for the submission of a 
rebuttal report. 
The claimant testified at hearing, in addition to Alex Wiezorak.  Kimberly Blink 
served as the court reporter for these proceedings and the hearing transcript was filed 
on February 10, 2021.  The matter was fully submitted on March 15, 2021 after helpful 
briefing by the parties.  Both parties were well-represented. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the stipulated work injury is a cause of any permanent disability. 
2. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care. 
3. Whether apportionment is appropriate. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Sep-30  11:38:51     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HUSMANN V. BRUGGEMAN LUMBER, INC. 
Page 2 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1. The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
2. Claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on October 22, 2018. 
3. Temporary disability/healing period and medical benefits are no longer in 
dispute. 
4. The commencement date for any permanent disability benefits is May 16, 
2019. 
5. The weekly rate of compensation is $438.48 
6. Defendants have paid and are entitled to a credit as set forth in the hearing 
report. 
7. Affirmative defenses have been waived other than apportionment. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Brent Husmann was 49 years old as of the date of hearing. He lives in 
Hopkinton, Iowa, a small town approximately 30 miles from Dubuque.  He is a high 
school graduate and he attended auto mechanic courses after high school.  Mr. 
Husmann testified live and under oath at hearing.  I find him to be generally credible.  
He was a verbose witness and offered details unnecessarily at times.  He generally 
answered the questions he was asked though.  There was nothing about his demeanor 
which caused me any concern regarding his truthfulness.  It is noted that his credibility 
is a key issue in the case and this shall be discussed further below. 
Mr. Husmann has a varied and interesting work history.  He is ambitious, 
entrepreneurial and the record reflects he has an excellent work ethic.  His full work 
history is set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 2.  He has truck driving experience, including 
operating his own business.  He also has retail sales experience and owned a pawn 
shop for a period of time.  He began working for Bruggeman Lumber, (hereafter 
Bruggeman) in 2010, first as a driver, and later in the shop.  He also earns income on 
the side as a performance hypnotist, a conceal carry trainer and screen printing on 
shirts. 
While employed at Bruggeman, Mr. Husmann underwent four surgeries for a 
non-work related condition and at some point, mostly stopped driving a truck.  He 
earned $640.00 per week prior to his work injury.  His job duties involved providing 
maintenance on the trucks. 
 
 

HUSMANN V. BRUGGEMAN LUMBER, INC. 
Page 3 
On October 22, 2018, Mr. Husmann sustained a fairly serious workplace 
accident.  He was attempting to fix a hose on the bed of a truck early in the morning 
while it was still dark.  Upon climbing on the truck, he hit his head on a boom and fell off 
the truck approximately four feet to the ground onto the concrete.  (Transcript, pages 
41-42)  He initially felt pain in his shoulder and head.  Toward the end of his workday, 
he noticed his back was stiff.  “And then October 26, I couldn’t hardly move.  I had pain 
going down my leg.”  (Tr., p. 43)  Photographs of the area where the injury occurred are 
at Claimant’s Exhibit 3. 
The condition of Mr. Husmann’s back prior to this injury is highly relevant to this 
case.  Mr. Husmann testified at hearing that he began receiving chiropractic care for 
maintenance when he was approximately 25 years old.  He testified: 
And I remember the chiropractor, the first one I went to, he said, ‘It’s kind 
of like changing oil on your car.  You need routine maintenance.’  So every 
so often you come in and get straightened back out and you feel better. 
And 90 percent of the time, it seems like, when they did my neck, I 
wouldn’t have any – you know, just seemed like it was night-and-day 
difference.  So if you had a stuffy nose or something and they cracked 
your neck, it seemed like the stuffy nose would go away.  I just did it kind 
of as routine maintenance. 
(Tr., p. 48)  He testified that he never had the same type of back pain prior to the work 
accident that he had after.  (Tr., p. 49) 
The chiropractic records in evidence, however, did show prior low back problems 
with some fairly significant symptoms at times.  These records were identified early on 
in the claim, however, apparently the records were not obtained by the parties until just 
shortly before hearing.  It is noted that Mr. Husmann never attempted to hide his 
chiropractic treatment or earlier condition.  He did downplay and minimize the condition 
to some extent at hearing and in his deposition testimony.  Mr. Husmann had reported 
low back pain as early as January 2013.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 2)  He was seen for back pain in 
2014 and 2015.  (Jt. Ex. 1)  He was also seen for muscle spasms in the low back and 
right hip pain.  (Jt. Ex. 2)  He continued with low back treatments in 2016, 2017 and 
2018, all the way up to just a few months before his work injury.  (Jt. Ex. 2; Jt. Ex. 1, p. 
17)  On August 20, 2018, he was diagnosed with sciatica, low back pain and muscle 
spasms. 
Following the work injury, the employer directed Mr. Husmann’s medical 
treatment.  He was given an MRI, physical therapy and injections.  (Jt. Ex. 4)  He was 
evaluated by Chad Abernathey, M.D., in February 2019.  (Jt. Ex. 5)  Dr. Abernathey 
documented the following.  “To date, medical management, including physical therapy 
and epidural steroid injection, has stabilized his symptomatology, but he still has some 
residual discomfort.”  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 1)  Dr. Abernathey diagnosed lumbosacral strain and 
recommended further conservative management.  

HUSMANN V. BRUGGEMAN LUMBER, INC. 
Page 4 
In March 2019, Jeffrey Westpheling, M.D., evaluated Mr. Husmann.  Dr. 
Westpheling diagnosed left lumbar radiculitis and recommended another epidural 
steroid injection.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 1)  Mr. Husmann followed up with Dr. Westpheling 
attempting further conservative care including SI joint injections, medications and 
osteopathic manipulations.  None of the treatments alleviated his symptoms.  His last 
visit to Dr. Westpheling was in May 2019.  At that time, he was restricted to no lifting 
more than 40 pounds and limited squatting, kneeling and climbing.  Dr. Westpheling 
recommended a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) to determine permanent 
restrictions.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 17) 
Andrew Pugely, M.D., performed a defense IME in June 2019.  (Jt. Ex. 8)  Dr. 
Pugely reviewed a number of records and examined Mr. Husmann.  He recounted the 
treatment history and then provided a number of expert opinions.   
Today Mr. Husmann reports 6/10 midline low back pain extending 
down the left buttock down the back of the left leg to the back of the foot.  
He also has pain down the right buttock to the proximal posterior thigh.  
He denies pain in the left foot.  See symptom drawing scanned into the 
media tab in Epic.  He reports the leg pain is always there, and can be 
very sharp.  He is often pretty comfortable when sitting, but his pain is 
aggravated by climbing into a truck, pushing a shopping cart that cause 
pain to go down his leg.  He describes his symptoms as worsening over 
the last 7 months.  Functional capacity evaluation has not been done. 
(Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 1-2)  Dr. Pugely diagnosed low back pain and indicated there was no 
radiographic or clinical evidence of nerve compression.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 5)  He assigned a 
5 percent whole body impairment rating and concurred with Dr. Westpheling’s 
restrictions of limiting his lifting to 40 pounds.  He modified the no squatting, kneeling, 
ladders and fork truck to occasional.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 6) 
Alex Wiezorak, the maintenance manager at Bruggeman testified on behalf of 
the employer.  His testimony is generally credible.  He testified that Mr. Husmann, along 
with a number of other employees, was laid off in 2019.  (Tr., p. 93)  Mill workers were 
recalled.  Mr. Husmann was not. 
Claimant retained Sunil Bansal, M.D., for an IME in October 2020.  Dr. Bansal 
reviewed appropriate medical records and examined Mr. Husmann.  Dr. Bansal noted 
Mr. Husmann’s prior back issues.  (Cl. Ex. 1 p. 9)  I find Dr. Bansal had a generally 
accurate history.  He diagnosed an aggravation of lumbar facet arthropathy and 
assigned a 7 percent whole body rating for this condition.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 12)  He opined 
this rating was related to the stipulated work injury.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 13)  He recommended 
no lifting greater than 35 pounds and limited bending, twisting and stairs.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 
13) 
At the commencement of hearing, the parties indicated that a number of early 
chiropractic records in Joint Exhibits 1 and 2 were obtained late in the discovery 
process, after all the expert reports had been obtained.  (Tr., p. 10)  In response, 

HUSMANN V. BRUGGEMAN LUMBER, INC. 
Page 5 
defendants sought to obtain a further report from their expert regarding these records.  
The record in the case was held open and defendants submitted Joint Exhibit 8, pages 
7 through 9.  It is a “check box” report from Dr. Pugely, written on defense counsel 
letterhead.  Defense counsel set forth a history that went beyond the discussion of the 
old chiropractic records, although those are mentioned.  Dr. Pugely opined that Mr. 
Husmann did not suffer any structural damage to his back/spine/hip from his work injury 
and at most suffered a soft-tissue strain or temporary aggravation of his underlying 
condition.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 8)  These opinions appear to be consistent with Dr. Pugely’s 
earlier opinions.  Defendants requested he also opine that Mr. Husmann would not 
require any additional treatment in the future related to his work injury, and Dr. Pugely 
refused to agree with this.  (Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 8-9) 
Having reviewed all of the evidence in the file, I find the greater weight of 
evidence supports a finding that the claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of 
and in the course of his employment on October 22, 2018.  The greater weight of 
evidence supports a finding that this injury materially aggravated Mr. Husmann’s 
preexisting low back condition, which was likely symptomatic to some degree at the 
time he sustained his work injury.  I believe Mr. Husmann, however, that the pain and 
symptoms he experienced after the injury were more severe and different than what he 
had experienced in the past.  Furthermore, the accident was relatively significant.  He 
fell approximately four feet from a flatbed truck onto the cement.  It does appear that Mr. 
Husmann may have downplayed or minimized, to some degree, the significance of his 
earlier low back symptoms.  This is likely because in his mind, the conditions were very 
different in both type and severity. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The primary question submitted is one of medical causation.  The defendants 
argue that claimant has had a symptomatic low back for many years and has failed to 
prove that his work injury is a substantial cause of his work injury. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 

HUSMANN V. BRUGGEMAN LUMBER, INC. 
Page 6 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956).  If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961).  “An 
employer is not liable for compensating an employee’s preexisting disability that arose 
out of and in the course of employment with a different employer or from causes 
unrelated to employment.”  Iowa Code section 85.34(7) (2019). 
For the reasons set forth in the findings of fact above, I find that the greater 
weight of evidence supports a finding that the claimant has sustained a permanent 
disability as a result of his work injury.  I based this upon the claimant’s credible 
testimony, the nature and severity of his stipulated work injury, and the opinions of Dr. 
Bansal.  Furthermore, I find that Dr. Bansal’s causation opinion is generally supported 
by the remaining medical evidence in the file. 
The defendants point to the opinions of Dr. Pugely, who opined there was no 
“structural damage” caused by the stipulated work injury.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 8)  Dr. Pugely 
further opined that Mr. Husmann sustained at most a soft-tissue strain or temporary 
aggravation of his degenerative condition.  Dr. Pugely’s causation opinion, however, is 
somewhat ambiguous.  While he does not provide enough information on his own to 
meet claimant’s burden to prove medical causation, his opinion is somewhat unclear as 
to what his exact opinion is.  The fact that he refused to state that he would not need 
any further treatment for his work injury in the future further complicates the ambiguity of 
his opinion.  He opined that claimant had sustained a mild disability “as it relates to the 
work-related injury.”  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 5)  In contrast, Dr. Bansal provided a clear causation 
opinion based upon his record review, history taken and examination of Mr. Husmann.  
His conclusions are more convincing in light of the record of evidence.  “The above 
mechanism of falling, coupled with his immediate clinical presentation, is consistent with 
his symptomatic lumbar back pain.  Specifically, he aggravated his lumbar arthropathy.” 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 13)  I find this is the most convincing and credible expert medical opinion in 
the record. 
The defendants also raised “apportionment” as an issue at hearing, although it 
was not briefed.  The defendants seem to argue that his earlier disability should be 
apportioned out of his work injury claim.  The defendants, however, have not proven 
any permanent preexisting low back disability.  He undoubtedly had some symptoms 
which had never resulted in significant treatment (other than chiropractic maintenance), 
work restrictions or impairment.  Once the claimant has proven medical causation, the 

HUSMANN V. BRUGGEMAN LUMBER, INC. 
Page 7 
burden shifts to the defendants to apportion out any preexisting disability. The 
defendants have failed to prove that any ascertainable portion of claimant’s preexisting 
condition resulted in a permanent disability. 
The next issue is the extent of claimant’s industrial disability. 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the 
Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in the terms of 
percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34. 
Mr. Husmann was 49 years old as of the date of hearing.  He lives in a small 
town in northeast Iowa.  He is bright and has a number of transferrable work skills, 
which make him employable.  He sustained a relatively significant work injury, which 
aggravated his underlying lumbar arthropathy.  This has resulted in a permanent 
impairment of approximately 7 percent of the whole body.  He was not a surgical 
candidate and underwent conservative treatment only.  He has some recommended 
work restrictions, which are somewhat limiting in the area of manual labor.  Mr. 
Husmann had worked for this employer for approximately 10 years and was a valuable 
maintenance employee.  He was laid off for economic reasons.  He has secured higher 
paying employment in skilled manufacturing, which is well within his physical 
capabilities.  He is, however, a less attractive job candidate in the competitive job 
market as a result of his condition.  It is noted the defendants did obtain video 
surveillance of Mr. Husmann carrying some items and unloading a truck.  It does not 
show him doing much at all, however, it does show that he is generally able to engage 
in some minor physical activities. 
Considering all of the factors of industrial disability, the claimant has proven a 
minor industrial disability of 15 percent.  I conclude this entitles Mr. Husmann to 75 
weeks of compensation at the rate set forth in the hearing report commencing on May 
16, 2019. 

HUSMANN V. BRUGGEMAN LUMBER, INC. 
Page 8 
The next issue is whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care.  Mr. 
Husmann has asked for treatment recommended by Dr. Pugely; specifically, a back 
brace, physical therapy and ongoing chiropractic maintenance.   
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27 (2013). 
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment – and seeking alternate care – 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable.  See 
Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995).  Determining what care is 
reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.  Id.  The employer’s obligation turns 
on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability.  Id.; Harned v. Farmland 
Foods, Inc., 331 N.W.2d 98 (Iowa 1983).   
An application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because 
claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving.  Mere dissatisfaction with 
the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical 
care.  Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not 
reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the 
claimant.  Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). 
An employer’s statutory right is to select the providers of care and the employer 
may consider cost and other pertinent factors when exercising its choice. Long, at 124. 
An employer (typically) is not a licensed health care provider and does not possess 
medical expertise. Accordingly, an employer does not have the right to control the 
methods the providers choose to evaluate, diagnose and treat the injured employee. An 
employer is not entitled to control a licensed health care provider’s exercise of 
professional judgment. Assmann v. Blue Star Foods, File No. 866389 (Declaratory 
Ruling, May 19, 1988). An employer’s failure to follow recommendations of an 
authorized physician in matters of treatment is commonly a failure to provide reasonable 
treatment. Boggs v. Cargill, Inc., File No. 1050396 (Alt. Care Dec. January 31, 1994). 
I find that the claimant’s medical treatment to date has been generally 
appropriate and reasonable.  Therefore, the alternate medical care claim is technically 
denied.  Dr. Pugely, however, did recommend a lumbar support brace and chronic 
maintenance therapy.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 5)  Mr. Husmann is entitled to treatment for his 
work-related condition.  This would, however, exclude any chiropractic maintenance of 
the type he received prior to his work injury.  The defendants ceased all medical care 
after receiving Dr. Pugely’s IME report, which, as mentioned, was somewhat vague as 
related to medical causation.  I find that claimant did aggravate his underlying lumbar 
arthropathy, and is entitled to ongoing treatment for this condition.  The appropriate  
 
 

HUSMANN V. BRUGGEMAN LUMBER, INC. 
Page 9 
remedy is that defendants, if requested, shall authorize another physician to review 
whether there is any reasonable and necessary medical treatment associated with this 
condition. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay the claimant seventy-five (75) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the rate of four hundred and thirty-eight and 48/100 ($438.48) per 
week commencing May 16, 2019. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall be given credit for weeks previously paid as stipulated. 
If requested, defendants shall promptly authorize a new treating physician to 
provide an opinion as to whether there is any reasonable and necessary treatment for 
claimant’s work-related aggravation of his lumbar arthropathy. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants. 
Signed and filed this _30th _ day of September, 2021. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Channing Dutton (via WCES) 
Nathan McConkey (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
