Case Number: 21003206.01
Case Title:  JONES, DAWN V. CITY OF PLEASANT HILL
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Jones Dawn-21003206.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DAWN JONES, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
     File No. 21003206.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, IA, 
  : 
 
  ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
IMWCA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
      Head Note:  1402.20 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Dawn Jones, filed a petition in arbitration for workers’ compensation 
benefits against City of Pleasant Hill, IA, as employer, and IMWCA, as insurance 
carrier.  The undersigned heard this case on January 31, 2024, via Zoom.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing.  On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed.  The parties are bound by their stipulations.   
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 6, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 10, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through L.  Claimant testified on her own behalf.  
The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.  All parties 
filed their post-hearing briefs on March 1, 2024, at which time the case was deemed 
fully submitted.   
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury on November 25, 2020, which arose out 
of and in the course of her employment; 
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability; 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Jul-31  12:48:09     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

JONES V. CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, IA 
Page 2 
 
3. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability and, if so, the 
nature and extent of disability; 
4. The proper commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any are awarded; 
5. The proper gross weekly earnings;  
6. Whether claimant is entitled to past and future medical expenses for her 
alleged injury; 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for her independent medical 
examination under Iowa Code section 85.39; and  
8. Costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Dawn Jones is a 45-year-old mother of two who has worked as a custodian for 
the City of Pleasant Hill since 2006. (Hearing Transcript, pages 11-13)  In the instant 
matter, Ms. Jones is asserting that she sustained an acute injury to her cervical spine 
on November 25, 2020. 
Ms. Jones’ relevant medical history includes a significant amount of treatment for 
her spine.  On January 2, 2015, Ms. Jones presented to Alex Van Wyk, D.C., for a 
chiropractic adjustment. (Joint Exhibit 2, p. 5)  Ms. Jones reported severe neck and 
upper back pain with radiating pain, numbness, and tingling into the right arm following 
“recent heavy lifting activity.” (Id.)  She further told Dr. Van Wyk that she recently 
presented to the emergency room for her symptoms and received two Toradol 
injections, anti-inflammatory medication, a muscle relaxer, and hydrocodone. (Id.)   
Ms. Jones’ symptoms improved with chiropractic treatments and medication. 
(See JE2, pp. 7-8)  Nevertheless, she continued to report moderate to severe thoracic 
and cervical spine pain through April 2016. (JE2, pp. 7-15) 
More recently, Ms. Jones reported worsening chronic neck and upper back pain 
on May 29, 2020. (JE3, p. 16)  According to the medical notes, Ms. Jones told Einar 
Arason, D.O., that her chronic pain had been present for approximately 20 years. (Id.)  
The report provides, “Overall, the issue has been worsening, to where it is now severely 
interfering with her activities of daily living and day-to-day test [sic] completion.” (Id.)  At 
hearing, Ms. Jones asserted that she was joking when she reported a 20-year history to 
Dr. Arason. (Hr. Tr., pp. 23, 60)  She described severe tightness in the levator scapula 
and upper trapezius region bilaterally, worse on the right. (JE3, p. 16)  Ms. Jones 
managed her pain with over-the-counter pain medication and chiropractic visits. (Id.) 

JONES V. CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, IA 
Page 3 
 
On examination, Ms. Jones exhibited severe hypermobility of the elbows, wrists 
and thumbs bilaterally. (JE3, p. 16)  Given Ms. Jones’ medical history, Dr. Arason 
quickly suspected a hypermobility syndrome.  Dr. Arason opined that Ms. Jones’ 
condition was most consistent with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type III, benign variant. 
(Id.) 
 
At the time of the injury that brought about this case, Ms. Jones was using a 
ladder to place a box of toilet paper on an overhead shelf. (Hr. Tr., p. 18)  In order to 
complete this task, Ms. Jones moved the box up to the top of the ladder before climbing 
up the ladder herself.  Once in position, Ms. Jones shifted the box to her shoulder and 
hoisted it up to the proper shelf. (Id.)  Ms. Jones testified that she has completed this 
task many times in the past. (Id.)  However, on this occasion, she pushed the box up 
and experienced pain from the base of her skull all the way down her arm. (Id.)  After 
placing the box on the shelf, Ms. Jones climbed down the ladder and walked to an 
administrative office located near her cleaning closet to collect herself. (Hr. Tr., p. 19)  
According to Ms. Jones, Jenn Stratton, an administrative assistant with the Pleasant Hill 
Police Department, was in the office at the time.  Ms. Jones asserts that she told Ms. 
Stratton about what had just transpired and where she was hurting. (Hr. Tr., pp. 19-20)   
 
Claimant’s attorney deposed Ms. Stratton on September 7, 2023. (Defendants’ 
Exhibit J)  Ms. Stratton did not recall having a discussion with Ms. Jones on November 
25, 2020, regarding her injury. (Ex. J, Depo. pp. 10-11)  However, Ms. Stratton testified 
that Ms. Jones had talked to her about her chiropractic appointments and the pain she 
was experiencing. (Ex. J, Depo. pp. 11-12)  She did not recall any conversations about 
how Ms. Jones’ neck and arm symptoms came about. (Ex. J, Depo. p. 12) 
 
Ms. Jones asserts that she also told Lieutenant Ryan Hill of the Pleasant Hill Fire 
Department about her pain on the date of injury. (Claimant’s Exhibit 2, p. 18)  She 
concedes that she did not immediately report the injury to Gary Patterson, her longtime 
supervisor. (Hr. Tr., p. 20) 
 
Ms. Jones worked the next two days. (Hr. Tr., p. 21)  She testified she only 
worked a few hours each day because of the pain she was experiencing; however, her 
timecards indicate that she worked two hours of overtime each day and then received a 
full eight hours each day for the Thanksgiving holiday. (Ex. C, p. 10)  She did not report 
her injury to Mr. Patterson on Thursday or Friday. (Hr. Tr., p. 21) 
 
After the alleged injury, Ms. Jones first presented for medical treatment on 
November 28, 2020. (JE3, p. 19)  She presented to Joseph McGargill, M.D. of 
MercyOne Pleasant Hill. (Id.)  During the appointment, Ms. Jones complained of right-
sided neck pain that radiated into her back, down her arm, and into her hand. (Id.)  
Again, the medical record provides that Ms. Jones’ back pain had been present for 
approximately 20 years. (Id.)  The record provides that these episodes of radiating pain 
began roughly six months prior, and the most recent episode “started a month ago and 
is getting progressively worse.” (Id.)  At no point does the medical record discuss the 
alleged November 25, 2020, work injury.  Ms. Jones asserts this is because Dr. 

JONES V. CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, IA 
Page 4 
 
McGargill never asked how her pain started. (Hr. Tr., pp. 56-57)  I do not find Ms. Jones’ 
explanation to be credible. 
 
Dr. McGargill assessed cervical radiculopathy and, at Ms. Jones’ request, 
ordered an MRI of the cervical spine.1 (JE3, p. 21) 
 
Ms. Jones asserts she first reported the alleged injury to Mr. Patterson on 
December 3, 2020. (Hr. Tr., pp. 28-29)  On December 8, 2020, Ms. Jones contacted the 
Company nurse and a first report of injury was completed. (JE1, pp. 1-4)  During the 
defendants’ investigation into the compensability of Ms. Jones’ claim, Ms. Jones denied 
prior issues with her neck and right shoulder. (Ex. 8, pp. 82-83) 
 
Dr. Arason evaluated Ms. Jones on December 10, 2020. (JE3, p. 23)  Dr. Arason 
noted that she did not have a formal diagnosis but had diffuse joint hypermobility and 
“almost certainly has Ehler’s Dahnlo’s [sic] syndrome type 3.” (Id.) 
 
The December 30, 2020, MRI revealed cervical spondylosis at C5-C6 and C6-C7 
with moderate bilateral neural foramina narrowing at C5-C6, and mild bilateral neural 
foramina narrowing at C6-C7. (JE3, p. 28) 
 
Defendants investigated Ms. Jones’ claims and ultimately denied compensability 
via letter on January 14, 2021. (Ex. G, p. 23) 
Todd Harbach, M.D. conducted an orthopedic evaluation of Ms. Jones on 
January 18, 2021. (JE4, p. 34)  Dr. Harbach opined that the work injury lit up Ms. Jones’ 
pre-existing degenerative condition at C5-6, where she had bilateral neural foraminal 
narrowing and compression of both exiting C6 nerve roots. (JE4, p. 37)  Following his 
examination, Dr. Harbach released Ms. Jones to return to work without restrictions. 
(JE4, p. 38) 
Ms. Jones was referred to physical therapy and presented for her first 
appointment on January 21, 2021. (JE5, p. 58)  She was discharged with a prognosis of 
“excellent” on March 18, 2021. (JE5, p. 68) 
On referral from Dr. Harbach, Ms. Jones presented for a pain management 
consultation with Thomas Klein, D.O. (JE4, p. 47)  While Ms. Jones complained of pain 
in her neck, right shoulder blade, and posterior back, she reported the pain in her right 
arm had stopped. (Id.)  Dr. Klein recommended and performed trigger point injections 
for the bilateral neck and shoulder areas. (JE4, p. 49) 
When the trigger point injections provided only temporary relief, the plan was to 
perform a medial branch block series at C4-C5, C5-C6, and C6-C7. (JE4, p. 53)  
However, Ms. Jones elected not to proceed with said recommendation.  (See Hr. Tr., 
pp. 39, 49)  
                                                 
1 Ms. Jones disputes that she asked Dr. McGargill to order an MRI. (Ex. 8, p. 82) 

JONES V. CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, IA 
Page 5 
 
Ms. Jones remained employed full-time without restrictions with the City of 
Pleasant Hill until November 5, 2021.  Shortly thereafter, Ms. Jones obtained 
employment as a teacher’s aide with Southeast Polk School District. (Hr. Tr., p. 43)  Ms. 
Jones did not miss any work at Southeast Polk School District as a result of her alleged 
work injury. (Ex. 9, Depo. p. 21)  She then accepted a position as a meter reader with 
MidAmerican Energy in July 2022. (Hr. Tr., p. 44)  She remained in this position on the 
date of hearing. (Id.) 
Two years after her release from treatment, Ms. Jones sought an independent 
medical evaluation with Sunil Bansal, M.D. (Exhibit 1)  The examination occurred on 
September 5, 2023. (Ex. 1, p. 1)  Dr. Bansal opined that Ms. Jones sustained an 
aggravation of cervical facet arthropathy on the alleged date of injury. (Ex. 1, p. 9)  He 
explained that the act of reaching high to place a box on a shelf necessitated arm 
extension and likely neck hyperextension, which increases the load and stress on the 
cervical spine. (Id.)  He further explained that leaning her head to the side while bearing 
the 25-pound box significantly strained her facet joints. (Id.)  According to Dr. Bansal, 
the increased stress from this incident on the cervical facets aggravated Ms. Jones’ pre-
existing arthropathy and continuing to work without immediate treatment likely allowed 
the condition to persist or worsen. (Id.)  Utilizing the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, Dr. Bansal placed Ms. Jones in DRE Category II 
and assigned six percent whole person impairment. (Id.) 
Dr. Bansal produced an updated report on January 31, 2024, following receipt of 
chiropractic records from Swain Chiropractic. (Exhibit 10)  Dr. Bansal felt that the 
records bolstered his initial opinion that Ms. Jones sustained a permanent aggravation 
of a pre-existing condition on November 25, 2020.  He explained that while the 
chiropractic records demonstrate pre-existing neck pain, they do not include complaints 
of radicular symptoms.  According to Dr. Bansal, this strongly suggests that the 
November 25, 2020, work injury aggravated the pre-existing cervical facet arthropathy. 
(Ex. 10, p. 86) 
The rest of Dr. Bansal’s January 31, 2024, report appears to contradict his 
updated opinion.  The report goes on to contrast Dr. McGargill’s November 28, 2020, 
medical record with the May 29, 2020, chiropractic record from Dr. Arason to highlight a 
change in Ms. Jones’ pre-existing condition following her work injury.  Despite 
summarizing the November 28, 2020, medical record in his report, Dr. Bansal failed to 
address the note that states, “[T]he radiating arm pain began about a month prior and 
has progressively worsened.” If true, this statement would conflict with Dr. Bansal’s 
understanding that the radicular symptoms did not occur until after the date of injury. 
Additionally, Dr. Bansal was not privy to the chiropractic records from 2015. (See 
Ex. 10, p. 85)  These records note “severe neck and upper back symptoms with 
radiation into the right arm to include pain, numbness, and tingling.” (JE2, p. 5)  
Although Ms. Jones did not receive consistent treatment for these symptoms between 
2015 and 2020, the fact remains that Ms. Jones experienced cervical radiculopathy 
prior to the alleged date of injury.  I find Dr. Bansal’s causation opinion is based on an 
incomplete medical history.   

JONES V. CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, IA 
Page 6 
 
Further discrediting Dr. Bansal’s causation opinion is the fact that his description 
of the injury is not consistent with the rest of the evidentiary record.  The report 
provides, 
On November 25, 2020, she sustained an injury to her neck.  She was up 
on a ladder to place a box on a high shelf.  She still had to reach high to get 
the box on the shelf, and she leaned her head off to the side in order to use 
her shoulder.  The box was filled with 100 rolls of toilet paper, and weighed 
approximately 25 pounds.  As she leaned her head to the side, she had a 
sharp pain in her neck that shot down to the bottom of her shoulder blade 
and into her arm. 
(Ex. 1, p. 6)  Ms. Jones testified that she experienced pain when she went to push the 
box up onto its shelf, not when she leaned her head to the side. (Hr. Tr., p. 18) 
At the time of the evidentiary hearing, Ms. Jones testified she continues to suffer 
symptoms in her neck, shoulder blade, and arm. (Hr. Tr., p. 47)  She experiences what 
she calls “zingers” from her right shoulder blade to her wrist. (Hr. Tr., pp. 47-48)  At 
times, she has to shake her arm because “it will just go numb.” (Hr. Tr., p. 47)  
Defendants question the credibility of Ms. Jones’ complaints.  More specifically, they 
note that the medical records indicate Ms. Jones’ right upper extremity pain had 
resolved by February 9, 2021. (JE4, pp. 49, 51)  She has not sought any additional 
treatment for her conditions, including the alleged right arm pain, since April 5, 2021. 
(Hr. Tr., p. 40)  Ms. Jones does not take any prescription medications for her alleged 
conditions and she is not operating under any work restrictions. (Hr. Tr., pp. 80-81)  
Defendants suggest this supports a finding that the right arm complaints did not return 
and do not present a significant issue for Ms. Jones.   
The threshold issue in this case is whether claimant has proven by a 
preponderance of the evidence that she sustained a work-related injury arising out of 
and in the course of her employment with the defendant employer.  Defendants 
challenge Ms. Jones’ credibility and dispute whether she sustained a work-related injury 
on November 25, 2020.   
As mentioned, Ms. Jones asserts she sustained an acute injury to her neck on 
November 25, 2020.  Shortly after the alleged injury, Ms. Jones asserts she talked to 
Ms. Stratton about her injury in the administrative office of the Pleasant Hill Police 
Department.  Ms. Stratton has no recollection of this conversation.  Ms. Jones did not 
report the injury or seek immediate medical attention on the date of injury.   
Instead of reporting the work injury and requesting medical treatment, Ms. Jones 
sought unauthorized medical treatment at MercyOne Urgent Care.  During this initial 
appointment, Ms. Jones did not describe an acute injury occurring three days prior or 
give any indication that the condition was work-related.  Instead, Ms. Jones described 
chronic neck and upper back pain that had been present for approximately 20 years.  
Ms. Jones asserts she was joking and trying to lighten the mood when she told Dr. 
McGargill that her pain had been present for approximately 20 years.  Notably, this is 

JONES V. CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, IA 
Page 7 
 
not the first time in which Ms. Jones reported that her pain had been present for 20 
years. (See JE3, p. 16)  Moreover, it is clear from the “History” provided for Ms. Jones’ 
x-ray that Dr. McGargill did not consider the statement a joke.  As such, I do not find Ms. 
Jones’ explanation convincing.  At the November 28, 2020, visit, Ms. Jones reported the 
“gradual onset of constant episodes of moderate right posterior and right lateral neck 
pain, described as sharp, radiating to the right arm.” (JE3, p. 19)  She further reported 
that her current episode started approximately one month prior to her visit. (Id.)  She did 
not report an acute injury or an increase in symptoms three days prior.  Ms. Jones 
asserts this is because Dr. McGargill never asked how her pain started. (Hr. Tr., pp. 56-
57)  Again, I do not find Ms. Jones’ testimony in this regard to be credible. 
The November 28, 2020, medical record notes that Ms. Jones had tried applying 
heat and cold to the area, taking Flexeril, undergoing chiropractic adjustments, and 
performing exercises given to her by her physician but nothing had helped.  
Presumably, Ms. Jones was referring to the medications and exercises provided by Dr. 
Arason in May 2020.  (See JE3, pp. 18-19)  The medical record also provides that Ms. 
Jones requested an MRI.  Ms. Jones disputes the accuracy of this statement; however, 
I find it highly unlikely Dr. McGargill would inadvertently include the same in his medical 
records.   
After working for an additional week, Ms. Jones reported the injury to her 
supervisor on Monday, December 7, 2020. (See Ex. 3, p. 29)  Two days later, Ms. 
Jones spoke with her claims adjuster and expressly denied any prior issues. (Ex. 8, p. 
82)  She further reported that she had not been to a chiropractor in approximately 10 
years. (Id.)  After defendants obtained the initial medical records and brought the same 
to Ms. Jones’ attention, Ms. Jones asserted the medical records noting pre-existing 
conditions and more recent chiropractic adjustments were inaccurate. (Ex. 8, pp. 82-83)  
Ms. Jones asserts her statements were the result of being on muscle relaxers. (Hr. Tr., 
pp. 68-69)  I do not find Ms. Jones’ explanation to be credible. 
Defendants assert Ms. Jones attempted to impede defendants’ investigation by 
limiting the extent of the medical records her providers could release. (Ex. E, p. 19)  
Additionally, defendants assert Ms. Jones consciously omitted the names of her 
chiropractors when asked to provide the names of her past treating physicians, 
chiropractors, and hospitals. (Ex. E, p. 21)  Ms. Jones explained that she asked a co-
worker for advice on what to write on the forms in question, as she had never filed a 
workers’ compensation claim before. (Hr. Tr., pp. 33-34)  She asserted that she was not 
trying to prevent the disclosure of her pre-existing medical records. (Id.)  While she 
quickly corrected her error after the same was brought to her attention, it is difficult to 
accept Ms. Jones’ testimony that she was not trying to prevent the disclosure of her pre-
existing medical records to some extent.   
Having considered Ms. Jones’ testimony, the pre-existing and contemporaneous 
medical records, and the causation opinion of Dr. Bansal, I find that Ms. Jones failed to 
prove she sustained a neck injury that arose out of and in the course of her employment 
with the City of Pleasant Hill on November 25, 2020.  Similarly, I find that Ms. Jones 

JONES V. CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, IA 
Page 8 
 
failed to prove she sustained either a temporary or permanent aggravation of her pre-
existing neck condition as a result of her work activities on November 25, 2020. 
All other disputed issues with respect to the alleged November 25, 2020, work 
injury are rendered moot. 
REASONING AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995). An 
injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the injury 
and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309. The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment. Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143.  
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke's Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense. 
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956). If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover. Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961). 
Following review of the entirety of the evidentiary record and after giving 
significant consideration to the evidence in this case, I determined claimant provided 

JONES V. CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, IA 
Page 9 
 
insufficient evidence to prove she sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course 
of her employment on November 25, 2020.  In reaching this conclusion, I rejected the 
causation opinion of Dr. Bansal.  I also rejected claimant’s testimony as lacking 
credibility.   
Having found that Ms. Jones failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence 
that she sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of her employment, I 
conclude that Ms. Jones failed to prove a compensable work injury occurred.  Similarly, 
having found that Ms. Jones failed to prove a material aggravation of an underlying 
condition, I conclude that Ms. Jones failed to prove entitlement to weekly workers’ 
compensation benefits. 
The final disputed issue is whether costs should be assessed against either 
party. Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency. Iowa Code section 10A.328. 
Exercising the agency's discretion, I conclude that neither party's costs should be 
assessed in this case. Rather, all parties should bear their own costs. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant takes nothing. 
All parties shall pay their own costs. 
Signed and filed this ___31st __ day of July, 2024. 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Matthew Milligan (via WCES) 
Jane Lorentzen (via WCES) 
Adam Kiel (via WCES) 
 
 

JONES V. CITY OF PLEASANT HILL, IA 
Page 10 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
