Case Number: 5051469
Case Title:  BAIRD, ROBBYN V. LINN COUNTY, IOWA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Baird Robbyn-5064401D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ROBBYN BAIRD, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
  File Nos. 5051469 
 
 
  : 
 
 
           
vs. 
 
  : 
 
  
 
 
  :                  
LINN COUNTY, STATE OF IOWA, 
  :         REVIEW-REOPENING DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
Head Note Nos:  1402.40, 2905, 2907 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
ROBBYN BAIRD, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
    File No. 5064401 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                ARBITRATION DECISION       
LINN COUNTY, STATE OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
Head Note Nos: 1402.40, 1803, 2907 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
 
 
       
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Robbyn Baird, claimant, filed two petitions in this case seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Linn County, self-insured employer as defendant.  Ms. 
Baird filed a petition in review-reopening from an Agreement for Settlement (AFS).  In 
the AFS the parties stipulated that Ms. Baird sustained an injury to her body as a whole 
that arose out of and in the course of employment with Linn County on November 10, 
2014.  The parties also stipulated that Ms. Baird was entitled to 125 weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits which is the equivalent of 25 percent loss of earning 
capacity.  The parties stipulated that the appropriate weekly workers’ compensation rate 
is five hundred one and 08/100 dollars ($501.08).  This agency approved the AFS on 
November 30, 2016.  Ms. Baird also filed a petition in arbitration alleging that she 
sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of her employment on July 27, 
2016.  Both petitions allege cumulative injuries.   
 
This case was scheduled to be an in-person hearing occurring in Des Moines.  
However, due to the outbreak of a pandemic in Iowa, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Jul-27  16:00:57     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BAIRD V. LINN COUNTY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
Commissioner ordered all hearings to occur via video means, using CourtCall.  
Accordingly, this case proceeded to a live video hearing via CourtCall with all parties 
and the court reporter appearing remotely.     
 
The parties filed a hearing report for each date of injury.  The hearing reports 
were reviewed at the start of the hearing.  The transcript of the hearing reflects any oral 
amendments that were made to the hearing reports.  On the hearing reports, the parties 
entered into various stipulations.  All of those stipulations were accepted and are hereby 
incorporated into this arbitration decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the 
parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now 
bound by their stipulations.  
 
Robbyn Baird, Jerad Kelley, Melissa White, and Steve Estenson testified live at 
hearing.  The evidentiary record also includes Joint Exhibits 1-5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-
3, and Defendant’s Exhibits A-D.  All exhibits were received without objection.  The 
evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.       
 
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on April 2, 2021, at which time the case 
was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
File No:  5051469 (DOI:  11/10/14) 
 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. Whether the stipulated injury is the cause of any permanent disability, if 
so, the nature and extent of disability she is entitled to receive. 
 
2. Assessment of costs. 
 
File No:  5064401 (DOI:  07/27/16) 
 
 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
 
1. Whether the stipulated injury is the cause of any permanent disability, if 
so, the nature and extent of disability she is entitled to receive. 
 
2. Assessment of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
 Robbyn Baird, was 48 years of age at the time of the hearing.  She graduated 
from high school in 1991.  She describes herself as a below average student who 

BAIRD V. LINN COUNTY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
earned Cs and Ds.  After high school, Ms. Baird went to Job Corps in Kansas City 
where she was trained in the trade of interior, exterior, and drywall painting.  She did not 
complete the program; she quit.  She moved to Georgia and married a man who was in 
the Army.  She worked for a short time at Pizza Inn, but then moved to Korea with her 
husband.  Eventually she moved back to Cedar Rapids where she worked at the United 
States Post Office.  She worked night parcels at the airport.  Once her husband 
returned from Korea, they moved to Fort Bragg in North Carolina.  She was a housewife 
busy raising their children while they moved from base to base with her husband.  Once 
all of the children were in school, Ms. Baird returned to the workforce.  (Testimony; Def. 
Ex. A, p. 3)    
 
From approximately 2000 until 2004, Ms. Baird worked for the State of 
Tennessee performing highway maintenance.  This work was similar to the type of work 
she performed for Linn County.  She worked for Tennessee for approximately five 
years.  She ended that employment in 2005 when they moved to another base.  
(Testimony; Def. Ex. A, p. 3)       
 
From 2006 until 2009, Ms. Baird took some classes from the American 
InterContinental University.  She chose this school because it was accredited online so 
that she could continue her schooling when they had to move from base to base.  She 
earned several associate’s degrees in healthcare administration, business 
administration, and a bachelor’s in criminal justice, juvenile justice.  She also has a 
master’s in research assessment and evaluation, concentrating in counseling.  She has 
never used these degrees in any paid employment.  (Testimony; Def. Ex. A, p. 3) 
 
Ms. Baird worked as a landscaper on a military installation from 2005 until 2007.   
Ms. Baird also has experience helping with military support groups.  She helped with 
this work from 1990 until 2010.  She helped to implement and maintain family support 
services for military spouses and families.  From 2011 until 2012, Ms. Baird worked for 
a law firm in North Carolina as a post closer for a real estate attorney who did title work.  
(Testimony; Def. Ex. A, p. 3) 
 
In June of 2013, Ms. Baird separated from her husband and moved back to 
Marion, Iowa.  She began working for Linn County in November of 2013.  During her 
entire employment at Linn County she worked as a light equipment operator.  Ms. Baird 
testified that for the most part the job description in evidence was accurate.  Her job 
duties varied from day to day.  Her primary duties were dump truck and snow removal.  
Her secondary duties were maintenance of signs, putting rock on gravel roads.  Her 
duties varied depending on the season and every day was different.  At times her job 
was very physically demanding.  Filling potholes was demanding because it involved 
shoveling above your head.  She also described “ditching” as physically demanding.  
Ditching involved fixing culverts; it required the worker to go down in the culvert and 
clean up the area and ditch.  Climbing in and out of the dump truck was also physically 
demanding.  Ms. Baird also did a lot of mowing in her job; this was not physically 
demanding unless something got caught in the blades.  They would manually remove 

BAIRD V. LINN COUNTY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
items from the ditch and when debris was heavy, like appliances, they would use 
equipment to get the items out of the ditch.  Ms. Baird feels that over time this physically 
demanding work led to her injuries.  (Testimony; Def. Ex. A, pp. 1-2) 
 
As previously noted, Ms. Baird sustained a work-related injury on November 10, 
2014.  The parties entered into an Agreement for Settlement (AFS) of the claim.  The 
AFS was approved by this agency on November 30, 2016.  The parties stipulated that 
Ms. Baird sustained an injury to her body as a whole as the result of the November 10, 
2014 work injury.  The parties stipulated that Ms. Baird sustained 25 percent loss of 
earning capacity as the result of that injury.  The parties attached supporting 
documentation to the AFS.  In May of 2016, David S. Tearse, M.D. assigned permanent 
functional impairment for Ms. Baird’s left shoulder and separate permanent functional 
impairment for her right shoulder.  He also opined that Ms. Baird should have 
permanent restrictions placed on her activities due to the work injury.  Dr. Tearse 
recommended Ms. Baird be restricted to light duty work as set forth in the Functional 
Capacity Evaluation (FCE).  Richard F. Neiman, M.D. also assigned permanent 
functional impairment and stated that Ms. Baird should have permanent restrictions 
consistent with the FCE.  (Def. Ex. B; Testimony)       
 
Ms. Baird testified that since the time of the November 2016 AFS, her left 
shoulder was never as good as it was prior to the injury.  Ms. Baird testified that her left 
shoulder was never right after her surgery and her right shoulder did not feel right 
before her left shoulder surgery.  According to Ms. Baird, her shoulders progressively 
became worse and worse.  She described the symptoms in both of her shoulders as 
including pain, numbness, and completely going dead.  Her right arm locked up at 
times.  Ms. Baird continued to work until she felt she just could not do it anymore.  Ms. 
Baird called her supervisor at that time, Jerad Kelly, and he let her leave work to seek 
treatment.  (Def. Ex. B; Testimony) 
 
On October 16, 2017, Ms. Baird went to UnityPoint Health where she saw Megan 
Hart-Fernandez, DNP.  Ms. Baird reported that her right shoulder had not improved 
since the 2015 cortisone shots and MRI with Dr. Tearse.  She has continued to work, 
driving only (mowers/vehicles) with permanent restrictions in place.  This morning she 
reached down to pull a plastic grocery sack off the mower blade and as she pulled it 
inward and towards her, she felt excruciating pain.  The assessment was right shoulder 
pain, concerns for supraspinatus tear.  It was recommended that Ms. Baird take 
naproxen, ice often, and avoid use of the right arm.  (JE5, pp. 2-3) 
 
Linn County directed Ms. Baird to see Matthew White, M.D. at Physicians Clinic 
of Iowa.  On November 7, 2017, Ms. Baird saw Dr. White.  Ms. Baird reported that she 
previously had left shoulder issues which were treated with scope and biceps tenotomy 
by Dr. Tearse.  While she was recovering from surgery, she used her right arm more 
and has developed symptoms over the course of time.  Recently, she experienced 
significant discomfort on the anterior aspect of the shoulder.  She also has shooting 
pain from the shoulder down to the elbow.  Dr. White reviewed the MRI of the right 

BAIRD V. LINN COUNTY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
shoulder.  His assessment was right shoulder pain, likely biceps tendinopathy.  He 
injected her right shoulder and recommended physical therapy.  (JE2, pp. 1-4) 
 
Unfortunately, Ms. Baird’s condition did not improve.  On January 12, 2018, Dr. 
White performed surgery on her right shoulder.  The postoperative diagnosis was: right 
shoulder superior labrum anterior and posterior tear partial-thickness biceps tendon 
tear, right shoulder impingement, right shoulder partial-thickness articular sided rotator 
cuff tear 25 percent.  During Ms. Baird’s follow-up visits with Dr. White and her post-
operative physical therapy, Ms. Baird mentioned problems with her right elbow locking 
up.  As a result, the frequency of her physical therapy was increased.  By April of 2018, 
she continued to have problems with her elbow which made operating the gearshifts at 
work difficult.  Ms. Baird attended work conditioning and had some improvement.  Dr. 
White placed her at maximum medical improvement (MMI) on June 26, 2018.  In August 
2018, using the AMA Guides 5th Edition, Dr. White assigned 3 percent impairment of the 
right upper extremity which equates to 2 percent impairment of the whole body.  With 
regard to the right upper extremity, Dr. White permanently restricted Ms. Baird to 30 
pounds lifting between waist and shoulder level and above head level, with 40-pound 
carrying limit and a unilateral overhead lifting limit of 20 pounds with the right arm.  
(JE2, pp. 5-14)   
 
On February 25, 2019, Ms. Baird saw Megan Hart-Fernandez, DNP for right 
shoulder and right elbow pain.  She reported that she had undergone a right shoulder 
scope and repair with Dr. White in January 2018.  Since recovery she has worked with 
permanent restrictions without significant difficulties until about 3 weeks ago.  She has 
been having right shoulder pain and right upper extremity pain for several weeks, which 
she attributes to using the controls to operate her snowplow.  Because of her 
permanent restrictions the only job she is really able to do is driving a truck.  Recently, 
she has been working 14-hour shifts due to snow and she began to experience right 
shoulder and right elbow pain which became excruciating on February 22, 2019.  
Currently she experiences pain, numbness, and weakness in her right upper extremity, 
with an inability to fully extend her right elbow.  She has right shoulder pain and right 
elbow pain with reduced range of motion.  Megan Hart-Fernandez, DNP recommended 
physical therapy at least 3 times per week.  She recommended Ms. Baird not drive 
commercially due to her right elbow limited range of motion pain.  She should not pull 
herself into a large truck.  She should avoid forceful lifting and carrying to no more than 
2 pounds on the right side.  (JE5, pp. 8-9)       
     
Ms. Baird testified that the surgery actually made her shoulder worse.  A couple 
of weeks after her surgery, her elbow began locking up.  On May 22, 2019, Ms. Baird 
returned to Dr. White with ongoing discomfort in the right upper extremity including the 
right shoulder and elbow.  She denies recent injury.  Dr. White noted that she has 
restrictions for both the right and left shoulder.  She reported problems with daily 
activities and at work.  Dr. White’s assessment was incomplete tear of right rotator cuff, 
unspecified whether traumatic; and right elbow pain.  He noted that the tear was not 

BAIRD V. LINN COUNTY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
present at the time of her preoperative MRI.  He felt she would likely require surgery.  
Dr. White believed that her right elbow pain may represent possible radial tunnel 
syndrome.  He referred her to Dr. Pardubsky for further evaluation of her elbow.  (JE2, 
pp. 15-17)   
 
On October 7, 2019, at the request of her attorney, Ms. Baird saw Mark C. 
Taylor, M.D. for an IME.  Ms. Baird described persistent pain over portions of the 
glenohumeral area.  While driving, her pain can increase to 7/10, but when she is not 
working her pain is minimal.  Her elbow pain tends to occur over the back of her elbow 
and portions of her triceps.  Dr. Taylor’s diagnoses included:  left glenohumeral 
arthralgia and biceps tendinitis with impingement; surgery, October 28, 2015, left 
shoulder debridement, biceps tenotomy and subacromial decompression with Dr. 
Tearse; persistent and worsening in right glenohumeral arthralgia with labral and biceps 
tendon tearing as well as impingement; surgery, January 12, 2018, right shoulder 
arthroscopic debridement, subacromial decompression and biceps tenodesis with Dr. 
White; further worsening of right glenohumeral and elbow pain with evidence of rotator 
cuff tear; surgery, scheduled for November 11, 2019 with Dr. White; and persistent right 
elbow arthralgia.  Dr. Taylor opined that it was more likely than not that her work 
activities represented a significant contributing factor to her ongoing difficulties for which 
she has already undergone bilateral surgeries, and an additional surgery was planned 
for the right side in November 2019.  Dr. Taylor provided an estimated MMI date.  He 
also provided an impairment rating which he stated should be updated after surgery.  
He recommended Ms. Baird continue restrictions per Dr. White.  (Cl. Ex. 2)    
 
On November 11, 2019, Dr. White performed a right shoulder arthroscopic 
rotator cuff repair and subacromial decompression.  This was the second right shoulder 
surgery.  (JE2, pp. 18-19) 
 
Ms. Baird saw Tork J. Harman, M.D. at St. Luke’s Outpatient Interventional Pain 
Clinic on February 20, 2020.  She was referred there by Dr. Pardubsky.  Dr. Harman 
evaluated Ms. Baird.  His impression was complex regional pain syndrome type I right 
upper extremity.  No improvement with a Medrol Dosepak.  Ms. Baird was reluctant to 
take gabapentin due to side effects, but she agreed to a taper trial of gabapentin.  She 
was also advised to take vitamin C.  She was to return in 2 to 3 weeks for a ketamine 
infusion if her symptoms did not improve.  (JE4, pp. 1-4) 
 
On June 5, 2020, Dr. White reviewed a recent FCE.  He assigned the following 
permanent restrictions as it relates to her right arm:  waist level carry 20 pounds 
occasionally, waist to floor lift 20 pounds occasionally, waist to shoulder lift 20 pounds 
occasionally, waist to overhead (both) 15 pounds occasionally, waist to overhead (right) 
5 pounds occasionally, extended reach 5 pounds occasionally, push/pull 20/45 pounds 
occasionally, repetitive overhead reach rarely, bilateral sustained overhead rarely.  Dr. 
White also stated that Ms. Baird “has had direct evaluation on ability to pull herself into 
elevated truck seat and this can be done occasionally to avoid risk of re-injury.”  (JE2, p. 
20)  He did not place any restrictions on getting into a standard size truck.  (Id.)   

BAIRD V. LINN COUNTY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
 
Ms. Baird saw Peter Pardubsky, M.D. on August 5, 2019 for her right elbow.  He 
noted that following right shoulder surgery with her arm in a sling she developed 
increasing diffuse right elbow pain.  Since the time she made her appointment, her 
symptoms had somewhat resolved.  She had been working under restricted duty.  Dr. 
Pardubsky felt she possibly had lateral epicondylitis or resolved radial tunnel.  Given her 
resolved symptoms and minimal findings on MRI of the elbow, Dr. Pardubsky did not 
have any further recommendations or limitations for her right elbow.  If her symptoms 
recurred, he would be willing to see her again.  (JE3, pp. 1-3)   
 
Steve Estenson is the risk manager for Linn County.  Part of his duties included 
working with the different County departments to see if work restrictions could be 
accommodated within the essential functions of a job.  He worked with Ms. Baird 
through her workers’ compensation claims.  At some point, Ms. Baird had mentioned to 
Mr. Estenson that she had applied for other positions at the County in the past, 
positions that would utilize her education and degrees, but she did not get hired.  For 
example, she was not hired as a counselor at the County’s youth detention center 
because she did not have any current experience.  Mr. Estenson spoke with the director 
at the detention center to try to help Ms. Baird get some experience to meet the 
minimum requirements to be able to meet the requirements to get an interview for the 
job.  Mr. Estenson spoke to Ms. Baird about this opportunity, and she seemed 
interested.  Mr. Estenson set up a meeting between himself, Ms. Baird, and the 
detention center director.  He described it as similar to an interview to see what interest 
both Ms. Baird and the detention center had in exploring an opportunity for her to obtain 
experience while she was rehabilitating from a shoulder injury.  According to Mr. 
Estenson, the County was willing to move Ms. Baird from secondary roads light duty to 
the juvenile detention center light duty and pay her so she could gain the experience 
necessary to apply for a juvenile detention position.  However, after her shoulder 
surgery Ms. Baird went back to light duty in secondary roads because she was 
concerned about being injured while at the detention center due to the potential fighting 
and hazardous environment.  Ms. Baird testified that Mr. Estenson said there had been 
multiple employee injuries throughout the detention center.  (Testimony of Estenson; 
Rebuttal testimony of Baird) 
 
In June of 2020 Ms. Baird was able to return to work as a light equipment 
operator.  Ms. Baird testified that Linn County wanted her to perform all of her regular 
duties other than shoveling, sand bagging, and lifting.  Ms. Baird discussed this with Dr. 
White.  On August 5, 2020, Dr. White revised his opinion regarding elevated truck seats.  
His amended opinion for her permanent restrictions was that she was to avoid all 
activities that required her to pull herself up to an elevated truck seat.  (JE2, p. 21) 
 
On August 6, 2020, Ms. Baird was called into Linn County Risk Manager Steve 
Estenson’s office.  Ms. Baird testified that Mr. Estenson slid a letter across the table, 
basically firing her, and she was out the door a few minutes later.  The letter was dated 
August 6, 2020 and advised her that due to her change in restrictions, Linn County 

BAIRD V. LINN COUNTY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
would not be able to accommodate her in her light equipment operator position.  No 
other reason was given for her termination.  Ms. Baird testified that, although it was 
painful, she was able to perform her job at that time.  She liked her job and wanted to 
continue working.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 2; testimony) 
 
On August 21, 2020, Ms. Baird wrote a “To Whom It May Concern” letter.  She 
wrote this letter because since her termination, she needed money and had to cash out 
her Iowa Public Employees’ Retirement System (IPERS) benefits.  The letter stated that 
Ms. Baird’s “last day as a Linn County employee will be Wednesday September 23, 
2020.  I will use my remaining sick leave and personal days from September 7 – 
September 23, 2020.”  (Def. Ex. A, p. 13) Ms. Baird credibly testified that the only 
reason she wrote this letter was so she could receive a needed lump sum payment from 
IPERS.  Linn County Human Resource Department advised Ms. Baird that she needed 
to write this letter in order to withdraw money from her IPERS account.  It should be 
noted that Ms. Baird did eventually receive unemployment benefits from the County.  
(Testimony)  
 
I find that Ms. Baird was terminated from her employment with Linn County 
because the employer could not accommodate her work restrictions.   
 
Ms. Baird returned to see Dr. Pardubsky on January 29, 2020, for recurrent arm 
pain following her second shoulder surgery.  She reported severe tightness throughout 
the biceps and triceps region and entire limb discomfort as it radiates distally.  Dr. 
Pardubsky’s assessment included possible complex regional pain syndrome type 2 of 
the left upper extremity and pain in the right upper extremity.  He prescribed a Medrol 
Dosepak for pain relief.  She was to return in 6 weeks.  (JE3, pp. 4-6)  
 
On March 2, 2020, Ms. Baird called Dr. Harman’s office to report that the 
gabapentin made her feel very weird or drunk.  Ms. Baird was instructed not to take any 
more today.  She also reported that she was not getting any pain relief.  If she continues 
to have these symptoms from the medication, she should stop the gabapentin all 
together.  (JE4, p. 8) 
 
On May 20, 2020, Ms. Baird returned to Dr. Pardubsky for further evaluation of 
the right arm.  Since her last visit she had an evaluation at a pain clinic with a trial of 
gabapentin.  She had significant mental status changes and she tapered the drug and 
does not wish to resume gabapentin.  Dr. Pardubsky did not recommend any surgical 
intervention for her right arm.  He felt she had two options.  Ms. Baird could adapt and 
use her right arm for activities as tolerated in a full duty capacity if she is able to tolerate 
the discomfort.  The other option includes further intervention by the pain clinic for 
presumed complex regional pain syndrome including the possibility of a stellate 
ganglion block or ketamine infusion.  He deferred final management of her shoulder and 
arm complaints to Dr. White.  Dr. Pardubsky felt the possibility of an FCE and 
resumption of work without further pain clinic intervention was reasonable if she did not 
want to consider any further intervention for complex regional pain syndrome and if she 

BAIRD V. LINN COUNTY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
can tolerate the discomfort.  Dr. Pardubsky denied a request to provide an impairment 
rating and deferred to Dr. White.  (JE3, pp. 7-10)           
 
Dr. White issued his opinion regarding permanent impairment on November 4, 
2020.  He used the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides and opined that Ms. Baird has 
sustained shoulder impairment of 14 percent.  Additionally, he felt she had residual 
limitations to the elbow.  He assigned 8 percent impairment of the upper extremity which 
equates to 5 percent whole person impairment.  (JE2, p. 22)  I find Dr. White’s opinions 
regarding permanent impairment and permanent restrictions to be persuasive.   
 
Ms. Baird has alleged that her conditions are related to the original November 10, 
2014 date of injury.  Ms. Baird testified that her symptoms continued to get 
progressively worse.  This is supported by the opinion of Dr. Taylor.  Dr. Taylor stated:   
Based on the records and discussions with Ms. Baird, it was my 
understanding that she developed bilateral symptoms around the 
timeframe that she was performing a significant amount of shoveling of 
asphalt out of the back of a dump truck. However, at least initially, the 
symptoms were more pronounced on the left. Once she started to recover 
after surgery on the left side, she was then using the right side even more. 
Her right-sided symptoms were then more noticeable and started to 
worsen, which prompted an MRI and injections with Dr. Tearse. These 
symptoms eventually progressed even further and she subsequently met 
with Dr. White and underwent the previously described surgery. 
Unfortunately, the symptoms worsened yet again and additional surgery 
was planned. 
Her ongoing shoulder and elbow issues were accepted and treated as 
work-related. Based on the history provided, her symptoms date back to at 
least 2015. She had relatively brief stretches of time where the symptoms 
seemingly plateaued or stabilized. It appears that this has been treated as 
the same underlying process. I agree that it is more likely than not that her 
work activities represented a significant contributing factor to her ongoing 
difficulties and for which she has already undergone bilateral surgeries, 
and an additional surgery is planned for the right side in November 2019. 
(Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 6-7) 
 
I find Ms. Baird’s ongoing conditions are related to the November 10, 2014 work 
injury.  I further find that at the time of the 2016 AFS, Ms. Baird was able to perform her 
job with the County and the County was willing to keep her employed.  However, since 
the 2016 AFS, Ms. Baird’s permanent restrictions have changed to such an extent that 
the County could no longer accommodate her restrictions.  Thus, I find that due to the 
November 10, 2014 work injury, Ms. Baird has sustained a substantial change of 
condition since the November 2016 AFS and is entitled to an increase of compensation.     

BAIRD V. LINN COUNTY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 10 
 
We now turn to the issue of permanent disability.  Defendant disputes that the 
November 10, 2014 injury caused any permanent disability.  However, the defendant 
previously stipulated in the 2016 AFS that the November 10, 2014 work injury did in fact 
cause permanent disability for 25 percent loss of body as a whole.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 1, 
numbered paragraph 4(b)).  I find the November 10, 2014 work injury did cause 
permanent disability to Ms. Baird’s body as a whole.   
As noted, I find the opinions of Dr. White to be persuasive.  I find Ms. Baird has 
permanent restrictions as assigned by Dr. White and set forth above.  After the County 
received these restrictions, the County advised Ms. Baird that they could no longer 
accommodate her in her position as a light equipment operator.      
Since Ms. Baird’s employment with the County has ended, she has applied for 
several jobs.  In early December 2020, she applied for a Care Coordinator position with 
Rock Valley Physical Therapy Center, a Family Support Specialist job at Four Oaks, an 
Administrative Assistant position with Roberts Technology, a Surgical Scheduler at 
Wolfe Eye Clinic; she did not receive any job offers as the result of these applications.  
In January of 2021, she indicated that she had also applied at Linn County for a tracker 
but was turned down.  She also applied for a job with the State but did not hear back.  
There is no further documentation of job applications after January 2021.  Ms. Baird 
testified that she previously worked as a substitute teacher for a few months years ago; 
unfortunately, this experience convinced her that teaching is not for her.  (Testimony; Cl. 
Ex. 3, pp. 1-6)  
Ms. Baird is an educated, pleasant, well-spoken individual.  However, she has 
spent much of her working life as a light equipment operator.  Because of her work 
injury and restrictions, she is now precluded from this type of work.  Considering Ms. 
Baird’s age, educational background, employment history, ability to retrain, level of 
motivation to obtain a job, length of healing period, permanent impairment, and 
permanent restrictions, and the other industrial disability factors set forth by the Iowa 
Supreme Court, I find that she has sustained a 30 percent increase in her loss of future 
earning capacity since the AFS as a result of her work injury with Linn County.  I 
specifically find that Ms. Baird has proven a 55 percent loss of future earning capacity at 
the present time, or an increase of 30 percent since the November 30, 2016 AFS. 
The parties stipulated that Ms. Baird sustained an injury that arose out of and in 
the course of her employment on July 27, 2016.  Claimant contends she sustained 
permanent disability as the result of a cumulative July 27, 2016 date of injury.  However, 
I find that claimant’s ongoing complaints and conditions are not related to the July 27, 
2016 injury; rather, I found that those complaints and conditions are related to the 
November 10, 2014 date of injury.  Therefore, I find Ms. Baird failed to demonstrate that 
she sustained any permanent disability as the result of the July 27, 2016 work injury.    
 
 

BAIRD V. LINN COUNTY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 11 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3). 
Claimant brings this review-reopening proceeding.  A review-reopening 
proceeding is appropriate whenever there has been a substantial change in condition 
since a prior arbitration award or settlement.  Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 
387 (Iowa 2009).  Under Iowa Code section 86.14(2), this agency is authorized to 
reopen a prior award or settlement to inquire about whether the condition of the 
employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, or increase of compensation.  Id. 
Upon review-reopening, claimant has the burden to show a change in condition 
related to the original injury since the original award or settlement was made.  The 
change may be either economic or physical.  Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 
N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Henderson v. Iles, 250 Iowa 787, 96 N.W.2d 321 (1959).  A 
mere difference of opinion of experts as to the percentage of disability arising from an 
original injury is not sufficient to justify a different determination on a petition for review-
reopening.  Rather, claimant's condition must have worsened or deteriorated since the 
time of the initial award or settlement.  Bousfield v. Sisters of Mercy, 249 Iowa 64, 86 
N.W.2d 109 (1957).  A failure of a condition to improve to the extent anticipated 
originally may also constitute a change of condition.  Meyers v. Holiday Inn of Cedar 
Falls, Iowa, 272 N.W.2d 24 (Iowa App. 1978).   
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 

BAIRD V. LINN COUNTY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 12 
 
Interestingly, in the post-hearing briefs neither party addresses whether Ms. 
Baird has or has not sustained a change of condition since the AFS.  Based on the 
above findings of fact, I conclude that due to the November 10, 2014 work injury, Ms. 
Baird has sustained a substantial change of condition since the November 2016 AFS 
and is entitled to an increase of compensation.  Ms. Baird has demonstrated that her 
condition has deteriorated since the time of the AFS.  At the time of the AFS, Ms. Baird 
was able to perform her job and the County was willing to keep her employed.  
However, since the 2016 AFS, Ms. Baird’s condition has deteriorated, she has had to 
receive additional medical treatment, including surgery.  Despite this additional 
treatment, Ms. Baird’s physical abilities have decreased.  Ms. Baird’s permanent 
restrictions have changed to such an extent that the County could no longer 
accommodate her restrictions.        
We now turn to the issue of permanent disability.  Defendant disputes that the 
November 10, 2014 injury caused any permanent disability.  However, the defendant 
previously stipulated in the 2016 AFS that the November 10, 2014 work injury did in fact 
cause permanent disability for 25 percent loss of body as a whole.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 1, 
numbered paragraph 4(b)).  I conclude the November 10, 2014 work injury did cause 
permanent disability to Ms. Baird’s body as a whole.  I further conclude that Ms. Baird 
has demonstrated that since the time of the AFS, she sustained a substantial change of 
condition and is entitled to an increase in compensation.       
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the 
legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in the terms of 
percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34. 
Defendant contends that Ms. Baird has not sustained any permanent disability or 
loss of earning capacity.  However, based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that 
Ms. Baird proved a 55 percent loss of future earning capacity at the present time.  This 
is equivalent to a 55 percent industrial disability.  Ms. Baird previously received 25 
percent industrial disability pursuant to the AFS.  As such, she is now entitled to an 

BAIRD V. LINN COUNTY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 13 
 
additional 30 percent industrial disability which entitles claimant to an award of 150 
weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(u).   
Claimant also alleged she sustained permanent disability as the result of a 
cumulative injury with an injury date of July 27, 2016.  Based on the above findings of 
fact, I conclude claimant failed to carry her burden of proof to demonstrate by a 
preponderance of the evidence that she sustained any permanent disability as the result 
of the July 27, 2016 injury.  Rather, I concluded that her ongoing symptoms and 
conditions in her right shoulder are related to the November 10, 2014 date of injury.  
Therefore, claimant has failed to demonstrate entitlement to any permanency benefits 
as the result of the July 27, 2016 injury.        
Claimant is seeking an assessment of costs for each file.  Costs are to be 
assessed at the discretion of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner or the 
deputy hearing the case.   
With regard to agency file number 5051469, I find that Ms. Baird was generally 
successful and therefore find an assessment of costs is appropriate.  Claimant is 
seeking reimbursement for the filing fee in the amount of one hundred and no/100 
dollars ($100.00).  I find that this is an appropriate cost under 876 IAC 4.33(7).  
Defendant shall reimburse claimant in the amount of one hundred and no/100 dollars 
($100.00).   
With regard to agency file number 5064401, I find that Ms. Baird was not 
successful and therefore find an assessment of costs is not appropriate.  Each party 
shall bear their own costs.   
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
File No:  5051469 (DOI:  11/10/14) 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of five hundred one and 
08/100 dollars ($501.08).   
Defendant shall pay one hundred fifty (150) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits commencing on the stipulated commencement date of March 12, 2021. 
Defendant shall be entitled to credit for all weekly benefits paid to date.   
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with interest 
at the rate of ten percent for all weekly benefits payable and not paid when due which 
accrued before July 1, 2017, and all interest on past due weekly compensation benefits 
accruing on or after July 1, 2017, shall be payable at an annual rate equal to the one-
year treasury constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 
report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  See Deciga-Sanchez v. Tyson 

BAIRD V. LINN COUNTY, STATE OF IOWA 
Page 14 
 
Fresh Meats, Inc., File No. 5052008 (App. Apr. 23, 2018) (Ruling on Defendants’ Motion 
to Enlarge, Reconsider or Amend Appeal Decision re: Interest Rate Issue). 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant costs as set forth above. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
File No:  5064401 (DOI:  07/27/16) 
Claimant shall take nothing further from this proceeding.   
Each party shall bear their own costs. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this ___27th ____ day of July, 2021. 
 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Matthew Petrzelka (via WCES) 
Elena Wolford (via WCES) 
Heidi Carmer (via WCES) 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
                ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
