Case Number: 5067990.02
Case Title:  HAYES, DALE A V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Hayes Dale-5067990.02R.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DALE HAYES, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
    File No. 5067990.02 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                     REVIEW-REOPENING  
GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP., 
  : 
 
 
  :                             DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
OLD REPUBLIC INSURANCE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Headnotes:  1402.40; 1800; 1802; 1804;  
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
2700; 4100 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Dale Hayes, filed a petition for review-reopening seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Georgia Pacific, and its insurer, Old Republic Insurance.  
Mark Sullivan appeared on behalf of the claimant.  Christopher Fry appeared on behalf 
of the defendants.   
The matter came for hearing on March 23, 2022, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips.  Pursuant to an order of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner related to the COVID-19 pandemic, the hearing 
occurred electronically.  The hearing proceeded without significant difficulty.   
The record in this case consists of Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 6.  As a 
sanction for noncompliance with an order of the undersigned, the record was closed to 
the defendants prior to the hearing.  The claimant testified on his own behalf.  Rachel 
Waterhouse was appointed the official reporter and custodian of the notes of the 
proceeding.  The evidentiary record was held open for the receipt of three claimant’s 
exhibits through May 2, 2022.  The matter was fully submitted after receipt of the 
outstanding exhibits, and briefing by the parties on June 3, 2022.   
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Jul-15  15:02:27     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 2 
 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged 
injuries.   
  
2. The claimant sustained an injury arising out of, and in the course of 
employment on March 15, 2018.   
 
3. The alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery.   
 
4. The alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability.   
 
5. That, although entitlement to temporary disability benefits cannot be 
stipulated, the claimant was off work from April 20, 2021, “until the issue of 
additional permanent benefits can be completed.”   
 
6. The March 15, 2018, injury caused the claimant to suffer an industrial 
disability.   
 
7. That the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any 
are awarded, is October 1, 2021.   
 
8. The claimant’s gross earnings were seven hundred ninety-three and 60/100 
dollars ($793.60) per week.  At the time of the alleged injury, the claimant was 
single and entitled to one exemption.  The result is a weekly compensation 
rate of four hundred eighty-four and 98/100 dollars ($484.98).   
The defendants waived their affirmative defenses.  Credits against any award are 
no longer in dispute.   
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the claimant has proven the prerequisites to demonstrate he is 
entitled to review-reopening benefits under Iowa Code section 86.14.   
  
2. Whether the claimant is entitled to temporary disability and/or healing period 
benefits during a running healing period from April 20, 2021, “until the issue of 
permanent benefits can be completed, once claimant completes current 
treatment.”   
 
3. The extent of permanent disability benefits, should any be awarded.   
 
4. Whether the claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
examination (“IME”) pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.   
 

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 3 
 
5. Whether the claimant is entitled to alternate medical care pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.27.   
 
6. Whether an award of penalty benefits due to late payment of weekly benefits 
is appropriate.   
 
7. Whether the claimant is entitled to a taxation of costs, and whether those 
costs were paid.   
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Dale Hayes, the claimant, was 56 years old at the time of the review-reopening 
hearing.  (Testimony).   
 
Mr. Hayes injured himself while working at Georgia Pacific.  (Testimony).  While 
working at Georgia Pacific, he worked sixty hours per week.  (Testimony).   
 
This case dates back to an injury to the claimant that arose out of, and in the 
scope of employment, on March 15, 2018.  An arbitration hearing was held on August 6, 
2020, and an arbitration decision was issued by the undersigned on September 29, 
2020.  The claimant was awarded a 10 percent industrial disability, with compensation 
to be paid at four hundred eighty-four and 98/100 dollars ($484.98) per week, and the 
defendants were ordered to reimburse the claimant for costs totaling fifty and 00/100 
dollars ($50.00).   
 
At the initial arbitration hearing, Mr. Hayes testified that he had lower back pain in 
the right side of his back that ranged between 3 and 10 out of 10.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 
2:29).  The claimant testified that bending, lifting and sometimes walking, caused his 
low back pain to flare.  (CE 2:29).  He also had tingling and sharp pain in his legs.  (CE 
2:29).  He could not sit for more than 30 minutes before his back would stiffen.  (CE 
2:30).  He could still maintain his lawn, but testified as to difficulty with shoveling snow 
due to his lower back pain.  (CE 2:30).  Mr. Hayes testified that he believed he would 
have difficulty performing a number of his previous jobs, which were physically 
demanding in nature.  (CE 2:30).  The opinions of Dr. Mark Taylor and Dr. Erin Kennedy 
were key to the arbitration decision.  The decision stated:  
 
Dr. Taylor proposed permanent restrictions to include a 35 pound lifting limit 
up to waist level, 30 pounds between the waist and chest level, and 25 
pounds or less below the knee level or above the chest level.  Dr. Taylor 
also noted that Mr. Hayes should be able to alternate sitting, standing, and 
walking as needed for his comfort.  Mr. Hayes could squat and bend 
occasionally, and could kneel occasionally to frequently.  He could also 
travel occasionally, but would need the ability to stop and get out of the 

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 4 
 
vehicle.  Finally, Dr. Taylor indicated that Mr. Hayes could not tolerate the 
operation of equipment over particularly rough surfaces.   
 
(CE 2:29, internal citations omitted).  Dr. Kennedy allowed Mr. Hayes to work 8 hours 
per shift for 5 shifts per week until the floors at Georgia Pacific were replaced.  (CE 
2:27).  Once the floors at Georgia Pacific were replaced, the claimant was to attempt 
working overtime.  (CE 2:27).   
 
The undersigned, noted in the arbitration decision: 
 
Mr. Hayes has a lengthy history of low back pain dating back to 1999. In 
July of 1999, Mr. Hayes complained of low back pain after lifting metal onto 
a table, which caused pain to the right side of his lower back. His back pain 
returned in July of 2001, and radiated into his right leg. There were no 
records of lower back pain reported until January of 2014, when the 
claimant noted lower back pain for several days. In October of 2014, Mr. 
Hayes again reported lower back pain on the right side present for the 
previous three weeks. Mr. Hayes told the provider that the lower back pain 
would come every two years. In March of 2015, Mr. Hayes reported low 
back pain that began one year earlier and worsened over the past few 
months. He indicated to the provider that he experienced years of lower 
back pain that would increase every six months. An injection to his lower 
back followed. In May of 2015, Mr. Hayes reported radicular low back pain 
into his right leg. An MRI performed showed a two level disk bulge with an 
annular tear. Another injection into the lumbar spine followed the MRI. In 
June of 2015, Mr. Hayes received a diagnostic facet joint injection due to 
ongoing complaints of pain in his lumbar spine. During a May of 2016, IME 
with Dr. Sassman, Mr. Hayes continued to note lower back pain, which 
worsened due to constipation. In 2017, Mr. Hayes undertook a course of 
physical therapy for lower back pain which began while he was shoveling 
snow. Mr. Hayes reported to the therapist that he suffered low back pain for 
5 years, and especially since the electrocution injury. In March of 2017, Mr. 
Hayes visited Dr. Kawasaki with complaints of lower back pain for years that 
worsened over the previous 2 months. By March 15, 2018, the alleged date 
of injury in this matter, Mr. Hayes again began to notice pain in his lower 
back after hitting chunks of concrete on a daily basis. 
 
(CE 2:31).  The decision continued, in pertinent part: 
 
 
The claimant clearly had a preexisting lower back condition. Based upon 
the medical evidence and the opinions of Dr. Kennedy and Dr. Taylor, it 
appears that his work at Georgia Pacific, including driving over pothole-filled 
floors exacerbated or lit up his back pain causing the need for treatment 
and some extent of permanent disability. 
 
(CE 2:32).  The decision noted the following regarding industrial disability: 

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 5 
 
 
Dr. Kennedy assessed Mr. Hayes with no permanent impairment based 
upon her treatment of Mr. Hayes. Further, she placed him at MMI on 
January 3, 2019. She placed permanent restrictions on him of working no 
more than 8 hours per day for 5 shifts or days per week. Dr. Taylor, the 
claimant’s retained IME doctor, placed no such restrictions on Mr. Hayes, 
and simply relied on lifting restrictions, which were more stringent than 
those from Mr. Hayes’ previous injury. Dr. Taylor assessed Mr. Hayes with 
a 7 percent body as a whole impairment. Considering that Mr. Hayes is 
currently working within the restrictions promulgated by Dr. Kennedy, I find 
Dr. Kennedy’s restrictions to be more persuasive. I find Dr. Taylor’s 
permanent impairment rating to be more persuasive. Mr. Hayes now makes 
$13.00 per hour with Hodge, compared to $17.25 per hour, plus some 
overtime, with Georgia Pacific. He has clearly suffered income loss based 
upon his disability. However, Mr. Hayes admits that he has no issues driving 
a forklift for his new employer. He admits to looking for new employment, 
but notes that he is only doing so because of his displeasure with his rate 
of pay.  Considering all of the factors in an industrial disability analysis, as 
discussed above, I award Mr. Hayes a 10 percent industrial disability. This 
award entitles the claimant to 50 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits (10 percent x 500 weeks = 50 weeks), commencing on the 
stipulated date of January 3, 2019. 
 
(CE 2:33).   
 
The claimant appealed the arbitration decision to the Commissioner.  On March 
10, 2021, the Commissioner issued an appeal decision.  (CE 3:36-39).  In their appeal, 
the claimant argued that the underlying arbitration award was inadequate, and that the 
undersigned erred in calculating the claimant’s weekly benefit rate.  (CE 3:36).  The 
Commissioner affirmed the restrictions promulgated by Dr. Kennedy, as noted above.  
(CE 3:37).  The Commissioner concluded that restrictions offered by Dr. Taylor, along 
with those provided by Dr. Kennedy, “effectively precluded claimant from continuing his 
job with defendant-employer, which included overtime work and driving on a rough 
surface.”  (CE 3:37).  Based upon the claimant suffering an actual loss of earnings, the 
Commissioner ruled that the claimant was entitled to an industrial disability award 
greater than the 10 percent awarded in the underlying arbitration decision.  (CE 3:37).  
Considering the applicable industrial disability factors, the Commissioner found that the 
claimant sustained a 25 percent industrial disability.  (CE 3:37).  The Commissioner 
affirmed the rate calculation as provided in the underlying arbitration decision.  (CE 
3:38).   
 
 
At the time of the previous arbitration hearing, the claimant worked at Hodge 
Company in Dubuque, Iowa.  (Testimony).  He started at Hodge in 2019.  (Testimony).  
At Hodge, he drove a forklift and unloaded parts containers from John Deere for three 
hours per day.  (Testimony).  He also cleaned old bar codes off racks and containers.  
(Testimony).  He earned thirteen and 00/100 dollars ($13.00) per hour.  (Testimony).  

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 6 
 
He eventually received a raise to fifteen and 00/100 dollars ($15.00) per hour.  
(Testimony).  He worked forty hours per week at Hodge.  (Testimony).  The floors at 
Hodge were “new,” and smooth.  (Testimony).  He also drove a brand new forklift.  
(Testimony).   
 
Mr. Hayes testified that he told Hodge about his previous work injuries.  
(Testimony).  He testified that at the time of the initial arbitration hearing, he missed 
about 10 days of work in the previous several months due to issues with his back.  
(Testimony).  Hodge had not given him any difficulty or negative feedback with this, at 
the time of the arbitration hearing.  (Testimony).  After the arbitration hearing, Mr. Hayes 
began to miss up to two days per week.  (Testimony).  He left employment with Hodge 
on April 19, 2021.  (Testimony).  He testified that working was “too hard” on his back.  
(Testimony).  Since voluntarily resigning his employment with Hodge, Mr. Hayes has not 
looked for any employment.  (Testimony).   
 
Since the arbitration proceeding, Mr. Hayes has continued seeking medical care 
for his lower back condition.  (Testimony).  On August 26, 2020, Mr. Hayes met with 
Nurse Practitioner Angel Keller.  (CE 4:40).  He complained of low back pain and neck 
pain extending into his arms.  (CE 4:40).  He told Ms. Keller that his back pain was 
worsening.  (CE 4:40).   
 
Mr. Hayes continued seeing Dr. Schreiber, including on January 8, 2021.  (CE 
4:41).   Mr. Hayes complained of low back pain, which was present for “many years.”  
(CE 4:41).  Mr. Hayes noted that pain was primarily located over the right lumbar region 
and into his legs.  (CE 4:41).  He began taking a Medrol dosepak, which provided some 
relief.  (CE 4:41).  Mr. Hayes had an MRI of his lumbar spine in January of 2021.  
(Testimony; CE 4:41).  The MRI showed “multilevel degenerative changes of the lumbar 
spine without evidence of high-grade central canal or neuroforaminal narrowing.”  (CE 
4:41).  Mr. Hayes saw Dr. Schreiber again on January 26, 2021.  (CE 4:41).  During that 
visit, Mr. Hayes indicated that his pain was not work related, but clarified later that he 
was referring to his work at Hodge and not with the defendant-employer in this matter.  
(CE 4:41).  Dr. Schreiber recommended that Mr. Hayes see Dr. Miller for pain 
management based upon the results of the MRI.  (CE 4:41).   
 
On February 8, 2021, Mr. Hayes presented to Dr. Miller’s office for trigger point 
injections.  (CE 4:41; Testimony).  Upon discussion with Dr. Taylor during his IME in 
April of 2022, Mr. Hayes could not recall improvement from the injections.  (CE 4:41).   
 
Mr. Hayes presented to the emergency room in March of 2021, complaining of “a 
real bad sharp back pain.”  (CE 4:41; Testimony).   
On March 24, 2021, Mr. Hayes returned to Dr. Schreiber’s office with continued 
back pain related to his employment with Georgia Pacific.  (CE 4:41).  Dr. Schreiber 
recommended referral for another injection.  (CE 4:41).   
Mr. Hayes met with Dr. Matthew Howard at the University of Iowa on May 4, 
2021.  (CE 4:41).  Mr. Hayes complained of neck and back pain, but told Dr. Howard 

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 7 
 
that his back pain was more problematic than his neck pain.  (CE 4:41-42).  Dr. Howard 
reviewed the MRI, and could not identify any neurosurgical issues, so he referred Mr. 
Hayes to the University of Iowa Pain Clinic.  (CE 4:42; Testimony).  Mr. Hayes indicated 
that his appointment with Dr. Howard only lasted about five minutes, as Dr. Howard 
previously reviewed the results of the MRI.  (Testimony).   
During a May of 2021, visit with Dr. Noeller at the University of Iowa, Mr. Hayes 
was seen dragging his right leg.  (Testimony).  He testified that since the arbitration 
hearing, dragging of his right leg worsened.  (Testimony).   
On June 23, 2021, Mr. Hayes began seeing Dr. Wikle.  (Testimony; CE 4:42).  
Mr. Hayes rated his low back pain 7 out of 10 with dysesthesias and weakness 
extending into the right lower extremity.  (CE 4:42).  Dr. Wikle felt that Mr. Hayes’ pain 
was multifactorial, and included myofascial pain, neuropathic pain, and sacroiliac pain.  
(CE 4:42).  Dr. Wikle recommended continuing hydrocodone, an SI joint injection, a 
prescription of baclofen, and aqua therapy, physical therapy, and visits with a pain 
psychologist.  (Testimony; CE 4:42).  If the SI joint injection provided no relief, Dr. Wikle 
recommended a cluneal nerve block.  (CE 4:42).   
Dr. Miller provided a right SI joint injection on July 29, 2021.  (CE 4:42).  The 
injection provided no benefit to the claimant.  (CE 4:42).   
On November 11, 2021, Mr. Hayes met with Dr. Wikle for a right cluneal nerve 
block.  (CE 4:42; Testimony).  The nerve block provided temporary relief, as Mr. Hayes’ 
pain levels dropped from 7 out of 10 to 4 out of 10; however, this relief did not last.  (CE 
4:42; Testimony).     
In February of 2022, Mr. Hayes started aqua therapy, which helped for a short 
time, but eventually his pain would return.  (Testimony; CE 4:42).  In physical therapy, 
he performed a great deal of stretching.  (Testimony).  He felt he received no benefit 
from physical therapy.  (Testimony).   
On March 7, 2022, Mr. Hayes underwent a functional capacity evaluation (“FCE”) 
at Short Physical Therapy, PLLC, in Callender, Iowa.  (CE 1:1-17).  At the outset of the 
examination, Mr. Hayes rated his pain 6 out of 10 in his lower back.  (CE 1:2).  As he 
proceeded through testing, his pain increased to 10 out of 10.  (CE 1:2).  The examiner 
found that Mr. Hayes provided a consistent effort on all tested areas.  (CE 1:1).  The 
examiner noted that Mr. Hayes “was very cooperative and his heart rate changes and 
body mechanics adjustments . . . were reflective of his effort.”  (CE 1:1).   
Mr. Hayes had some limitations with the following areas: elevated work, sitting, 
standing work, walking, lifting from the floor to the waist up to 10 pounds, lifting from the 
waist to the crown up to 5 pounds, front carrying up to 10 pounds for up to 50 feet.  (CE 
1:2).  Mr. Hayes had significant limitations including: forward bent standing, kneeling or 
half-kneeling, stairs, crawling, lifting from the floor to the waist up to 15 pounds, lifting 
from the waist to the crown up to 10 pounds, and front carrying up to 15 pounds up to 
50 feet.  (CE 1:2).  Mr. Hayes could not crouch.  (CE 1:2).   

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 8 
 
Measurements revealed severe deficits in range of motion in the trunk.  (CE 1:7).  
He also had issues with range of motion in the bilateral shoulders.  (CE 1:8).  Mr. Hayes 
also had issues with range of motion in his bilateral hips.  (CE 1:8).  He had no issues 
with muscle strength in his knee or ankle.  (CE 1:8-9).   
Based upon the results of the examination, Mr. Hayes did not meet the 
capabilities of the sedentary category of physical demand.  (CE 1:2).  The examiner 
continued, “[i]f his condition would not improve to where he is able to demonstrate 
increased range of motion, strength and endurance of his low back he is essentially in 
an unemployable condition.”  (CE 1:2).  The examiner recommended that Mr. Hayes 
limit standing and walking combined for up to 30 percent of the day due to decreased 
range of motion, strength and endurance in his low back.  (CE 1:2).  Mr. Hayes should 
also be allowed to sit, stand, and walk on an as needed basis.  (CE 1:3).  The examiner 
noted that Mr. Hayes’ heart rate increased to “very high levels as his pain intensity 
increased.”  (CE 1:3).  The level to which his heart rate increased placed Mr. Hayes at 
an unsafe level, beyond what is deemed safe for exercise purposes.  (CE 1:3).   
On April 6, 2022, Mr. Hayes reported to Medix where Dr. Taylor examined him 
again for an IME.  (CE 4:40-47).  Dr. Taylor is a certified independent medical examiner, 
is a fellow of the American College of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, and is 
board certified in occupational and environmental medicine.  (CE 4:47).  Mr. Hayes 
marked on a pain diagram that he had stabbing pain in the lower back and back of the 
right leg.  (CE 4:49).  He also had pins and needles pain in his right rear leg, behind his 
knee.  (CE 4:49).  On April 28, 2022, Dr. Taylor issued a report based upon his 
examination of the claimant.  (CE 4:40-47).  Dr. Taylor begins his report by reviewing 
Mr. Hayes’ treatment history.  (CE 4:40-43).  Mr. Hayes continued to have physical 
therapy and followed up with Dr. Wikle.  (CE 4:43).  Mr. Hayes also took hydrocodone 
twice per day.  (CE 4:43).   
Mr. Hayes described persistent pain in the right lower back and/or lumbar region.  
(CE 4:43).  This included “over and just above the iliac crest.”  (CE 4:43).  Pain 
extended down the right thigh, with paresthesias and dysesthesias into the calf.  (CE 
4:43).  His pain averaged between 6 and 7 out of 10.  (CE 4:43).  Mr. Hayes told Dr. 
Taylor that he had to get up, walk, stretch, and move around when his pain increases.  
(CE 4:43).  He could not sleep for more than “a couple of hours at a time” before he had 
to get up and out of bed to move around.  (CE 4:43).  Mr. Hayes told Dr. Taylor that he 
could not tolerate his job at Hodge due to his back pain, even though Hodge “treated 
him well and were very accommodating.”  (CE 4:43).   
One particular record was from an April 12, 2022, meeting with Beth Dinoff, 
Ph.D.  (CE 4:42).  Dr. Dinoff indicated in her records that Mr. Hayes was “not interested 
in working with pain psychology.”  (CE 4:42).  Dr. Taylor spoke with Mr. Hayes about his 
visit with Dr. Dinoff.  (CE 4:42).  Mr. Hayes told Dr. Taylor that Dr. Dinoff indicated that 
the pain was “all in [his] head,” and that Dr. Dinoff needed 8 to 10 sessions to “talk the 
pain away.”  (CE 4:42).  Mr. Hayes described a rather awkward appointment with Dr. 
Dinoff, and indicated that he did not wish to continue seeing her.  (CE 4:42-43).   

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 9 
 
Dr. Taylor observed that Mr. Hayes had an antalgic gait, and protected his right 
lower extremity.  (CE 4:44).  Mr. Hayes could take a few steps on his heels and toes 
with difficulty and the assistance of the exam table.  (CE 4:44).  He could only squat 
down one-third.  (CE 4:44).  Mr. Hayes had no tenderness to palpation over the left 
lower back or buttock, but had moderate to significant tenderness in his mid to lower 
right lumbar paraspinals.  (CE 4:44).  Dr. Taylor diagnosed Mr. Hayes with chronic right-
sided lumbago with pain and paresthesias extending into the right buttock and leg, 
spondylosis, and moderate facet arthrosis.  (CE 4:45).   
Based upon his review of the medical records, his examination, and Mr. Hayes’ 
increased average pain levels, Dr. Taylor opined that Mr. Hayes experienced an overall 
decline in his condition.  (CE 4:45).  Dr. Taylor continued, “there has been a substantial 
change in his work-related low back condition and for which he has undergone 
additional evaluation and treatment.”  (CE 4:45).  Based upon his examination and the 
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, Dr. Taylor placed Mr. 
Hayes between the DRE Category II and DRE Category III due to Mr. Hayes not having 
been surgically treated.  (CE 4:45-46).  Dr. Taylor provided Mr. Hayes with a 9 percent 
whole person impairment rating.  (CE 4:46).   
Dr. Taylor recalled his previous restrictions, which included a 35-pound lifting 
limit to waist level, and a 30-pound limit between waist and chest level.  (CE 4:46).  Dr. 
Taylor proceeded to recommend certain restrictions, which were based upon the results 
of the FCE.  (CE 4:46).  Dr. Taylor noted that Mr. Hayes could generally tolerate lifting 
between five and 15 pounds on a rare to occasional basis.  (CE 4:46).  Mr. Hayes 
should also use a good lifting technique by keeping items close to his body, and moving 
his feet as opposed to twisting or turning his spine. (CE 4:46).  Dr. Taylor recommended 
that Mr. Hayes have the ability to alternate sitting, standing, and walking, as needed for 
comfort.  (CE 4:46).  Dr. Taylor recommended that Mr. Hayes rarely bend forward.  (CE 
4:46).  Mr. Hayes could occasionally sit, stand, and walk.  (CE 4:46).  He could only 
rarely kneel.  (CE 4:46).  He could occasionally travel, but needed to have the ability to 
stretch and move around as needed.  (CE 4:46).  Finally, Dr. Taylor recommended that 
the claimant infrequently climb stairs.  (CE 4:46).   
With regard to continuing medical care, Dr. Taylor recommended that Mr. Hayes 
follow-up with Dr. Wikle.  (CE 4:46).  He also recommended that Mr. Hayes meet with a 
pain psychologist.  (CE 4:46).  Dr. Taylor noted that Mr. Hayes had a negative 
interaction with Dr. Dinoff, and Dr. Taylor recommended that Mr. Hayes not see Dr. 
Dinoff again.  (CE 4:46).  Finally, Dr. Taylor recommended that Mr. Hayes continue with 
home exercises and stretches learned in therapy.  (CE 4:47).   
On April 29, 2022, Barbara Laughlin, M.A., of Laughlin Management, submitted 
an employability assessment report.  (CE 5:52-73).  Ms. Laughlin reviewed a number of 
documents, conferenced with Mr. Hayes, and produced an employability assessment 
based upon consideration of Mr. Hayes’ “age, education, past work and transferable 
skills, site of injury, work restrictions, and ability to engage in employment for which he 
is fitted.”  (CE 5:52).  Ms. Laughlin begins her report by reviewing Mr. Hayes’ medical 
treatment.  (CE 5:52-56).  Ms. Laughlin noted that Mr. Hayes took hydrocodone, 
trazodone, metformin, Farxiga, and Tylenol as needed.  (CE 5:57).   

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 10 
 
Ms. Laughlin opined, that based on Mr. Hayes’ age of nearly 56 years old, he 
would be considered an “older worker.”  (CE 5:57).  She cited to several studies 
indicating that older workers “often encounter resistance to hiring and promotion due to 
age.”  (CE 5:57).  She then reviewed Mr. Hayes’ educational history.  (CE 5:59).  
Specifically, Mr. Hayes is a high school graduate who had average grades.  (CE 5:59).  
He also took an electrical training course and had first responder training in 2007.  (CE 
5:59).  Based upon her review, Mr. Hayes had few computer skills.  (CE 5:59).  He 
could do searches, but was unfamiliar with word processing or business programs.  (CE 
5:59).  He was a “two-finger” typist.  (CE 5:59).   
Ms. Laughlin reviewed Mr. Hayes’ employment history in light of the Dictionary of 
Occupational Titles, as published by the United States Department of Labor.  (CE 5:59-
61).  Mr. Hayes’ jobs at Eagle Window and Door varied between medium and heavy 
exertional levels.  (CE 5:59).  His job at J and J Pool, as a hot tub installer, and Hormel 
as a packager, was considered an unsuccessful work attempt.  (CE 5:59-60).  His 
employment with Quik Stop was light, but Mr. Hayes told Ms. Laughlin that he could not 
stand long enough in one spot.  (CE 5:60).  He worked in a medium level position at 
Casey’s, but he received an accommodation.  (CE 5:60).  Mr. Hayes’ job at Georgia 
Pacific was considered a medium exertional level.  (CE 5:61).  Finally, Mr. Hayes’ 
position at Hodge was considered medium exertional level.  (CE 5:61).  Ms. Laughlin 
noted that Mr. Hayes left his position with Hodge because he “could not perform the 
work even with their willingness to accommodate his need to change positions.”  (CE 
5:61).  All of Mr. Hayes’ positions were either semi-skilled or unskilled, except for two 
positions at Eagle Window and Door and one position at Casey’s.  (CE 5:59-61).     
Mr. Hayes described the following perceptions of capabilities and limitations to 
Ms. Laughlin: 
- 
Getting dressed is difficult. 
- 
Putting on socks is difficult. 
- 
Standing at the sink and doing dishes is difficult. 
- 
He needs help with yard work.   
- 
He can no longer mow with a self-propelled mower. 
- 
He cannot shovel snow. 
- 
He cannot shoot pool. 
- 
He cannot fish. 
- 
He cannot camp.   
- 
He cannot get into the upper-level cabinets. 
- 
His sleep is interrupted by pain nightly.  He is up almost every hour 
throughout the night.  He only sleeps about 3-4 hours a night.  He lays 
down during the day 5-6 times for about ½ an hour and naps.  Laying 
down helps alleviate his pain more than sitting and standing.  He feels 
exhausted.   
- 
Getting groceries is difficult for him-he can unload them at his house 
but needs to make multiple trips.  He has difficulty picking up mild [sic] 
or a case of water at the grocery store and putting it in the cart.  He 

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 11 
 
has had to ask for assistance to obtain his groceries as well as putting 
them into his vehicle.   
- 
His sleep is interrupted by pain and now he is able to sleep only a few 
hours at a time.   
- 
He rates his pain as 7-8 on a rising 1-10 scale, and states it is 
constant.  The pain is a 10 on a bad day.  He has trouble with pain 
going down his right leg, now with paresthesias into the calf.  He has 
been referred to the Pain Clinic at UIHC.   
- 
He has difficulty with lifting, carrying, pushing and pulling-this has 
gotten worse.   
- 
He only drives locally. 
- 
He feels his balance is impaired.   
- 
He can only comfortably sit for 30 minutes.   
- 
He states he is uncomfortable after standing more than 10 minutes.   
- 
He is only comfortable walking for 10 minutes.   
- 
It is difficult to put on his seatbelt.   
- 
He gets cramping in his hands.   
- 
Recently, he had an FCE with DPT Short.  He was not able to squat.   
- 
He has to take breaks when he travels.  From Dubuque to Iowa City, 
he has to stop 3-4 times so he can get out and walk around.   
- 
He used to play pool in a league and can no longer do this.   
- 
He used to fish and can no longer do this.   
- 
He used to walk 2-3 miles a day and can no longer do this.  He can 
only walk about a block.   
(CE 5:61-62).  While Ms. Laughlin noted that she did not include these perceptions in 
her assessment of loss, it is important to consider the claimant’s perceptions in light of 
his testimony, and a potential industrial disability analysis.  (CE 5:62).   
Ms. Laughlin continued with a vocational analysis.  (CE 5:62-67).  She used an 
OASYS transferable skills analysis program, which only addresses occupational loss 
due to a decrease in functional capacity, or medically imposed restrictions.  (CE 5:62).  
She noted that it did not address things like age, education, training, injury, pain, or 
other factors.  (CE 5:62).  Using Dr. Taylor’s restrictions, Mr. Hayes had a 98.6 percent 
occupational loss after injury in occupations that closest match his skills.  (CE 5:64).  He 
had a 93.4 percent occupational loss in occupations that were a “good” match for his 
skills.  (CE 5:65).  Finally, Mr. Hayes had a 95.4 percent occupational loss in unskilled 
occupations.  (CE 5:65).  Ms. Laughlin opined that Mr. Hayes’ need to change position 
as needed is a “severe restriction” as noted by Social Security Disability.  (CE 5:65).  
Ms. Laughlin then used the restrictions of Dr. Taylor and found the following jobs 
available to Mr. Hayes within his restrictions: election clerk, grinding machine operator, 
appointment clerk, maintenance service dispatcher, and check cashier.  (CE 5:66).  Of 
note, Ms. Laughlin did not find any openings for these positions in the area.  (CE 5:66).   
Using the restrictions of the FCE, Ms. Laughlin opined that the claimant had a 
100 percent occupational loss for the “closest match” occupations.  (CE 5:65).  This 
means that he had a 100 percent occupational loss for all semi-skilled and skilled 

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 12 
 
occupations after his injury.  (CE 5:65).  He had a 95 percent occupational loss for 
“good match” occupations, and a 98.2 percent occupational loss for unskilled 
occupations.  (CE 5:65).  Ms. Laughlin then performed a labor market survey, which 
showed the following occupations available to Mr. Hayes based upon the restrictions of 
the FCE: maintenance service dispatcher, appointment clerk, microfilming document 
preparer, and election clerk.  (CE 5:66-67).   
Ms. Laughlin continued by noting the following factor, which impeded Mr. Hayes’ 
ability to return to work: 
- 
Current medically imposed limitations.  Those limitations are expressed 
through occupational loss per the OASYS transferable skills assessment.   
- 
Mr. Hayes is now considered an older worker, a trait making him less 
attractive to many employers.   
- 
Mr. Hayes lacks computer skills often needed in sedentary and light 
exertional level occupations.   
- 
He is currently unable to perform sedentary work without accommodations 
according to the most recent FCE and it [sic] in the less than sedentary 
category.   
- 
The FCE states he lacks the ability to sit, stand or walk for prolonged periods 
of time.  All activities are considered occasional; he could not perform 
sedentary work, requiring frequent sitting.  The FCE states his 
standing/walking combined is occasional.   
- 
Mr. Hayes has shown the ability to obtain work.  His difficulty is maintaining 
employment in the environment of significant pain and his need to change 
position.   
(CE 5:67).  Ms. Laughlin continued, “[t]he transferable skills analysis demonstrates Mr. 
Hayes’ worsening condition.  He has very few jobs available to him following the 
transferable skills analysis using the limitations of Dr. Taylor.”  (CE 5:67).  Further, Ms. 
Laughlin noted, that the limitations provided by Dr. Taylor and the FCE, presented a 
situation that would require accommodations considered unreasonable by most 
employers.  (CE 5:67).  Ms. Laughlin continued, “[i]t is my opinion that at this time, 
without a decrease in his symptoms/restrictions or an increase in his skills, Mr. Hayes 
will find no further work in any quality, quantity or dependability that he can perform.”  
(CE 5:68).  His difficulty moving forward, according to Ms. Laughlin would be in 
maintaining employment, not finding employment.  (CE 5:68).   
Mr. Hayes testified that he continued to experience pain in his right lower back in 
the belt area.  (Testimony).  The pain never goes away.  (Testimony).  He rated his pain 
6 out of 10 on his best day and 10 out of 10 on his worst day, with an average of 7 to 8 
out of 10.  (Testimony).  Things like walking too far, sitting for too long, and standing for 
too long aggravate his back pain.  (Testimony).  In order to alleviate his back pain, he 
testified that he needed to lay down upwards of six times per day.  (Testimony).  He 
took hydrocodone to relieve his pain, which he had taken since 2010.  (Testimony).  His 
pain radiated down his right leg.  (Testimony). He also testified that his right leg 

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 13 
 
periodically gives out when walking.  (Testimony).  Dr. Miller suggested to him that he 
get a cane for support.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Hayes testified that he had problems squatting, bending over, and lifting.  
(Testimony).  He could not comfortably put on his shoes and socks, nor could he pick 
up something from the floor without pain.  (Testimony).  He could no longer bend over, 
stoop, kneel or crawl on the ground.  (Testimony).  He could no longer fully squat and 
could not extend or rotate his lower back.  (Testimony).  Mr. Hayes could lift some 
groceries to carry them into his home, but noted that lifting the laundry basket was 
“tough.”  (Testimony).  He could walk up to one block before his low back and right leg 
began to hurt.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Hayes described worsening problems with sleeping.  (Testimony).  He 
testified that he sleeps for maybe one hour, and then pain causes him to awaken.  
(Testimony).  He woke up about six times per night.  (Testimony).  He also noted that 
his mental health has worsened.  (Testimony).  Specifically, he testified that he had 
depression and suicidal thoughts.  (Testimony).   
Since the arbitration hearing, he no longer mows his lawn, and has his brother 
assist him with that task.  (Testimony).  He also no longer shovels his own snow, and 
has a neighbor help him.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Hayes applied for Social Security Disability benefits, in October of 2021, but 
was initially denied eligibility.  (Testimony).  He has an appeal on file, which is not yet 
scheduled to be heard.  (Testimony).   
The claimant opined that he could no longer work in any of the previous positions 
which he held due to the physical requirements of those positions.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Hayes agreed that aqua therapy benefitted him, and he wishes to continue 
aqua therapy.  (Testimony).  He also wishes to have a consultation with a neurosurgeon 
in order to determine whether there is a surgical option for his lower back and right leg 
pain.  (Testimony).  Specifically, the claimant requests a visit with Dr. Jonathan Citow in 
Libertyville, Illinois, or “with some other qualified neurosurgeon qualified to give him a 
second opinion to that of Dr. Howard….”  (Claimant’s Posthearing Brief, p. 13).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3). 
Iowa Code section 86.14 governs review-reopening proceedings.  When 
considering a review-reopening petition, the inquiry “shall be into whether or not the 
condition of the employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, or increase of 
compensation so awarded.”  Iowa Code section 86.14(2).  The deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner does not re-determine the condition of the employee 
adjudicated by the former award.  Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387, 391 
(Iowa 2009).  The deputy workers’ compensation commissioner must determine “the 
condition of the employee, which is found to exist subsequent to the date of the award 
being reviewed.”  Id.  (quoting Stice v. Consol. Ind. Coal. Co., 228 Iowa 1031, 1038, 291 

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 14 
 
N.W. 452, 456 (1940)).  In a review-reopening proceeding, the deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner should not reevaluate the claimant’s level of physical 
impairment or earning capacity “if all of the facts and circumstances were known or 
knowable at the time of the original action.”  Id. at 393.   
The claimant bears the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence 
that, “subsequent to the date of the award under review, he or she has suffered an 
impairment or lessening of earning capacity proximately caused by the original injury.”  
Simonson v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 588 N.W.2d 430, 434 (Iowa 1999)(emphasis in 
original).   
Before considering any other disputed issue in this case, I must first determine 
whether Mr. Hayes has established a change in condition following the previous 
arbitration and appeal decision.  Mr. Hayes presents his own testimony, medical 
evidence, a valid FCE, and a repeat IME conducted by Dr. Taylor.  When considering 
expert testimony, the trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, even if 
uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 
156 (Iowa Ct. App. 1997).  When considering the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-
finder may consider whether the examination occurred shortly after the claimant was 
injured, the compensation arrangement, the nature and extent of the examination, the 
expert’s education, training, and practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the 
weight and value” of the opinion.  Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 
187, 192 (Iowa 1985).    
At the initial arbitration hearing, Mr. Hayes testified that he had lower back pain in 
the right side of his back that ranged between 3 and 10 out of 10.  He also had tingling 
and sharp pain in his legs.  He further testified that bending, lifting and sometimes 
walking, caused his low back pain to flare.  He could not sit for more than 30 minutes 
before his back would stiffen.  He could still maintain his lawn, but testified as to 
difficulty with shoveling snow due to his lower back pain.  Mr. Hayes testified that he 
believed he would have difficulty performing a number of his previous jobs, which were 
physically demanding in nature.   
In their posthearing brief, the defendants concede that, based upon the 
unrebutted report of Dr. Taylor, Mr. Hayes “is likely able to prove that his March 15, 
2018, lower back injury is a proximate cause of his current condition.”  (Defendants’ 
Posthearing Brief, p. 6).  The defendants attempt to pin some of Mr. Hayes’ increased 
pain and restrictions on his previous injury with Eagle Window and Door.  There is little 
evidence in the record as to that injury, and as to the restrictions that he received from 
that injury.  While he complained of pain from that incident, his injuries, and the 
associated impairment were due to neck and arm issues.  The injuries in this case 
involve the lower back with radiation of pain into the lower extremity.  Therefore, the 
defendants’ argument rings hollow.   
Mr. Hayes testified to worsening pain at the review-reopening proceeding.  He 
indicated that his pain averaged between 7 and 8 out of 10.  He indicated that his back 
pain required him to lay down upwards of six times per day.  He also indicated that his 
leg gives out on him when he walks.  He testified to problems with squatting, bending 

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 15 
 
over and lifting.  He could no longer put on shoes or socks without significant pain.  He 
testified to worsening sleep issues.  He also no longer mows his lawn or shovels his 
own snow, which he did at the time of the arbitration hearing.  The FCE provided 
increased restrictions as to Mr. Hayes’ capabilities.  Dr. Taylor also increased 
restrictions on the claimant.  Finally, Dr. Taylor indicated that Mr. Hayes had an 
increased functional impairment.   
Based upon the information in the record, the claimant has proven, by a 
preponderance of the evidence, that he suffered an impairment and/or lessening of 
earning capacity proximately caused by the original injury.   
Healing Period Benefits 
The claimant argues that he is entitled to temporary disability benefits for a 
running healing period.  The claimant alleges that this running healing period should 
begin on April 20, 2021, which is the day after he voluntarily left his employment with 
Hodge.  The claimant alleges that working at Hodge was too difficult based upon his 
pain in his back and right leg.  The claimant argues in his posthearing brief that, 
‘[h]ealing period benefits should be provided while there is a reasonable hope or 
expectation of improvement in Dale’s condition.”  (Claimant’s Posthearing Brief, p. 13).  
The claimant bases their argument in their request for alternate care pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.27, for a second opinion with Dr. Jonathan Citow in Libertyville, Illinois.  
The request for alternate care will be addressed separately.   
The defendants argue that the claimant’s voluntary resignation from employment 
with Hodge was tantamount to a refusal of suitable work.  If the claimant refused 
suitable work, he would no longer be entitled to receiving healing period benefits.   
As a general rule, “temporary total disability compensation benefits and healing-
period compensation benefits refer to the same condition.”  Clark v. Vicorp Rest., Inc., 
696 N.W.2d 596 604 (Iowa 2005).  The purpose of temporary total disability benefits 
and healing period benefits is to “partially reimburse the employee for the loss of 
earnings” during a period of recovery from the condition.  Id.  The appropriate type of 
benefits depends on whether or not the employee has a permanent disability.  Dunlap v. 
Action Warehouse, 824 N.W.2d 545, 556 (Iowa Ct. App. 2012).   
When an injured worker has been unable to work during a period of recuperation 
from an injury that did not produce permanent disability, the worker is entitled to 
temporary total disability benefits during the time the worker is disabled by the injury.   
Iowa Code 85.33(1) provides 
. . . the employer shall pay to an employee for injury producing temporary 
total disability weekly compensation benefits, as provided in section 85.32, 
until the employee has returned to work or is medically capable of 
returning to employment substantially similar to the employment in which 
the employee was engaged at the time of injury, whichever occurs first.   
Temporary total disability benefits cease when the employee returns to work, or 
is medically capable of returning to substantially similar employment. 

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 16 
 
Iowa Code 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an 
injured worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until: (1) the worker has 
returned to work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or, (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The first of 
the three items to occur ends a healing period.  See Waldinger Corp. v. Mettler, 817 
N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2012); Evenson v. Winnebago Indus. Inc., 881 N.W.2d 360 (Iowa 
2016); Crabtree v. Tri-City Elec. Co., File No. 5059572 (App., Mar. 20, 2020).  The 
healing period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable 
expectation of improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber 
Co. v. Kubli, 312 N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be 
interrupted or intermittent.  Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986).  
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Id.   
An employer’s acceptance of an employee’s voluntary quit from suitable 
employment is a rejection of suitable work on that date and any future date.  Schutjer, 
780 N.W.2d at 559.  The burden of proof to show a refusal of suitable work is on the 
employer.  Koehler v. American Color Graphics, File No. 1248489 (App. February 25, 
2005).   
Healing period may be characterized as a period during which there is a 
reasonable expectation of improvement of a disabling condition.  Pitzer v. Rowley 
Interstate, 507 N.W.2d 389, 391 (Iowa 1993)(citation omitted).  The Iowa Supreme 
Court has held that persistence of pain “may not itself prevent a finding that the healing 
period is over, provided the underlying condition is stable.”  Myers v. F.C.A. Services, 
Inc., 592 N.W.2d 354, 359 (Iowa 1999)(citing Pitzer v. Rowley Interstate, 507 N.W.2d 
389, 391 (Iowa 1993)).  Iowa courts have previously held that medical evidence of 
anticipated improvement may extend a healing period, even if it is later demonstrated 
that an injury stabilized earlier than anticipated.  Id.  (citing Thomas v. William Knudson 
& Son, Inc., 349 N.W.2d 124, 125 (Iowa App. 1984)).  The Iowa Court of Appeal has 
held: 
Section 85.34(1) leaves room for the possibility that continuing medical 
treatment provided by the employer under section 85.27 can result in a 
series of intermittent invasive treatments, periods of temporary disability 
from work and convalescence, serial MMI dates, and revised permanent 
disability ratings following a single work-related injury. 
Annett Holdings, Inc. v. Roberts, 964 N.W.2d 14, 3 (Iowa App. 2021)(citing Waldinger 
Corp. v. Mettler, 817 N.W.2d 1, 7 (Iowa 2012)).   
I do not find the defendants’ argument that the claimant’s voluntary resignation 
from his employment with Hodge was a refusal of suitable work that would disqualify 
him from receiving temporary disability benefits to be convincing.  Iowa Code section 
85.33(3) is clear that the discontinuance of benefits to a worker who refuses to accept 
suitable work offered by the employer applies to temporary partial disability benefits.  
Healing period benefits and temporary total disability benefits are located under a 

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 17 
 
different portion of the statutes.  Applying the analysis urged by the defendants would 
not be consistent with the plain language of the statute.   
In the underlying arbitration proceeding, the parties agreed that the claimant 
achieved maximum medical improvement (“MMI”) on January 3, 2019.  Since that time, 
the claimant has had additional pain, and a general degradation of his physical 
capabilities.  However, his underlying condition appears to be stable based upon the 
information in the record.  Mr. Hayes had an MRI which showed degenerative issues.  
Mr. Hayes has had a number of injections and attempts at therapy since the arbitration 
proceeding.  Similar to the attempts prior to the arbitration hearing, these treatments 
offered no long-term improvement to his pain.  Additionally, a neurosurgeon opined that 
there were no neurosurgical options to treat his complaints of pain.  Based upon this, 
the claimant has not proven a reasonable expectation of improvement in his disabling 
condition.  There is no information in the record indicating that the claimant entered a 
new period of disability based upon his voluntary resignation from Hodge.  If anything, 
the claimant testified that Hodge was willing to accommodate his pain issues and 
allowed him to take time off as needed.  Based upon the medical evidence, it appears 
that the claimant’s underlying condition was stable, despite his subjective complaints of 
pain.  I conclude that there is not a new healing period.  Therefore, the claimant is not 
entitled to a running award of healing period benefits.   
Permanent Disability 
The claimant argues that he is permanently and totally disabled as a result of the 
work injury.  The defendants argue that the claimant is only entitled to a small increase 
in his industrial disability award based upon his continued complaints and the increase 
in permanent impairment rating from Dr. Taylor.   
Under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
85.34(2)(a)-(u) or for loss of earning capacity under Iowa Code 85.34(2)(v).  The extent 
of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is 
determined by using the functional method.  Functional disability is “limited to the loss of 
the physiological capacity of the body or body part.”  Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 
N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998).   
An injury to a scheduled member may, because of after effects or compensatory 
change, result in permanent impairment of the body as a whole.  Such impairment may 
in turn be the basis for a rating of industrial disability.  It is the anatomical situs of the 
permanent injury or impairment which determines whether the schedules in Iowa Code 
85.34(a) – (u) are applied.  Lauhoff Grain v. MacIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834 (Iowa 1986); 
Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Dailey v. Pooley Lumber 
Co., 233 Iowa 758, 10 N.W.2d 569 (1943); Soukup v. Shores Co., 222 Iowa 272, 268 
N.W. 598 (1936).   
In Iowa, a claimant may establish permanent total disability under the statute, or 
through the common law odd-lot doctrine.  Michael Eberhart Constr. v. Curtin, 674 
N.W.2d 123, 126 (Iowa 2004)(discussing both theories of permanent total disability 
under Idaho law and concluding the deputy’s ruling was not based on both theories, 

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 18 
 
rather, it was only based on the odd-lot doctrine).  Under the statute, the claimant may 
establish that they are totally and permanently disabled if the claimant’s medical 
impairment, taken together with nonmedical factors totals 100-percent.  Id.  The odd-lot 
doctrine applies when the claimant has established the claimant has sustained 
something less than 100-percent disability, but is so injured that the claimant is “unable 
to perform services other than ‘those which are so limited in quality, dependability or 
quantity that a reasonably stable market for them does not exist.’”  Id.  (quoting Boley v. 
Indus. Special Indem. Fund, 130 Idaho 278, 281, 939 P.2d 854, 857 (1997)).   
“Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness.”  Walmart 
Stores, Inc. v. Caselman, 657 N.W.2d 493, 501 (Iowa 2003)(quoting IBP, Inc. v. Al-
Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 621, 633 (Iowa 2000)).  Total disability occurs when the injury 
wholly disables the employee from performing work that the employee’s experience, 
training, intelligence, and physical capacities would otherwise permit the employee to 
perform.”  IBP, Inc., 604 N.W.2d at 633.  However, finding that the claimant could 
perform some work despite claimant’s physical and educational limitations does not 
foreclose a finding of permanent total disability.   See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File 
No. 661698 (App. October 1987); Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial 
Commissioner Report 134 (App. May 1982).   
In Guyton v. Irving Jensen, Co., the Iowa Supreme Court formally adopted the 
“odd-lot doctrine.”  373 N.W.2d 101 (Iowa 1985).  Under that doctrine, a worker 
becomes an odd-lot employee when an injury makes the worker incapable of obtaining 
employment in any well-known branch of the labor market.  An odd-lot worker is thus 
totally disabled if the only services the worker can perform are “so limited in quality, 
dependability, or quantity that a reasonably stable market for them does not exist.”  Id., 
at 105.   
Under the odd-lot doctrine, the burden of persuasion on the issue of industrial 
disability always remains with the worker.  Nevertheless, when a worker makes a prima 
facie case of total disability by producing substantial evidence that the worker is not 
employable in the competitive labor market, the burden to provide evidence showing 
availability of suitable employment shifts to the employer.  If the employer fails to 
produce such evidence and the trier of fact finds the worker does fall in the odd-lot 
category, then the worker is entitled to a finding of total disability.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d 
at 106.  Factors to be considered in determining whether a worker is an odd-lot 
employee include: the worker’s reasonable but unsuccessful effort to find steady 
employment, vocational or other expert evidence demonstrating suitable work is not 
available for the worker, the extent of the worker’s physical impairment, intelligence, 
education, age, training, and potential for retraining.  No factor is necessarily dispositive 
on the issue.  Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258 (Iowa 1995).  
Even under the odd-lot doctrine, the trier of fact is free to determine the weight and 
credibility of evidence in determining whether the worker’s burden of persuasion has 
been carried, and only in an exceptional case would evidence be sufficiently strong as 
to compel a finding of total disability as a matter of law.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 106.   
 The claimant is 56 years old.  Ms. Laughlin concluded that this made him an 
older worker, and thus he would likely encounter resistance in hiring.   Mr. Hayes was 

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 19 
 
an average student who earned a high school diploma.  He has few computer skills and 
is a “two-finger” typist.  His employment history includes working in meatpacking for a 
short time.  He then worked at Eagle Window and Door for 27 years.  He worked in 
maintenance, and eventually took some classes in electrical work.  After leaving Eagle 
Window and Door, he made an attempt to work at a hot tub installation company, Kwik 
Stop, Casey’s General Store, and Blaine’s Farm & Fleet.  He eventually started working 
at Georgia Pacific, where he drove a forklift all the time.  After leaving Georgia Pacific, 
he worked for Hodge.  At Hodge, he operated a forklift for part of the day, and then took 
stickers off John Deere parts racks.  It does not appear that the claimant would be a 
good candidate for retraining based upon his employment history.   
Ms. Laughlin, a vocational expert, completed an employability assessment 
report.  She considered Mr. Hayes’ work at Eagle Window and Door to have been 
between medium and heavy duty.  Some of his jobs after Eagle Window and Door were 
considered unsuccessful work attempts.  His work at Casey’s and Georgia Pacific was 
considered a medium exertional level.  All of his positions were either semi-skilled or 
unskilled, but for two of his positions at Eagle Window and Door and one position at 
Casey’s.   
Ms. Laughlin considered the restrictions provided by the FCE and affirmed by Dr. 
Taylor in her employability analysis.  The FCE revealed “some” limitations with the 
following areas: elevated work, sitting, standing work, walking, lifting from the floor to 
the waist up to 10 pounds, lifting from the waist to the crown up to 5 pounds, front 
carrying up to 10 pounds for up to 50 feet.  Mr. Hayes had “significant” limitations 
involving: forward bent standing, kneeling or half-kneeling, stairs, crawling, lifting from 
the floor to the waist up to 15 pounds, lifting from the waist to the crown up to 10 
pounds, and front carrying up to 15 pounds up to 50 feet.  Mr. Hayes could also not 
crouch.  Of note, the FCE examiner found that Mr. Hayes’ heart rate increased to a level 
that is unsafe for even exercise purposes when he was lifting.  Based upon the results 
of the FCE, the examiner opined that the claimant did not even meet the capabilities of 
a sedentary category of physical demand.  He also was “essentially in an unemployable 
position,” unless he could improve his condition.   
Dr. Taylor noted that Mr. Hayes had an antalgic gait that protected his right lower 
extremity.  He also had issues with squatting during an IME.  Dr. Taylor recalled his 
previous restrictions, which included a 35-pound lifting limit to waist level, and a 30-
pound limit between waist and chest level.  Dr. Taylor proceeded to recommend certain 
restrictions, based upon the results of the FCE.  Specifically, Dr. Taylor noted that Mr. 
Hayes could generally tolerate lifting between five and 15 pounds on a rare to 
occasional basis.  Mr. Hayes would need to use a good lifting technique by keeping 
items close to his body, and moving his feet as opposed to twisting or turning his spine. 
Dr. Taylor continued by recommending that Mr. Hayes have the ability to alternate 
sitting, standing, and walking, as needed for comfort.  Dr. Taylor recommended that Mr. 
Hayes rarely bend forward.  Mr. Hayes could occasionally sit, stand, and walk, but could 
only rarely kneel.  The claimant could occasionally travel, but needed to have the ability 
to stretch and move around as needed.  Finally, Dr. Taylor recommended that the 
claimant infrequently climb stairs.   

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 20 
 
Based upon the restrictions provided by Dr. Taylor, Ms. Laughlin opined that Mr. 
Hayes had a 95.4 percent occupational loss in unskilled occupations, and a 93.4 
percent occupational loss in occupations that were a good match for his skills.  Based 
upon the restrictions provided by the FCE, Ms. Laughlin opined that the claimant has a 
100 percent occupational loss for occupations that were the “closest match” to his 
employment history and skill set.  This included semi-skilled and skilled occupations.  
She opined that he had a 95 percent occupational loss for “good match” occupations, 
and a 98.2 percent loss for unskilled occupations.   
Ms. Laughlin opined that Mr. Hayes’ need to change positions as needed was a 
“severe restriction.”  She continued by noting that Mr. Hayes’ inability to perform even 
sedentary work according to the FCE results was a limiting factor on the positions 
available to him.  Ms. Laughlin also noted that Mr. Hayes is able to obtain work; 
however, he has difficulty maintaining employment based upon his significant pain and 
need to change positions.  According to Ms. Laughlin’s report, Mr. Hayes has 
restrictions from both Dr. Taylor and the FCE that most employers would be unable to 
reasonably accommodate.  Ms. Laughlin concluded her report by saying “[i]t is my 
opinion that at this time, without a decrease in his symptoms/restrictions or an increase 
in his skills, Mr. Hayes will find no further work in any quality, quantity or dependability 
that he can perform.”   
The restrictions provided in Dr. Taylor’s IME, the FCE, and the results of Ms. 
Laughlin’s reports are afforded substantial weight, even though Dr. Taylor’s assessment 
of permanent impairment for the claimant was 9 percent to the whole person.    
The Commissioner previously found that the claimant suffered a 25 percent 
industrial disability.  Considering the claimant has not shown entitlement to an additional 
healing period, I now consider whether the claimant is entitled to additional industrial 
disability benefits, or whether the claimant is permanently and totally disabled. As the 
court notes in Guyton, only in an exceptional case would evidence be sufficiently strong 
to compel a finding of total disability as a matter of law.  Id.  As discussed above, this is 
a case where the evidence is sufficiently strong pointing to the conclusion that the 
claimant has provided substantial evidence that he is no longer employable in the 
competitive labor market.  Furthermore, the claimant has shown that the only services 
that he can perform are “so limited in quality, dependability, or quantity that a 
reasonably stable market for them does not exist.”  Id.  I further conclude that the 
employer has not shown that suitable employment is available to the claimant.  While 
the claimant did maintain employment at Hodge for a time, his restrictions from the FCE 
and Dr. Taylor’s IME, when taken in conjunction with the results of Ms. Laughlin’s 
report, make it clear that the claimant’s condition has continued to degrade.  Mr. Hayes 
also testified that he increasingly took time off from Hodge before his voluntary 
resignation due to increasing pain.  While the claimant had a prior injury at Eagle 
Window and Door, his permanent disability is based upon his injuries from his time at 
Georgia Pacific.  Specifically, the claimant’s injuries were to his lower back with pain 
radiating into his leg.  Considering the evidence in the record, the claimant is 
permanently and totally disabled based upon the odd-lot doctrine.    
 

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 21 
 
Penalty 
Iowa Code 86.13(4) provides the basis for awarding penalties against an 
employer.  Iowa Code 86.13(4) states: 
(a) If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs 
without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the 
employer or insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in 
payment, or termination of benefits, the workers’ compensation 
commissioner shall award benefits in addition to those benefits 
payable under this chapter, or chapter 85, 85A, or 85B, up to fifty 
present of the amount of benefits that were denied, delayed, or 
terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse.   
 
(b) The workers’ compensation commissioner shall award benefits under 
this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following facts: 
 
(1) 
The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in payment, 
or termination of benefits.   
 
(2) 
The employer has failed to provide a reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of 
benefits.  
 
(c) In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or excuse 
under paragraph “b”, an excuse shall satisfy all of the following 
criteria: 
 
(1) 
The excuse was preceded by a reasonable investigation and 
evaluation by the employer or insurance carrier into whether 
benefits were owed to the employee. 
 
(2) 
The results of the reasonable investigation and evaluation 
were the actual basis upon which the employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits.   
 
(3) 
The employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously 
conveyed the basis for the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits to the employee at the time of the denial, delay, or 
termination of benefits.   
If weekly compensation benefits are not fully paid when due, Iowa Code 86.13 
requires that additional benefits be awarded unless the employer shows reasonable 
cause or excuse for the delay or denial.  Robbennolt v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 555 
N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996).  Delay attributable to the time required to perform a 

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 22 
 
reasonable investigation is not unreasonable.  Kiesecker v. Webster City Custom 
Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d 109 (Iowa 1995).   
It is also not unreasonable to deny a claim when a good faith issue of law or fact 
makes the employer’s liability fairly debatable.  An issue of law is fairly debatable if 
viable arguments exist in favor of each party.  Covia v. Robinson, 507 N.W.2d 411 
(Iowa 1993).  An issue of fact is fairly debatable if substantial evidence exists which 
would support a finding favorable to the employer.  Gilbert v. USF Holland, Inc., 637 
N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001).  An employer’s bare assertion that a claim is fairly debatable 
is insufficient to avoid imposition of a penalty.  The employer must assert facts upon 
which the commissioner could reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.”  
Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996).   
If an employer fails to show reasonable cause or excuse for the delay or denial, 
the commissioner shall impose a penalty in an amount up to 50-percent of the amount 
unreasonably delayed or denied.  Christensen v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 
(Iowa 1996).  The factors to be considered in determining the amount of the penalty 
include: the length of the delay, the number of delays, the information available to the 
employer, and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 238.   
For purposes of determining whether an employer has delayed in making 
payments, payments are considered “made” either (a) when the check addressed to a 
claimant is mailed, or (b) when the check is delivered personally to the claimant by the 
employer or its workers’ compensation insurer.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 235-236; 
Kiesecker, 528 N.W.2d at 112.   
Penalty is not imposed for delayed interest payments.  Schadendorf v. Snap-On 
Tools Corp., 757 N.W.2d 330, 338 (Iowa 2008); Davidson v. Bruce, 594 N.W.2d 833, 
840 (Iowa 1999).    
The claimant argues for an award of a penalty based upon an unreasonable 
delay in medical care recommended by Dr. Wikle.  This case included physical therapy, 
aquatic therapy, and referral to a pain psychologist.  The claimant also blames the 
defendants for a delay in his application for social security disability benefits.  The 
claimant alleges that the defendants refuse to pay any additional healing period or 
permanency benefits to the claimant.  They request a 50 percent penalty for “past due 
weekly benefits.”   
The defendants argue that the claimant is not entitled to additional healing period 
benefits, and therefore would not be entitled to a penalty.  They further argue that the 
claimant is not entitled to a penalty because the claim for additional healing period 
benefits is fairly debatable.  
I previously determined that the claimant is not entitled to an additional healing 
period.  Even if the claimant were entitled to an additional healing period, the 
entitlement to healing period benefits based upon the claimant’s voluntary resignation 
from Hodge created a good faith issue of law or fact that made the defendants’ liability 
for the benefits fairly debatable.  Based upon the foregoing, and the evidence in the 
record, there is not an appropriate basis for an award of penalty benefits.   

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 23 
 
85.27 Alternate Care 
Iowa Code 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obligated to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has 
the right to choose the care. . .  The treatment must be offered promptly 
and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience 
to the employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the 
care offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
Iowa Code 85.27(4). See Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433 (Iowa 
1997).   
“Iowa Code section 85.27(4) affords an employer who does not contest the 
compensability of a workplace injury a qualified statutory right to control the medical 
care provided to an injured employee.”  Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 
N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016) (citing R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 
195, 197 (Iowa 2003)).  “In enacting the right-to-choose provision in section 85.27(4), 
our legislature sought to balance the interests of injured employees against the 
competing interests of their employers.”  Ramirez, 878 N.W.2d at 770-71 (citing Bell 
Bros., 779 N.W.2d at 202, 207; IBP, Inc. v. Harker, 633 N.W.2d 322, 326-27 (Iowa 
2001)).   
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the 
employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend 
Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 
(Review-Reopening, October 16, 1975).  An employer’s right to select the provider of 
medical treatment to an injured worker does not include the right to determine how an 
injured worker should be diagnosed, evaluated, treated, or other matters of professional 
medical judgment.  Assmann v. Blue Star Foods, File No. 866389 (Declaratory Ruling, 
May 19, 1988).  Reasonable care includes care necessary to diagnose the condition, 
and defendants are not entitled to interfere with the medical judgment of its own treating 
physician.  Pote v. Mickow Corp., File No. 694639 (Review-Reopening Decision, June 
17, 1986).   
The employer must furnish “reasonable medical services and supplies and 
reasonable and necessary appliances to treat an injured employee.”  Stone Container 
Corp. v. Castle, 657 N.W.2d 485, 490 (Iowa 2003)(emphasis in original).  Such 
employer-provided care “must be offered promptly and be reasonably suited to treat the 
injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.”  Iowa Code section 85.27(4).   
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment - and seeking alternate care – 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable.  See e.g. 

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 24 
 
Iowa R. App. P. 14(f)(5); Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 
193, 209 (Iowa 2010); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995).  An 
injured employee dissatisfied with the employer-furnished care (or lack thereof) may 
share the employee’s discontent with the employer and if the parties cannot reach an 
agreement on alternate care, “the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order the care.”  Id.  “Determining what care 
is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.”  Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123; Pirelli-
Armstrong Tire Co., 562 N.W.2d at 436.  As the party seeking relief in the form of 
alternate care, the employee bears the burden of proving that the authorized care is 
unreasonable.  Id. at 124; Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d at 209; Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co., 562 
N.W.2d at 436.  Because “the employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the 
question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” an injured employee’s dissatisfaction 
with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough to find such care 
unreasonable.  Id.   
The claimant requests alternate medical care in the form of a second opinion by 
a neurosurgeon, specifically, Dr. Jonathan Citow, of Libertyville, Illinois, or another 
qualified neurosurgeon.  The claimant alleges that he is entitled to alternate medical 
care because the care provided by Drs. Howard and Wikle did not provide “meaningful 
improvement” to the claimant’s condition.  (Claimant’s Posthearing Brief, p. 12).   
The defendants provided for treatment with Dr. Wikle and a consultation with Dr. 
Howard at the University of Iowa.  Dr. Howard appears to be a qualified neurosurgeon.  
He did not make any recommendations for further consultation.  He indicated that the 
claimant was not a surgical candidate.   
Based upon the information in the record, I find that the claimant has not proven 
that the care offered is unreasonable.  No authorized treating doctor has recommended 
a second opinion.  It appears that the claimant’s request for care with Dr. Citow is 
simply due to dissatisfaction with care.  Therefore, the request for alternate medical 
care is denied.   
Reimbursement for IME Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39 
Iowa Code 85.39(2) states: 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and 
upon delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its 
insurance carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, 
and reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for the 
examination.   
. . .  
An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which 

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 25 
 
the employee is being examined is determined to be compensable under 
this chapter or chapter 85A or 85B.  An employer is not liable for the cost 
of such an examination if the injury for which the employee is being 
examined is determined not to be a compensable injury.  A determination 
of the reasonableness of a fee for an examination made pursuant to this 
subsection shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical 
provider to perform an impairment rating in the local area where the 
examination is conducted.   
Iowa Code section 85.39(2).   
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant’s 
independent medical examination.  The claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  The claimant 
need not prove that the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify 
for reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008).  An opinion finding a lack of causation is tantamount to a zero 
percent impairment rating.  Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 2021 WL 3890603 
(Iowa App. 2021).   
The claimant requests reimbursement for the expenses associated with Dr. 
Taylor’s IME.  The claimant argues that the defendants’ referral of the claimant to Dr. 
Howard for evaluation and treatment, and his subsequent conclusion that there was not 
a surgical solution to the claimant’s issues, is akin to an opinion of no change in a 
permanent impairment.  This argument, while creative, is neither convincing, nor 
correct.   
There is no evaluation of permanent disability provided by anyone but Dr. Taylor.  
Dr. Taylor was retained by the claimant to provide opinions.  Dr. Howard provided an 
opinion as to potential future treatment options for the claimant.  He made no mention of 
permanent impairment, or even causation, as the doctor did in Kern.  The claimant has 
not proven an entitlement to reimbursement of Dr. Taylor’s IME fees based upon Iowa 
Code section 85.39.   
Costs 
Claimant seeks the award of costs as outlined in Claimant’s Exhibit 6.  Costs are 
to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner hearing the case.  See 876 
Iowa Administrative Code 4.33; Iowa Code 86.40.  876 Iowa Administrative Code 
4.33(6) provides:  
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by 
Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 26 
 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes.   
Pursuant to the holding in Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 
867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015), only the report of an IME physician, and not the 
examination itself, can be taxed as a cost according to 876 IAC 4.33(6).  The Iowa 
Supreme Court reasoned, “a physician’s report becomes a cost incurred in a hearing 
because it is used as evidence in lieu of the doctor’s testimony,” while “[t]he underlying 
medical expenses associated with the examination do not become costs of a report 
needed for a hearing, just as they do not become costs of the testimony or deposition.”  
Id.  (noting additionally that “[i]n the context of the assessment of costs, the expenses of 
the underlying medical treatment and examination are not part of the costs of the report 
or deposition”).  The commissioner has found this rationale applicable to expenses 
incurred by vocational experts.  See  Kirkendall v. Cargill Meat Solutions Corp., File No. 
5055494 (App. Dec., December 17, 2018); Voshell v. Compass Group, USA, Inc., File 
No. 5056857 (App. Dec., September 27, 2019).   
The claimant requests reimbursement of costs as follows: 
Filing fee – one hundred and 00/100 dollars ($100.00) 
Short Physical Therapy FCE – nine hundred fifty and 00/100 dollars 
($950.00) 
Taylor IME – one thousand eight hundred thirty-seven and 50/100 dollars 
($1,837.50)   
Laughlin Vocational Report – one thousand one hundred fifty and 00/100 
dollars ($1,150.00) 
(CE 6).  The defendants (correctly) argue that the claimant is only allowed 
reimbursement for the filing fee and two of the reports.  The costs of the filing fee are 
one hundred three and 00/100 dollars ($103.00), as they include a convenience fee.  
(CE 6:75).  The cost for the FCE report was three hundred fifty and 00/100 dollars 
($350.00).  There is no indication which portion of Dr. Taylor’s invoice in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 6:77 relates to the report.  There is a portion which is entitled “abstract medical 
records,” but I do not find this clear enough to consider it the drafting of the IME report.  
Finally, the report from Ms. Laughlin cost five hundred sixty-two and 50/100 dollars 
($125.00 x 4.5 = $562.50).   
Based upon my discretion, I award the claimant one hundred three and 00/100 
dollars ($103.00) for the filing fee and associated convenience fee.  I also award the 
claimant the cost of the FCE report of three hundred fifty and 00/100 dollars ($350.00), 
and the cost of Ms. Laughlin’s report of five hundred sixty-two and 50/100 dollars 
($562.50).  The total costs awarded are one thousand fifteen and 50/100 dollars 
($1,015.50).   

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 27 
 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant has proven an entitlement to review-reopening benefits pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 86.14. 
Claimant is not entitled to a “running award” of healing period benefits.   
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of four hundred eighty-four 
and 98/100 dollars ($484.98) per week.   
Defendants shall pay claimant permanent total disability benefits on a weekly 
basis from October 1, 2021, through the date of the review-reopening hearing, and 
continuing into the future during the period of claimant’s total disability.   
Defendants shall be entitled to credits for weekly benefits paid to date.   
Claimant’s request for alternate care is denied. 
Claimant is not owed penalty benefits.   
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.   
Defendants shall reimburse the claimant one thousand fifteen and 50/100 dollars 
($1,015.50) for costs.   
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7.   
Signed and filed this _____15th _____ day of July, 2022. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Mark Sullivan (via WCES) 
Christopher Fry (via WCES) 
 
 
            ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

HAYES V. GEORGIA PACIFIC CORP. 
Page 28 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
