Case Number: 1637077.03
Case Title:  SPRINGER, JEFFREY V. HOLY FAMILY CATHOLIC SCHOOLS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Springer Jeffrey-1637077.03d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JEFFREY SPRINGER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
    File No. 1637077.03 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                       
HOLY FAMILY CATHOLIC SCHOOLS,   : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                       
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
CATHOLIC MUTUAL RELIEF SOCIETY, : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                     Head Note No. 1803.1 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Jeffrey Springer, filed a petition for arbitration on April 8, 2022.  He 
seeks workers’ compensation benefits from Holy Family Catholic Schools, employer, 
and Catholic Mutual Relief Society, insurance carrier.  The claimant was represented by 
Mark Sullivan.  The defendants were represented by Christopher Fry. 
The matter came on for hearing on September 13, 2023, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom 
videoconference.  The record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 11; 
Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 7; and defense exhibits A through E.  The claimant 
testified at hearing, in addition to Robin Sassman, M.D.  Rachel Waterhouse-Schwalm 
served as the court reporter.  The matter was fully submitted on November 1, 2023, 
following concise, excellent briefing by the parties. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. The nature and extent of disability.  Claimant alleges that his disability is to 
his body as a whole and should be evaluated under subsection (v).  
Defendants dispute this and contend that the disability should be evaluated 
under subsection (n). 
2. Costs. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-May-21  09:06:02     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SPRINGER V. HOLY FAMILY CATHOLIC SCHOOLS 
Page 2 
 
 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1.  The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
2. Claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on August 1, 2017.  This work injury is a cause of some 
temporary and permanent disability. 
3. Temporary disability/healing period and medical benefits are no longer in 
dispute.  Claimant was paid healing period benefits for the times set forth in 
the Hearing Report, paragraph 4. 
4. The commencement date for any permanent disability benefits is December 
5, 2018. 
5. The weekly rate of compensation is $372.77. 
6. Defendants have paid and are entitled to a credit of 128 weeks of 
compensation (permanent partial disability). 
7. Affirmative defenses have been waived. 
8. Medical expenses are not in dispute. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Jeffrey Springer was 68 years old as of the date of hearing.  He is 
married.  He graduated from high school in 1974 and served honorably in the United 
States Air Force.  He testified live and under oath at the video hearing.  I find his 
testimony to be highly credible.  He was an excellent witness.  His answers were short 
and responsive.  His testimony matched with other relevant portions of the record.  
There was nothing about his demeanor which caused me any concern for his 
truthfulness. 
Following high school, Mr. Springer has worked exclusively in manual labor 
positions. He worked several different labor positions before starting for Georgia Pacific 
as a “scrapper” in approximately 1988.  This position involved inspecting and loading 
materials into boxes and loading them onto pallets, in addition to operating a forklift.  He 
testified in some detail at hearing about this job which he held until 2004.  (Transcript, 
pages 14-15)  He was laid off from this job in 2004.   
While Mr. Springer has enjoyed good health for most of his life, he does have 
Tourette’s syndrome.  He treats with Hillcrest Mental Health Services for this condition, 
which is fairly well controlled with medications.  He does mumble to himself at times and 
makes odd facial expressions, symptoms which he exhibited mildly during the course of 
the hearing.  He also developed bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome from a work injury at 

SPRINGER V. HOLY FAMILY CATHOLIC SCHOOLS 
Page 3 
 
 
Georgia Pacific, which was treated successfully with surgery. 
In November 2004, Mr. Springer began working for Holy Family Catholic Schools 
as a full-time custodian.  (Tr., p. 16)  In addition to general custodial duties, Mr. Springer 
would clean, strip and wax classroom floors once school was out.  (Tr., pp. 16-17)  He 
was not having any ongoing symptoms or complaints prior to his work injury.  Mr. 
Springer is left handed. 
The parties have stipulated that Mr. Springer sustained an injury to his left 
shoulder on August 1, 2017 which arose out of and in the course of his employment.  
(Hearing Report, paragraph 2)  The parties have further stipulated that this injury 
resulted in some temporary and permanent disability.  The primary question in this case 
involves the location of body parts which sustained permanent damage as a result of 
the stipulated injury. 
Mr. Springer testified on August 1, 2017, he was working at a high school for the 
employer.  He slipped on some liquids and fell, landing on his left shoulder.  He 
immediately reported the injury.  His wife took him to the emergency room that night.  
His treatment over the next several months is not really in dispute.  Christopher Palmer, 
M.D., was his treating physician.  He promptly ordered an MRI and diagnosed a rotator 
cuff tear as well as a degenerative condition in the biceps tendon and AC joint.  Dr. 
Palmer provided an injection and therapy initially.  By September 2017, he referred Mr. 
Springer to a surgeon, David Hart, M.D.  Dr. Hart diagnosed a massive rotator cuff tear 
and ruptured long head of the left biceps tendon. 
Surgery was performed to repair the torn rotator cuff on December 12, 2017.  
(Joint Exhibit 8)  Following surgery, Mr. Springer’s shoulder remained quite painful.  The 
surgical note indicated the long head of the left biceps was “absent.”  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 95)  
Mr. Springer made little progress in physical therapy.  By May 2018, Dr. Hart 
recommended a “reverse total shoulder arthroplasty” primarily to address the pain.  (Jt. 
Ex. 7, p. 67)  This surgery was performed on June 28, 2018.  (Jt. Ex. 9, pp. 106-108)  
Unfortunately, the recovery was slow, and Mr. Springer developed adhesive capsulitis 
(frozen shoulder) in October 2018.  Dr. Hart did perform a manipulation of the left 
shoulder on October 23, 2018, as well as an injection to help with the ongoing 
symptoms.  (Jt. Ex. 10, pp. 113-115)  Dr. Hart placed Mr. Springer at maximum medical 
improvement on December 5, 2018.  (Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 86-87)  Dr. Hart assigned permanent 
restrictions of left arm at side, no repetitive work with left arm, no pushing, pulling, or 
reaching overhead with left arm, and no lifting of more than 5 pounds with left arm.  (Jt. 
Ex. 7, p. 87) 
Claimant’s Exhibit 1 is a summary of all of Mr. Springer’s treatment for his work 
injury.  Mr. Springer testified credibly that his shoulder remained painful and 
extraordinarily limited throughout the course of his treatment. 
The employer promptly met with Mr. Springer following the assignment of these 
restrictions.  It appears the parties had a meaningful meeting regarding whether he was 
able to maintain employment with the employer.  Mr. Springer essentially agreed that he 

SPRINGER V. HOLY FAMILY CATHOLIC SCHOOLS 
Page 4 
 
 
could not perform his regular job within these restrictions, and he was terminated.  (Tr., 
pp. 36-37, 63; Claimant’s Exhibit 5)  Mr. Springer testified that he had planned to retire 
at age 66.  He was 63 at the time of his termination.   
There are a number of expert opinions in this record regarding Mr. Springer’s 
medical condition. 
On January 16, 2019, Dr. Hart, the treating orthopedic surgeon, opined that Mr. 
Springer sustained a 32 percent impairment rating of the left upper extremity pursuant 
to the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  He provided logical reasoning and citations for this 
rating.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 91)  Dr. Hart specifically assigned 24 percent for the total shoulder 
implant arthroplasty and an additional 10 percent for loss of strength in the left shoulder. 
Robin Sassman, M.D., is an occupational medicine physician who examined Mr. 
Springer on February 23, 2021.  She prepared an expert report dated April 9, 2021.  
She reviewed a number of appropriate medical records and met with Mr. Springer.  (Cl. 
Ex. 2, pp. 9-15)  She performed a thorough medical evaluation.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 16-17)  
She agreed with the diagnosis of Dr. Hart of left massive rotator cuff tear.  She opined 
that this condition was directly related to his work injury.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 18)  She 
assigned an impairment rating of 45 percent of the left upper extremity.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 
19)  She assigned 30 percent for total shoulder resection arthroplasty and 21 percent 
for loss of range of motion. 
In May 2021, Dr. Hart provided an opinion that Mr. Springer’s procedure was an 
implant arthroplasty, not a resection.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 22)  Subsequently, Dr. Sassman 
quickly revised her rating with this information, assigning 24 percent for the implant 
arthroplasty and assigning a total of a 40 percent left upper extremity rating.  (Cl. Ex. 2, 
pp. 24-25)  Nearly two years later, claimant’s counsel asked Dr. Sassman to update her 
IME with a second evaluation. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 26)  Dr. Sassman performed a second 
evaluation in February 2023, and provided a report containing additional expert opinions 
in March 2023.  She again performed a thorough examination.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 35-37)  
Her opinions were largely unchanged, although she adjusted the range of motion 
deficits, finding a 41 percent impairment rating to account for some additional loss of 
range of motion.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 38) 
On May 12, 2023, claimant’s counsel followed up asking for additional opinions. 
     In your IME report dated 04/09/2021 you noted substantial reduced 
grip strength in the left hand versus the right hand, despite the fact that 
Jeffrey is left-handed (page 9).  In your more recent report dated 
03/08/2023, you again noted substantially reduced grip strength in the left 
versus right (page 10). 
     I am wondering if there is any relationship between the injury to the 
biceps tendon and the reduced grip strength, and if so whether or not that 
is ratable under the AMA Guides.  Please provide us a short report 
addressing this issue at your earliest convenience.  We are trying to get 

SPRINGER V. HOLY FAMILY CATHOLIC SCHOOLS 
Page 5 
 
 
Dr. Hart to address this also, but he is currently out of the country.  Thanks 
for your attention to this matter. 
(Cl. Ex. 2, p. 41)  The additional question focused on the impact of the biceps tendon 
condition in relation to Mr. Springer’s loss of strength in his left hand.  Claimant’s 
counsel wrote Dr. Hart a similar letter.   
 
Dr. Hart responded first on May 18, 2023.  He did not address the strength loss 
question at all.  He did describe the procedure he performed in detail, explaining the 
procedure he performed was deep into the scapula bone.  The procedure “required 
fixation well into his whole body via the scapula.  This is why I believe that both in 
Jeffrey Springer’s case, and in any patient’s case, involving this procedure, the injury 
should be considered as a whole body condition, rather than limited to the shoulder.”  
(Jt. Ex. 7, p. 94) 
On May 22, 2023, Dr. Sassman responded.  She reviewed her measurements for 
loss of grip strength and then opined the following: 
     From an anatomical perspective, several muscle groups are involved in 
grip strength, including the biceps musculature.  The biceps musculature 
is especially involved with supinated grip strength.  Mr. Springer’s loss of 
grip strength impacts his dominant left hand, which in turn, impacts his 
ability to perform activities of daily living and many work activities.  
Therefore, it would be appropriate to assign some impairment for the loss 
of grip strength that Mr. Springer has exhibited since the original injury on 
08/01/2017. 
     Using the instructions in The Guides, the average strength loss index 
of the left upper extremity was calculated as compared to the right upper 
extremity grip strength using the formula on page 509.  The average % 
strength loss index was 62%.  Using Table 16-34 on page 509, this is 
equal to 30% upper extremity impairment.  If indicated, using Table 16-3 
on page 439, this is converted to 18% whole person impairment.  This 
impairment would be in addition to the impairment I assigned in my IME 
report … 
(Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 42-43)  Dr. Sassman then combined all of the ratings and assigned a 59 
percent left upper extremity rating which converts to 35 percent of the whole body.  (Cl. 
Ex. 2, p. 43) 
On August 16, 2023, defense counsel summarized a conversation he had with 
Justin Khoriaty, M.D.  Dr. Khoriaty signed this letter in apparent agreement with the 
summary.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 10)  Dr. Khoriaty disagreed with Dr. Sassman.  “Neither the 
biceps tendon nor the biceps muscle itself has anything to do with grip strength.  The 
musculature of the hand and forearm determines grip strength.”  (Def. Ex. C, p. 8)  He 
went on to opine that any grip strength measured by Dr. Sassman is not related to any 
injury of his left shoulder or biceps tendon.  The opinion includes references.  (Def. Ex. 

SPRINGER V. HOLY FAMILY CATHOLIC SCHOOLS 
Page 6 
 
 
C, pp. 8-9) 
In addition to all of this, Dr. Sassman provided sworn testimony twice, first in a 
deposition dated August 11, 2021, then live video testimony at hearing.  All of this 
testimony was reviewed and considered.  Her sworn testimony is entirely consistent 
with her written reports.  In her testimony, she provided a thorough rebuttal of Dr. 
Khoriaty’s opinions.  (Tr., pp. 90-91)  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The only question submitted is the nature and extent of claimant’s permanent 
disability.  
 
The first question submitted is whether claimant’s disability should be evaluated 
under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) for the loss of a shoulder, or whether it should be 
evaluated under section 85.34(2)(v) as a body as a whole disability. The precise issue is 
the situs of the disability caused by the injury.  This is an issue of medical causation. 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
 
When an injury occurs in the course of employment, the employer is liable for all 
of the consequences that “naturally and proximately flow from the accident.” Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation: Law and Practice, Lawyer and Higgs, section 4-4. The 
Supreme Court has stated the following: “If the employee suffers a compensable injury 
and thereafter suffers further disability which is the proximate result of the original injury, 
such further disability is compensable.”  Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 

SPRINGER V. HOLY FAMILY CATHOLIC SCHOOLS 
Page 7 
 
 
767, 266 N.W. 480, 481 (1936). The Oldham Court opined that a claimant must present 
sufficient evidence that the disability was naturally and proximately related to the 
original work injury. 
The real issue here is the nature of the disability.   
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) governs in all cases of permanent partial disability 
other than those “described or referred to” elsewhere in subsection 85.34(2). Because 
of this, paragraph (v) “is often referred to as the ‘catch-all’ section” of the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act.  Subsection (n) governs disabilities to the shoulder. 
The Commissioner filed two appeal decisions which are controlling on the legal 
issue.  The first was Deng v. Farmland Foods, File No. 5061883 (Appeal September 29, 
2020).  In Deng, the Commissioner held that the 2017 amendments to Chapter 85 were 
ambiguous as to the definition of the shoulder.  He therefore undertook an effort to 
construe the statute by looking to the intent of the legislature.  Id. at 5.  He ultimately 
concluded the following: 
I recognize the well-established standard that workers’ compensation 
statutes are to be liberally construed in favor of the worker, as their 
primary purposes is to benefit the worker.  See Des Moines Area Reg'l 
Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 842 (Iowa 2015) (citations 
omitted); see also Jacobson Transp. Co. v. Harris, 778 N.W.2d 192, 197 
(Iowa 2010); Xenia Rural Water Dist. v. Vegors, 786 N.W.2d 250, 257 
(Iowa 2010) (“We apply the workers' compensation statute broadly and 
liberally in keeping with its humanitarian objective....”); Griffin Pipe Prods. 
Co. v. Guarino, 663 N.W.2d 862, 865 (Iowa 2003) (“[T]he primary purpose 
of chapter 85 is to benefit the worker and so we interpret this law liberally 
in favor of the employee.”).  This liberal construction, however, cannot be 
performed in a vacuum.  As discussed above, several of the principles of 
statutory construction indicate the legislature did not intend to limit the 
definition of “shoulder” under section 85.34(2)(n) to the glenohumeral joint.  
For these reasons, I conclude “shoulder” under section 85.34(2)(n) is not 
limited to the glenohumeral joint. 
Claimant’s injury in this case was to the infraspinatus muscle.  As 
discussed, the infraspinatus is part of the rotator cuff, and the rotator cuff’s 
main function is to stabilize the ball-and-socket joint.  As noted by both Dr. 
Bansal and Dr. Bolda, the rotator cuff is generally proximal to the joint.  
However, because the rotator cuff is essential to the function of the 
glenohumeral joint, it seems arbitrary to exclude it from the definition of 
“shoulder” under section 85.34(2)(n) simply because it “originates on the 
scapula, which is proximal to the glenohumeral joint for the most part.” 
(Def. Ex. A, [Depo. Tr., 27]).  In other words, being proximal to the joint 
should not render the muscle automatically distinct. 

SPRINGER V. HOLY FAMILY CATHOLIC SCHOOLS 
Page 8 
 
 
Given the entwinement of the glenohumeral joint and the muscles that 
make up the rotator cuff, including the infraspinatus, and the importance of 
the rotator cuff to the function of the joint, I find the muscles that make up 
the rotator cuff are included within the definition of “shoulder” under 
section 85.34(2)(n).  Thus, I find claimant’s injury to her infraspinatus 
should be compensated as a shoulder under section 85.34(2)(n).  The 
deputy commissioner’s determination that claimant’s infraspinatus injury is 
a whole body injury that should be compensated industrially under section 
85.34(2)(v) is therefore respectfully reversed.  
Deng, at 10-11. 
The second is Chavez v. MS Technology, LLC, File No. 5066270 (App. 
September 30, 2020), which was filed the day after Deng.  In Chavez, the 
Commissioner affirmed his legal holding in Deng and applied his interpretation to the 
various impairments and disabilities sustained by the claimant in that case. 
Again, as explained in Dr. Peterson’s operative note, claimant’s 
subacromial decompression was performed to remove scar tissue and 
fraying between the supraspinatus and the underside of the acromion.  As 
discussed above, the acromion forms part of the socket and helps protect 
the glenoid cavity, and as such, I found it is closely interconnected with the 
glenohumeral joint in both location and function.  And as discussed in 
Deng, I found the supraspinatus - a muscle that forms the rotator cuff - to 
be similarly entwined with the glenohumeral joint.  Thus, claimant’s 
subacromial decompression impacted two anatomical parts that are 
essential to the functioning of the glenohumeral joint; in fact, the 
procedure was actually performed to improve the function of the joint.  As 
such, I find any disability resulting from her subacromial decompression 
should be compensated as a shoulder under section 85.34(2)(n).  
I therefore find none of claimant’s injuries are compensable as 
unscheduled, whole body injuries under section 85.34(2)(v).  The deputy 
commissioner’s finding that claimant sustained an injury to her body as a 
whole is therefore respectfully reversed. 
Chavez, at 6. 
The key holdings of Deng and Chavez are: 
1. The definition of a “shoulder” is ambiguous in Section 85.34(2)(n).  Deng, at 
4. 
2. There is no “ordinary” meaning of the word shoulder.  Deng, at 5. 
3. The appropriate way to interpret the statute is to examine the legislative 
history.  Deng, at 5. 

SPRINGER V. HOLY FAMILY CATHOLIC SCHOOLS 
Page 9 
 
 
4. The well-established history of “liberal construction” of workers’ compensation 
statutes is inapplicable here because to do so would be to ignore the 
legislature’s intent to limit compensation to injured workers in the 2017 
amendments.1  Deng, at 10-11. 
5. The legislature did not intend to limit the definition of a “shoulder” to the 
glenohumeral joint.  Rather, the legislature intended to include the 
entwinement of the glenohumeral joint and the muscles that make up the 
rotator cuff.  Deng, at 11. 
Both Chavez and Deng were affirmed by the Iowa Supreme Court. Chavez v. MS 
Technology, LLC, 972 N.W.2d 662 (April 1, 2022); Deng v. Farmland Foods, Inc., 972 
N.W.2d 727 (April 1, 2022)  The principles in Chavez and Deng were reaffirmed and 
expanded by the Iowa Supreme Court in Bridgestone Americas, Inc. v. Anderson, 4 
N.W.3d 676 (March 29, 2024).  In fact, the Supreme Court decision in Anderson 
specifically addresses and defeats claimant’s second theory, namely that an injury to a 
shoulder plus a scheduled member places the disability into the body as a whole. 
Therefore, the remaining issue is whether the uncontroverted medical opinion of 
the treating surgeon, Dr. Hart, should lead to a finding that the injury is to Mr. Springer’s 
whole body, rather than isolated to his shoulder.  Dr. Hart, the company’s authorized 
treating surgeon, described the screws which were inserted into the scapula ranged 
anywhere from 1 to 4 inches deep.  He opined that this placed the situs of the disability 
beyond the immediate shoulder region into Mr. Springer’s whole body.  The procedure 
“required fixation well into his whole body via the scapula.  This is why I believe that 
both in Jeffrey Springer’s case, and in any patient’s case, involving this procedure, the 
injury should be considered as a whole-body condition, rather than limited to the 
shoulder.”  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 94)  While this is a hybrid medical/legal opinion, I cannot ignore 
it, particularly since there is no evidence in this record to counter it.  This opinion was 
bolstered and supported by claimant’s expert Dr. Sassman, who described the 
procedure in detail in her hearing testimony.  (Tr., pp. 92-95) 
None of the aforementioned cases have involved a total shoulder replacement as 
this case does.  There are, however, two arbitration decisions which address the issue.  
One stands for proposition that a total shoulder replacement is limited to evaluation 
                                                 
1 The fundamental guiding principle of statutory construction in a workers’ compensation case is 
that the statute is to be interpreted liberally in favor of the injured worker and their family.  “Any doubt in 
its construction is thus resolved in favor of the employee.”  Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W. 2d 405, 407 (Iowa 
1986). Workers’ compensation laws are to be construed in favor of the injured worker. Myers. v. F.C.A. 
Services, Inc., 592 N.W.2d 354, 356 (Iowa 1999).  The beneficent purpose is not to be defeated by 
reading something into the statute that is not there. Cedar Rapids Community School v. Cady, 278 
N.W.2d 298 (Iowa 1979).  This, combined with the legal principle that the legislature is presumed to know 
the prior construction of the law. State ex rel. Palmer v. Board of Supervisors of Polk County, 365 N.W.2d 
35, 37 (Iowa 1985), would lead me to side with the claimant in this case.  This, however, is not what the 
Commissioner held.  Deng and Chavez are binding precedent. 

SPRINGER V. HOLY FAMILY CATHOLIC SCHOOLS 
Page 10 
 
 
under subsection (n).  Steahr v. East Penn Manufacturing Co., File No. 20700328.01 
(Arb October 18, 2021).  This case is not directly on point, and it is not binding authority.  
In Steahr, there is no medical opinion such as that of Dr. Hart.  The second case held 
the opposite.  In Bolinger v. Trillium Healthcare Group, File No. 5060865 (Arb June 17, 
2021), the deputy held that a reverse total shoulder replacement is assessed to the 
body as a whole.  In Bolinger, the claimant’s expert opined that the screws were fixed 
deep into the scapula, noting that the disability extended into the injured worker’s back. 
The evidence in this case is that Mr. Springer has fixation screws which extend 
up to four inches deep into his scapula.  Both Dr. Hart and Dr. Sassman have opined 
that the nature of the disability extends into Mr. Springer’s whole body, not just his 
shoulder.  The question has to be asked, how deep into an injured worker’s whole body 
must a condition extend beyond the immediate shoulder area before the disability is 
deemed to his whole body? 
The defendants have provided no expert testimony to rebut these opinions. 
Looking specifically at the facts of this case, I find that Mr. Springer’s disability 
extends into his body as a whole and should be evaluated under subsection (v). 
 
Since the disability is not isolated to Mr. Springer’s shoulder, the assessment of 
disability is for loss of earning capacity. 
 Compensation for permanent partial disability under Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v) is: 
paid during the number of weeks in relation to five hundred weeks as the 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the disability 
bears in relation to the earning capacity that the employee possessed 
when the injury occurred.  A determination of the reduction in the 
employee’s earning capacity caused by the disability shall take into 
account the permanent partial disability of the employee and the number 
of years in the future it was reasonably anticipated that the employee 
would work at the time of injury. 
The assessment of how disability caused by work injuries impact a claimant’s earning 
capacity is based on multiple factors: functional disability, age, education, qualifications, 
work experience, inability to engage in similar employment, earnings before and after 
the injury, motivation to work, personal characteristics of the claimant, the claimant’s 
inability because of the injury to engage in employment for which the claimant is fitted, 
and the employer’s inability to accommodate the claimant’s functional limitations. Neal 
v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 526 (Iowa 2012); IBP, Inc. v. Al-Gharib, 604 
N.W.2d 621, 632–33 (Iowa 2000); Ehlinger v. State, 237 N.W.2d 784, 792 (Iowa 1976). 
In Guyton v. Irving Jensen Co., 373 N.W.2d 101 (Iowa 1985), the Iowa court 
formally adopted the “odd-lot doctrine.”  Under that doctrine a worker becomes an 
odd-lot employee when an injury makes the worker incapable of obtaining employment 

SPRINGER V. HOLY FAMILY CATHOLIC SCHOOLS 
Page 11 
 
 
in any well-known branch of the labor market.  An odd-lot worker is thus totally disabled 
if the only services the worker can perform are “so limited in quality, dependability, or 
quantity that a reasonably stable market for them does not exist.”  Id., at 105. 
Under the odd-lot doctrine, the burden of persuasion on the issue of industrial 
disability always remains with the worker.  Nevertheless, when a worker makes a prima 
facie case of total disability by producing substantial evidence that the worker is not 
employable in the competitive labor market, the burden to produce evidence showing 
availability of suitable employment shifts to the employer.  If the employer fails to 
produce such evidence and the trier of facts finds the worker does fall in the odd-lot 
category, the worker is entitled to a finding of total disability.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 
106.  Factors to be considered in determining whether a worker is an odd-lot employee 
include the worker’s reasonable but unsuccessful effort to find steady employment, 
vocational or other expert evidence demonstrating suitable work is not available for the 
worker, the extent of the worker’s physical impairment, intelligence, education, age, 
training, and potential for retraining.  No factor is necessarily dispositive on the issue.  
Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258 (Iowa 1995).  Even under the 
odd-lot doctrine, the trier of fact is free to determine the weight and credibility of 
evidence in determining whether the worker’s burden of persuasion has been carried, 
and only in an exceptional case would evidence be sufficiently strong as to compel a 
finding of total disability as a matter of law.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 106. 
Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness.  Permanent total 
disability occurs where the injury wholly disables the employee from performing work 
that the employee's experience, training, education, intelligence, and physical capacities 
would otherwise permit the employee to perform.  See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 
288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Diederich v. Tri-City R. Co., 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 
(1935). 
Claimant has alleged permanent total disability and has asserted odd-lot.  I find 
that claimant has failed to meet his burden of proof that he is permanently and totally 
disabled, including the burden shifting analysis under odd-lot.  A greater weight of 
evidence supports a finding that Mr. Springer likely could have performed some type of 
employment.  It likely would have been low paying, unskilled, entry-level type work. 
I have considered all of the relevant factors of industrial disability. In addition, I 
have factored including the fact that Mr. Springer was already near the age which he 
planned to retire.  Specifically, his disability would be slightly higher but for the age 
provisions of subsection (v).  (Tr., p. 59)  Mr. Springer was 68 years old at the time of 
hearing.  He had not worked for several years and after a period of time looking for jobs, 
he testified honestly that he now considers himself to be “retired.”  (Tr., p. 65)  He is a 
high school graduate with little or no post-school training.  His relevant work history was 
primarily in un-skilled or semi-skilled manual labor jobs.  (Tr., pp. 11-17)  His impairment 
is primarily in his shoulder, however, it impacts his arm and extends deep into his 
scapula on the side of his body as a whole.  His work-connected impairment is severe 
as documented by both Dr. Hart and Dr. Sassman.  Dr. Hart concluded he had 
sustained a 19 percent whole body impairment.  Dr. Sassman opined it was 35 percent.  

SPRINGER V. HOLY FAMILY CATHOLIC SCHOOLS 
Page 12 
 
 
(Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 42-43)  I adopt Dr. Hart’s restrictions as a reasonable opinion related to 
restrictions.  He is limited to lifting 5 pounds, no reaching, pushing, pulling, overhead or 
repetitive movements.  Must work with his left arm at his side.  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 88)  He was 
unable to continue performing the heavier job duties of a custodian and was terminated.  
He is unable to perform most of his relevant prior employment. 
I find that claimant has demonstrated a 60 percent loss of earning capacity 
resulting from his disability.  I therefore conclude that he is entitled to 300 weeks of 
compensation commencing on December 5, 2018. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay the claimant three hundred (300) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits at the rate of three hundred seventy-two and 77/100 dollars 
($372.77) per week from December 5, 2018. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall be given credit for the 128 weeks previously paid as set forth in 
the Hearing Report. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants as set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 3. 
Signed and filed this _21st __ day of May, 2024. 
 
 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Mark Sullivan (via WCES) 
 
Christopher Fry (via WCES) 

SPRINGER V. HOLY FAMILY CATHOLIC SCHOOLS 
Page 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
