Case Number: 19006218.01
Case Title:  ARMSTRONG, MICHAEL V. SSW HOLDING COMPANY, INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Armstrong Michael-19006218.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MICHAEL ARMSTRONG, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
              File No. 19006218.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          
COLLIS, LLC/SSW HOLDING CO. INC.,   : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                        
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SAFETY NATIONAL CASUALTY  
  : 
CORPORATION, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
  Head Notes: 1402.40; 1803; 1803.1; 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
  2601.10 
 
Defendants. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Michael Armstrong filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against Collis, LLC/SSW Holding Company, Inc., employer, and 
Safety National Casualty Corporation, insurance carrier, for an accepted work injury 
date of June 4, 2019.  The case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing 
on October 20, 2020. This case was scheduled to be an in-person hearing occurring in 
Davenport. However, due to the outbreak of a pandemic in Iowa, the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner ordered all hearings to occur via video means, using 
CourtCall. Accordingly, this case proceeded to a live video hearing via CourtCall with all 
parties and the court reporter appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded without 
significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 6 and Claimant’s 
Exhibits 1 through 7. Defendants did not submit any additional exhibits. 
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. Deborah Bianchi testified on behalf of 
defendants. The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Aug-18  13:19:14     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

ARMSTRONG V. COLLIS, LLC/SSW HOLDING CO., INC. 
Page 2 
 
on October 20, 2020. The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on December 4, 2020, 
and the case was considered fully submitted on that date. 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
Whether claimant’s accepted work injury is limited to the shoulder or extends 
to the body as a whole; 
2. 
The extent of claimant’s permanent partial disability; 
3. 
Payment of certain medical bills. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
his demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 54-year old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
18) He is married and lives with his wife in Clinton, Iowa. (Tr., p. 9) Claimant attended 
high school until the 12th grade, but did not graduate. (Tr., p.  10) He later obtained a 
GED. (Tr., p. 11) He has also taken some courses online, but does not have a college 
degree. He has received some on-the-job training involving truck-driving and 
“blueprints.” (Tr., p. 11) 
 
Claimant’s prior work history mainly involves physical labor. From 1996 until 
1998 claimant worked for Jetter Hauling, essentially as a general laborer. (Tr., pp. 15-
16) At some point later claimant worked for Hy-Vee as a stocker, which required lifting 
heavy boxes. (Tr., p. 16) Claimant also worked for Pallet Recovery, which involved 
pulling pallets off a trailer and going through them to find the ones that were good. (Tr., 
p. 17) Claimant then spent some time in prison between 2005 and 2012. (Tr., pp. 18-19) 
When he was released, he went to work for Molded Fibers, where his job was again as 
a laborer, working on lines making egg crates. (Tr., p. 17) Claimant said that job was not 
as physical. He worked there until he started working for defendant employer.  
 
At the time of hearing, Claimant had worked for defendant employer for almost 6 
years, meaning he started there in 2015. (Tr., p. 12) Claimant testified that his job at 
Collis is much better than his prior job at Molded Fibers, and he is happy with his 
employer. (Tr., pp. 19-20) Prior to his injury, claimant worked as a general laborer in 
Building 2, which is essentially a glass plant. (Tr., pp. 12; 58) His job initially was to load 
and unload trucks, work in the warehouse, pick up scrap, and complete other tasks as 
requested. (Tr., p. 13) On the date of injury, June 4, 2019, claimant was making $13.87 

ARMSTRONG V. COLLIS, LLC/SSW HOLDING CO., INC. 
Page 3 
 
per hour, and was a “Grade 7” employee. (Tr., pp. 52; 54-55; 60)1 Claimant worked 40-
hours per week, and did not work overtime. (Tr., pp. 15; 22)  
 
Claimant testified that he injured his right shoulder while working on June 4, 
2019. (Tr., p. 21) He had been asked to throw away several boxes that mainly 
contained scrap glass. (Tr., p. 21) He asked for someone to assist him, but no one was 
available so he had to do it alone. He testified that it was about “20 boxes, 5 to 6 or 7 
skids, couple of pink racks, mostly glass.” (Tr., p. 21) He said all of it was pretty heavy. 
As he got toward the end, his right shoulder began to tighten up, but it did not hurt and 
he could still move it, so he did not think much of it at the time. (Tr., pp. 21-22) He 
finished his shift and went home, where he showered and laid down to relax. (Tr., p. 22) 
It was at this point his shoulder began throbbing, and claimant’s wife brought him 
ibuprofen and ice. (Tr., pp. 22-23) The next morning, his shoulder hurt worse, so he 
reported the injury to his employer. (Tr., p. 23)  
 
Claimant was eventually sent to Medical Associates on June 18, 2019. (Joint 
Exhibit 1, p. 1) At that time he reported pain that was “20 on a 0-to-10 scale.” He was 
prescribed medications, given a sling, and referred to orthopedics. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 1) He 
was also placed on work restrictions of no use of the right arm. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 3) 
 
Claimant saw Xerxes R. Colah, M.D., on June 19, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 5) Dr. 
Colah noted claimant had no prior history of right shoulder pain or issues, but did have a 
prior left shoulder injury, which resulted in surgery. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 5; see also Tr., pp. 31-
32) On physical exam, Dr. Colah noted his examination was limited due to “marked 
guarding the shoulder and associated pain;” however, he was “able to coax the 
shoulder through almost a full range of motion.” (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 6) X-rays performed that 
day showed severe osteoarthritis of the acromioclavicular joint, as well as subacromial 
bursitis of the right shoulder joint. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 6) Dr. Colah recommended an injection, 
which was performed that day, and referred claimant for physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 
6-7)  
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Colah on June 26, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 10) While the 
injection had provided him with short-term relief, his pain had returned. He continued 
using his sling at that time, and “guards and grimaces with any attempts to even 
passively attempt to take the shoulder through a range of motion.” (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 11) He 
had not yet started physical therapy, so Dr. Colah showed him some exercises to do in 
the meantime. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 11) Dr. Colah noted he may consider an MRI if claimant’s 
condition did not improve with physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 11) 
 
Claimant next returned on July 3, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 15) At that time he had only 
had one physical therapy session. He continued to wear a sling. Dr. Colah advised him 
                                                                 
1 Claimant initially testified he was making $14.27 per hour on the date of injury. (Tr., p. 14) On cross -
examination, he was reminded that he received a raise after the date of injury, and was making $13.87 
per hour on the date of injury. (Tr., p. 52) Claimant indicated he had forgotten about the raise and was not 
attempting to deceive anyone with his prior testimony. (Tr., p. 53) The undersigned has no reason to 
doubt this, and accepts that claimant forgot about the raise prior to being reminded on cross-examination. 

ARMSTRONG V. COLLIS, LLC/SSW HOLDING CO., INC. 
Page 4 
 
to consider discontinuing the sling, as it might contribute further to his shoulder stiffness. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 17) He was instructed to continue with physical therapy, and an MRI was 
ordered. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 17) At his next follow-up on July 10, 2019, he continued to wear 
the sling and had been attending physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 20-23)  
 
Claimant had an MRI of the right shoulder on July 15, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 87-88) 
He returned to Dr. Colah on July 17, 2019, to discuss the results. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 25) Dr. 
Colah’s assessment after review of the MRI results was superior glenoid labrum lesion; 
arthritis of right acromioclavicular joint; and tendinitis of right rotator cuff. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 
27) Dr. Colah recommended a referral to a shoulder specialist. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 28) 
 
Claimant was referred to Abdullah Foad, M.D., who he saw on July 24, 2019. (Jt. 
Ex. 4, p. 49) Dr. Foad examined claimant and reviewed the MRI. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 49) He 
noted that claimant exhibited significant pain behaviors. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 49-50) He 
recommended that claimant discontinue using the shoulder sling, as he believed that 
was causing further stiffness and pain. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 50) He offered additional physical 
therapy, which claimant declined as he felt his prior physical therapy made his 
symptoms worse. Dr. Foad instead provided claimant with a home exercise program 
and a steroid injection. Claimant asked to be released from work restrictions, so Dr. 
Foad allowed him to return to full duty. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 50; 53) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Foad on August 14, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 54) The steroid 
injection did not help, and claimant was still demonstrating “significant pain behaviors,” 
in which his subjective complaints far outweigh his objective findings. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 54-
55) Dr. Foad noted that he was “reluctant” to offer surgery until claimant had a second 
opinion. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 55) 
 
Claimant was sent for a second opinion at University of Iowa Health Care, where 
he saw Matthew J. Bollier, M.D. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 91) He saw Dr. Bollier on August 29, 2019, 
who noted claimant reported pain at a level 10 of 10. After his examination, Dr. Bollier’s 
assessment was that the reported work incident was a significant factor in causing the 
current symptoms and need for treatment. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 93) He noted that although the 
MRI was negative for structural tears, the work injury was a significant factor in causing 
the frozen shoulder and aggravating the AC joint osteoarthritis. Dr. Bollier opined that 
the “most reliable and quickest return to work treatment option” would be surgery. (Jt. 
Ex. 6, p. 93) He recommended right shoulder arthroscopic biceps tenotomy, open vs. 
arthroscopic distal clavicle excision, lysis of adhesions, manipulation, decompression, 
and possible repair. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 94) 
 
Claimant returned to see Dr. Foad on September 18, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 58) Dr. 
Foad noted claimant said he had 10 of 10 pain all of the time and cannot move his 
shoulder. He noted very limited range of motion. Dr. Foad explained to claimant that “he 
may not be the best candidate [for surgery] and that there is a strong possibility that he 
may not get significant improvement with surgical intervention as he has significant pain 
issues that may be nonorganic.” (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 58-59) Claimant was insistent on wanting 
to proceed with surgery, so Dr. Foad agreed. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 59) 

ARMSTRONG V. COLLIS, LLC/SSW HOLDING CO., INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
Surgery took place on September 30, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 62) The postoperative 
diagnosis was right shoulder acromioclavicular joint impingement with inferior directed 
bone spur causing mass effect; right shoulder anterior to posterior superior labral tear; 
and right shoulder complex tear of anterior-superior labrum. There was no evidence of 
adhesive capsulitis, and the rotator cuff was intact. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 62) Dr. Foad noted that 
once claimant was under anesthesia, he had full passive range of motion with forward 
flexion and abduction, 90 degrees of external rotation and 85 degrees of internal 
rotation with his shoulder abducted 90 degrees. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 63) He noted fluid range of 
motion during the entire examination under anesthesia, with normal blood pressure and 
heart rate. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 63) Dr. Foad performed arthroscopic extensive glenohumeral 
joint debridement of superior labral tear, including biceps tenolysis, arthroscopic 
subacromial bursectomy and decompression, and arthroscopically assisted open distal 
clavicle excision. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 62) 
 
Claimant’s first postoperative visit was October 2, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 66) He 
started physical therapy on October 3, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 37) When he returned to Dr. 
Foad on November 12, 2019, he continued to voice significant pain and limitations with 
activities of daily living. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 74) He stated that he was better than he was 
before surgery, and attributed his slow progress to age. Dr. Foad noted difficulties and 
significant pain behaviors with attempts at range of motion. He again noted that the 
objective findings did not correlate with claimant’s subjective complaints, and that he 
was progressing much slower than expected. He continued claimant’s physical therapy. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 74-75) 
 
At claimant’s next follow-up visit on January 7, 2020, he continued to complain of 
sharp pain, and said his pain was about the same as it was prior to surgery. (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 79) Claimant’s physical therapist was with him at the appointment, and noted that he 
was not making significant progress due to pain. Dr. Foad again noted that claimant’s 
objective findings did not correlate with his subjective complaints, and showed claimant 
the arthroscopy pictures and reminded him that they were able to get full passive range 
of motion under anesthesia. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 79) Dr. Foad noted that it was difficult to 
determine exactly where claimant’s pain was coming from, so he offered a steroid 
injection into the glenohumeral joint for both diagnostic and therapeutic reasons. (Jt. Ex. 
4, p. 79) 
 
Following the injection, claimant continued with physical therapy, and at his next 
visit with Dr. Foad on January 28, 2020, he reported doing much better. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 83) 
On physical examination, he had much improved range of motion, and fewer pain 
behaviors than he had in the past. Physical therapy records from the same time frame 
also indicate that claimant had significantly improved following the steroid injection. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, pp. 40-41) Dr. Foad placed claimant at maximum medical improvement (MMI) on 
that date, and released him to work with no restrictions. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 83) 
 
Dr. Foad provided an impairment rating on February 28, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 86) 
Using the fifth edition of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 

ARMSTRONG V. COLLIS, LLC/SSW HOLDING CO., INC. 
Page 6 
 
Dr. Foad provided 5 percent of the right upper extremity for range of motion deficits, and 
10 percent for the distal clavicle excision. Combined, he provided a rating of 9 percent 
of the whole person. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 86) In reviewing the AMA Guides, I note that 9 percent 
of the whole person converts to 15 percent of the upper extremity. See AMA Guides to 
the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Table 16-3, p. 439. 
 
Claimant returned to his regular work position with the same job duties and the 
same pay following his release. However, in March of 2020, when the pandemic began, 
claimant was laid off for a period of time. (Tr., p. 14) Deborah Bianchi testified at hearing 
on behalf of the employer. Ms. Bianchi is the human resources manager for Collis, the 
employer. (Tr., p. 56) Ms. Bianchi’s testimony was consistent, and her demeanor at the 
time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt her veracity. Ms. Bianchi is 
found credible. 
 
Ms. Bianchi has been the human resources manager at Collis for 30 years. (Tr., 
p. 57) She testified that at the time of claimant’s injury, he was making $13.87 per hour. 
(Tr., p. 57) He was working as a Grade 7 general laborer in building 2, which is mainly a 
“glass plant.” (Tr., pp. 57-58) In October of 2019, after the date of injury, all employees, 
including claimant, received a 40-cent wage increase. (Tr., p. 58) Due to the outbreak of 
the coronavirus pandemic, about 80 employees were laid off, including claimant. (Tr., p. 
59) Claimant was on voluntary layoff from March 31, 2020, until July 19, 2020. (Tr., p. 
59) When he was recalled to work, his position was resistance welder operator, which is 
a grade 6 position. (Tr., pp. 59-61) At the time of hearing, due to a decrease in sales, 
Collis no longer had any employees in the general labor position. (Tr., p. 59) If and 
when sales increase, claimant will have the opportunity to bid back into his prior position 
as general laborer. (Tr., pp. 59-60) At the time of hearing, claimant was making $13.90 
per hour as a grade 6 employee. (Tr., p. 60) 
 
Claimant attended an independent medical evaluation (IME) with Richard L. 
Kreiter, M.D., on June 3, 2020. (Claimant’s Exhibit 1, p. 1) At the time of the IME, 
claimant was still on layoff, and was not working. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4) Claimant told Dr. 
Kreiter that he still experienced shoulder stiffness in the mornings, and had difficulty 
sleeping on the right side. He continued to perform his home exercise program and 
stretching exercises. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4) He continued to have weakness and had trouble 
lifting on the right side and throwing. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4) He noted a dull ache most of the 
time in the shoulder, which could go up to “almost a 10/10” with vigorous activity. He 
was not able to perform any overhead work.  
 
On physical examination, Dr. Kreiter noted some tenderness around the lateral 
clavicle and subacromial area of his right shoulder. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4) He noted some 
deficits in range of motion, but good strength. Dr. Kreiter’s impression was “adhesive 
capsulitis of the right shoulder, post-resection lateral clavicle, labral debridement and 
biceps tenodesis, partial cuff tear, mild anterior instability with chronic pain/weakness.” 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4)  
 

ARMSTRONG V. COLLIS, LLC/SSW HOLDING CO., INC. 
Page 7 
 
Dr. Kreiter provided an impairment rating. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) Dr. Kreiter assigned 13 
percent upper extremity impairment secondary to decreased range of motion; 10 
percent related to the clavicle resection; and 6 percent related to what Dr. Kreiter opined 
was an occult pattern of instability. The total combined impairment, then, was 27 
percent of the upper extremity, which converts to 16 percent of the whole person. (Cl. 
Ex. 1, p. 1) Dr. Kreiter also recommended permanent restrictions of very limited, if any, 
overhead work; no throwing; lifting with the right arm to the side primarily and not lifting 
with the arm away from the body; lifting two-handed with the arms to the side from floor 
to bench up to 35 pounds; and avoiding excessive pulling with the right arm such as 
starting a power mower or chain saw. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) With respect to future medical 
treatment, Dr. Kreiter did not believe any additional surgery was needed but noted that 
anti-inflammatory medications and occasional injections may be needed. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 
2) 
 
There are two main differences between the impairment ratings provided by Dr. 
Foad and Dr. Kreiter. The first relates to range of motion. At the time of Dr. Foad’s last 
examination on January 28, 2020, claimant demonstrated active forward flexion to 134 
degrees, active abduction to 130 degrees, full extension, and 75/85 degrees of 
internal/external rotation. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 83, 86) This is consistent with the physical 
therapy records, which had been showing improvement. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 39-41) However, 
at Dr. Kreiter’s examination about 4 months later, his range of motion was quite 
diminished. Forward flexion was 110 degrees, abduction to 90 degrees, and 40/45 
degrees of internal/external rotation. (Cl. Ex. 1., p. 4) 
 
There is no explanation for the decrease in claimant’s range of motion between 
the two examinations. It is noted throughout Dr. Foad’s records that claimant 
consistently exhibited pain behaviors that did not correlate with the objective findings. 
Dr. Foad was also able to obtain full passive range of motion with normal blood 
pressure and heart rate during the examination under anesthesia. Further, Dr. Foad 
found no evidence of adhesive capsulitis during surgery, contrary to Dr. Kreiter’s 
diagnosis. There was no contraction of the rotator interval, and the rotator cuff was 
intact - again, contrary to Dr. Kreiter’s diagnosis. 
 
The second difference in the impairment ratings comes from Dr. Kreiter’s addition 
of 6 percent impairment related to “symptomatic shoulder instability patterns.” (Cl. Ex. 1, 
p. 1) Dr. Kreiter cited to page 505, table 16-26 of the AMA Guides for this portion of the 
rating. I note, however, that the Guides specifically state that “[s]houlder instability, 
recurrent subluxation, or dislocation must be adequately documented through a 
complete medical history, physical examination, and radiographic findings.” (AMA 
Guides, p. 504) (emphasis in original). It further states that an individual’s “complaint of 
feeling or fearing that a joint is ‘popping’ or ‘going out of place’ without adequate clinical 
findings is not a basis for permanent impairment rating.” Id. The only test Dr. Kreiter 
noted with respect to instability is the apprehension test, which he stated did not cause 
claimant’s shoulder to dislocate, but gave him the feeling that something was about to 
“go out.” (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) The Guides specifically state that feeling or fear alone is not 
enough for permanent impairment without adequate clinical findings. Given that there 

ARMSTRONG V. COLLIS, LLC/SSW HOLDING CO., INC. 
Page 8 
 
are no medical records that indicate claimant had any instability issues, or had prior 
dislocations, Dr. Kreiter’s additional 6 percent is not supported. 
 
Given these findings, claimant’s testimony, and the remainder of the medical 
evidence in the record, I find Dr. Foad’s rating to be the most convincing. He was the 
treating surgeon who actually inspected claimant’s shoulder intraoperatively and is 
familiar with claimant’s injury, treatment, and recovery. Dr. Foad examined claimant 
several times over the course of his treatment, while Dr. Kreiter examined him once for 
the purposes of litigation. Having found Dr. Foad’s rating most convincing, I find that 
claimant has sustained 15 percent permanent partial disability to the right shoulder. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
 
As an initial matter, it should be noted that claimant’s petition alleged injuries to 
his back, neck, right shoulder, and right arm. Defendants admitted the right shoulder 
injury, but denied the other body parts. Claimant presented no evidence at hearing 
regarding his alleged back, neck, or right arm injuries, and appears to have conceded 
that his only compensable injury was to his right shoulder. As such, I find that claimant 
sustained an injury to his right shoulder arising out of and in the course of his 
employment on June 4, 2019, for which defendants have accepted liability. 
 
The next issue to determine is whether claimant’s shoulder injury resulted in 
permanent disability to be compensated as a scheduled member pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(n), or to the body as a whole, compensated pursuant to section 
85.34(2)(v). Again, claimant appears to have conceded this issue, as it was not 
addressed in his post-hearing brief. The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not 
established ordinarily has the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the 
evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e). Claimant did not meet his burden to prove that 
his shoulder injury should be compensated under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
Additionally, as defendants correctly point out, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner has recently addressed what constitutes a shoulder under the 2017 
amendments to section 85.34(2). See Deng v. Farmland Foods, Inc., File No. 5061883 
(App. Sept. 29, 2020) and Chavez v. MS Technology, LLC, File No. 5066270 (App. 
Sept. 30, 2020). In Deng, the main issue was whether a rotator cuff injury – specifically 
the infraspinatus - should be compensated as a shoulder under section 85.34(2)(n), or 
as a whole body injury under section 85.34(2)(v). The Commissioner ultimately 
determined that “shoulder” under section 85.34(2)(n) is not limited to the glenohumeral 
joint. The Commissioner also rejected the argument that whatever is proximal to the 
joint should be treated as an unscheduled injury under section 85.34(2)(v). Rather, the 
Commissioner held that given the entwinement of the glenohumeral joint and the 
muscles that make up the rotator cuff and the importance of the rotator cuff to the 
function of the joint, the muscles of the rotator cuff are included within the definition of 
“shoulder” under section 85.34(2)(n). Thus, the claimant’s injury in Deng was 
compensated as a shoulder under section 85.34(2)(n). 

ARMSTRONG V. COLLIS, LLC/SSW HOLDING CO., INC. 
Page 9 
 
 
In Chavez, the claimant had injuries involving her rotator cuff, as well as a labral 
tear and subacromial decompression. Similar to Deng, the Commissioner found that the 
labrum is closely interconnected both in location and function to the glenohumeral joint. 
See Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258, 270 (Iowa 1995), as 
amended on denial of reh'g (Feb. 14, 1996) (quoting Lauhoff Grain Co., 395 N.W.2d at 
839). In fact, like the rotator cuff, the labrum is not only extremely close in proximity to 
the glenohumeral joint (if not wholly contained within the joint space), but it is crucial to 
the proper functioning of the joint. As such the claimant’s labral tear was compensated 
as a shoulder under section 85.34(2)(n). With respect to the subacromial 
decompression, the Commissioner determined that based on the medical definition of 
“acromion,” it both forms part of the shoulder socket and protects the glenoid cavity. 
Therefore, the acromion is closely entwined with the glenohumeral joint both in 
location and function. As such, any disability resulting from a subacromial 
decompression should be compensated as a shoulder under section 85.34(2)(n). 
In this case, claimant’s injury involved acromioclavicular joint impingement with 
an inferior directed bone spur causing mass effect, right shoulder anterior to posterior 
superior labral tear, and right shoulder complex tear of anterior-superior labrum. There 
was no evidence of adhesive capsulitis, and the rotator cuff was intact. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 62) 
Dr. Foad performed arthroscopic extensive glenohumeral joint debridement of superior 
labral tear, including biceps tenolysis, arthroscopic subacromial bursectomy and 
decompression, and arthroscopically assisted open distal clavicle excision. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
62) Based on the Commissioner’s decisions in Deng and Chavez, his injuries must be 
compensated as a shoulder pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n). 
 
The next issue to determine is the extent of claimant’s permanent partial 
disability under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n). Claimant argues that Dr. Kreiter’s 27 
percent impairment rating is more accurate, while defendants argue that Dr. Foad’s 15 
percent rating is entitled to greater weight. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 

ARMSTRONG V. COLLIS, LLC/SSW HOLDING CO., INC. 
Page 10 
 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
After consideration of the impairment ratings, claimant’s testimony, and the 
remainder of the evidence in the record, I found Dr. Foad’s rating to be the most 
convincing. He was the treating surgeon who actually inspected claimant’s shoulder 
intraoperatively and is familiar with claimant’s injury, treatment, and recovery. Dr. Foad 
examined claimant several times over the course of his treatment, while Dr. Kreiter 
examined him once for the purposes of litigation. Additionally, portions of Dr. Kreiter’s 
rating related to range of motion and instability are not supported by the record. Having 
found Dr. Foad’s rating most convincing, I found that claimant has sustained 15 percent 
permanent partial disability to the right shoulder. 
Pursuant to section 85.34(2)(n), the shoulder is compensated based on 400 
weeks of benefits. Therefore, claimant is entitled to a proportional award equivalent to 
15 percent of 400 weeks, which is 60 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n). Benefits commence on the stipulated date of January 
28, 2020. 
The only remaining issue to note involves medical bills that were unpaid at the 
time of hearing. (Cl. Ex. 4, pp. 9-12) Defendants’ counsel indicated at hearing that the 
medical bills were under review, and bills for authorized care would be paid. (Tr., pp. 5-
6) To the extent any medical bills for authorized, causally connected treatment remain 
unpaid, defendants are responsible for payment. 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant sixty (60) weeks of benefits at the stipulated rate 
of three hundred seventy-nine and 98/100 dollars ($379.98), commencing on January 
28, 2020. 
 
Defendants shall be entitled to a credit for all permanent partial disability benefits 
previously paid. 
 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.  
 
 
Defendants are responsible for payment of all authorized, causally connected 
medical care. 
 

ARMSTRONG V. COLLIS, LLC/SSW HOLDING CO., INC. 
Page 11 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this ___18th ____ day of August, 2021. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
M. Leanne Tyler (via WCES) 
Timothy Clausen (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
