Case Number: 19700544.01
Case Title:  LOCKE, JERRY V. CITY OF WATERLOO
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Locke Jerry-19700544.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JERRY LOCKE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                     File No. 19700544.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
CITY OF WATERLOO, IOWA, 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  :       Head Note Nos.:  1803, 1108, 2500 
 
Defendant. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Jerry Locke, filed a petition for arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from the City of Waterloo, a self-insured employer.  The claimant 
was represented by Gary Nelson.  The defendants were represented by Bruce 
Gettman. 
The matter came on for hearing on August 25, 2021, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Court Call 
videoconferencing system.  The voluminous record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 
1 through 15 (350 pages); Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 7 (177 pages); and Defense 
Exhibits A through L (64 pages).  In addition, administrative notice was taken of File No.  
19700544.03, an alternate medical care claim between the same parties.  The claimant 
testified at hearing, in addition to defense witnesses Cheryl Huddleston and Matt 
Boquist.  Stephanie Cousins served as the court reporter.  The matter was fully 
submitted on October 8, 2021 after helpful briefing by the parties. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. The nature and extent of claimant’s permanent disability, including medical 
causation issues regarding some of the claimant’s alleged conditions. 
2. Whether the claimant is entitled to medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 6, under Iowa Code section 85.27.  Defendant contends that such 
expenses were not authorized, were not reasonable and necessary and were 
not causally connected to his stipulated work injury. 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to an independent medical examination (IME) 
under Section 85.39. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Mar-28  15:14:27     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 2 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care. 
5. Costs. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1. The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
2. Claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on October 31, 2018.  Specifically, defendant stipulates that on 
this date, claimant sustained an injury to his low back and has suffered the 
condition of tinnitus. 
3. This injury is a cause of both temporary and permanent disability. 
4. Temporary disability/healing period and medical benefits are no longer in 
dispute. 
5. The commencement date for any permanent disability benefits is May 17, 
2021. 
6. The elements comprising the rate of compensation are all stipulated and the 
parties contend the weekly rate of compensation is $669.06. 
7. Defendant City paid and is entitled to a credit of 34 weeks of compensation 
(permanent partial disability).  In addition defendant has paid medical 
expenses in the amount of $2,527.13 and is entitled to a credit under Section 
85.38(2). 
8. Affirmative defenses have been waived. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Jerry Locke was a 52-year-old married man as of the date of hearing.  
He and his wife live in Evansdale, Iowa.  He obtained his GED in June 1991 and later a 
welding certificate.  He has worked in manual labor positions for his adult life.  Mr. 
Locke testified live and under oath at hearing.  I find his testimony to be credible.  He 
was a reasonably good historian although it is noted he is not a particularly 
sophisticated witness.  His answers were simple.  His testimony is consistent with other 
portions of the record.  There was nothing about his demeanor which caused any 
concern about his truthfulness. 
Since 2013, Mr. Locke worked as an equipment operator for the City of Waterloo.  
On October 31, 2018, Mr. Locke was involved in a rather serious workplace accident.  
The injury itself is stipulated.  The real fighting issue in this case is what conditions were 
caused by this injury.  Mr. Locke was performing normal surveying work when the injury 
occurred.  He testified about the injury at hearing.  “I got hit by a track hoe bucket.”  (Tr., 
p. 16)  He testified that the bucket hit him on the right side of his body and estimated 

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 3 
that it knocked him about 10 to 15 feet.  (Tr., p. 17)  When asked whether he lost 
consciousness, he testified the following: 
A. I’m sure I did, ‘cause I - - I was out.  I mean, I couldn’t hear nothing.  
I couldn’t see nothing.  I couldn’t breathe.  I was regaining my breath when 
I was coming - - starting to come back or whatever, however it works.  And 
then as I - - I just - - I had a hard time.  I couldn’t breathe.  And then I 
ended up - - the ringing in my ears, I couldn’t hear.  It was all like muzzled. 
(Tr., p. 17) 
It is noted that Mr. Locke has experienced pain and various symptoms in parts of 
his body prior to this work injury.  He has experienced neck pain, right shoulder pain 
and low back pain.  He also experienced symptoms related to a hernia injury.  He also 
experienced ringing in his ears following an automobile accident in the 1990’s.  His prior 
medical problems are partially outlined in Joint Exhibits 1 through 3, pages 1 through 
57. 
The City directed Mr. Locke’s medical care the day after the accident.  On 
November 1, 2018, he was sent to Occupational Health in Waterloo, Iowa.  At that time, 
Mr. Locke complained of pain in his neck, right shoulder, chest, right arm, bilateral 
wrists and his right knee.  (Joint Exhibit 4, page 144)  The nurse took an accurate 
history of the injury.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 143)  He was placed on significant medical 
restrictions.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 146)  X-rays were taken of his cervical spine, right shoulder, 
ribs and hip.  (Jt. Ex. 5)  The treatment notes from Occupational Health are a little 
unusual in that they are all hand-written form notes rather than ordinary typed clinical 
notes.  (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 142-158) 
He visited Occupational Health a few times between November 1, 2018, and 
November 15, 2018.  The November 15, 2018, note indicates he saw Kenneth 
McMains, M.D.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 158)  Mr. Locke testified that Dr. McMains told him that he 
[Mr. Locke] had arthritis and workers’ compensation does not cover arthritis.  (Tr., pp. 
20-22)  I find this testimony believable.  Mr. Locke understood this to mean the City 
would not cover his future medical care.  In any event, after two weeks of treatment, Mr. 
Locke testified that his symptoms improved significantly.  In fact, some of his medical 
notes from Occupational Health seem to indicate a complete recovery.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
156)  He was released to return to work without any restrictions at all on November 15, 
2018.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 158) 
Mr. Locke testified credibly, however, that he was, in fact, not completely 
recovered.  He testified that after he returned to work, his symptoms returned, 
particularly as he began performing heavier aspects of his job in the winter months, 
such as sandbagging and plowing snow.  (Tr., pp. 19-20)  There is a letter in evidence 
from Cheryl Huddleston, the Waterloo manager of human resources, which indicates 
that later in 2019, Mr. Locke chose to seek out medical treatment on his own with his 
family physician.  Specifically, he testified that because of his conversations with Dr. 
McMains, he did not believe the City would authorize any additional treatment, so he 
went to his own doctor.  (Tr., p. 20)  Mr. Locke provided an affidavit that he went to his 
family physician, Brian Sankey, D.O., in March 2019.  (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 175)  I cannot find 

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 4 
any corresponding clinical note in the record, however, there is an x-ray report of Mr. 
Locke’s thoracic spine.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 122)  The first note from Dr. Sankey I can find 
related to his work injury is dated June 28, 2019.  The following is documented:  
Subjective patient with chronic history of diagnosed hypothyroidism 
which resulted in his chronic symptoms being treated with levothyroxine 
also hyperlipidemia heartburn chronic back pain works in construction he 
had an accident about 8 months ago that was a Workmen’s Comp. injury 
that is still open but is having worsening pain now he has pain in his upper 
arms bilaterally he also has weakness he has numbness and tingling in 
his hands and arms bilaterally the morning and this did not happen prior to 
his accident at work he also has been having problems with leg pain 
where he will have a sensation of having intense leg cramps in his legs 
bilaterally but when they feels [sic] like there is no mass or muscle spasm. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 63)  Dr. Sankey diagnosed spinal stenosis of cervical and possibly lumbar 
spine.  He recommended diagnostic testing (MRI, EMG), conservative management 
and a referral to a specialist.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 63) 
This examination by Dr. Sankey occurred shortly after Mr. Locke had emailed 
Cheryl Huddleston.  On June 17, 2019, he wrote the following: 
Last fall I was injured on the job when a trackhoe bucket hit me and I 
was seen by the Workman comp doctor and they checked me over and 
sent me home with medication.  Since then I have been experiencing pain 
in same areas and I went to our family doctor and they prescribed me the 
same medications but they work temporarily and now the issues are 
worse and the pills do not seem to be helping.  I have been experiencing 
issues that I have never had before and want to get this checked and 
fixed.  I told the foreman and he said to talk to Tony and today I told Tony 
and he said I had to go to you. 
(Cl. Ex. 4, p. 162)  Ms. Huddleston responded that she had reviewed the request and it 
appeared that he had fully healed back in November 2018.  She asked if something 
happened in the interval.  She concluded, “We don’t normally open up a closed claim 
after that length of time since many things both on and off the job could have occurred 
in a 7-month time frame.”  (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 162)  This email undoubtedly constitutes a 
denial of Mr. Locke’s claim under Iowa law. 
Mr. Locke then went to his appointment with Dr. Sankey on June 28, 2019, which 
resulted in additional treatment through his family clinic which continued through 
October 2019.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 64-85)  He underwent diagnostic testing and a pain 
injection among other conservative treatments.  Most of the treatment focused on his 
low back, but also his neck and extremities.  He was evaluated by Marietta Walsh, D.O., 
on October 29, 2019, specifically for his low back complaints. She took history (noting 
the October 2018 work injury), performed an examination, and reviewed all of the 
radiographic films. She ultimately diagnosed spondylolisthesis.  She recommended 
injections and physical therapy.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 91)  Dr. Walsh continued to treat Mr. 
Locke with conservative treatment for the next several months.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 91-100) 

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 5 
By December 2019, Mr. Locke had retained legal counsel and filed a claim.  His 
attorney wrote to the City requesting treatment.  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 133)  In response, the City 
arranged an appointment with Sarvenaz Jabbari, M.D., on January 8, 2020.  Cheryl 
Huddleston sent Dr. Jabbari a letter asking questions related to medical causation.  (Jt. 
Ex. 4, p. 163)  It is unclear what medical records Dr. Jabbari was able to review, 
however, it appears that she at least reviewed the records of Dr. Walsh.  Dr. Jabbari did 
perform a physical examination and took a history from Mr. Locke at the appointment.  
Dr. Jabbari opined that Mr. Locke was not having any residual symptoms from his work 
injury.  She recommended no further workup and no restrictions.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 164)  She 
provided a diagnosis of arthritis in his shoulder and neck area.  She noted Dr. Walsh’s 
diagnosis of bilateral L5 spondylolisthesis and Grad 2 L5-S1 anterolisthesis.  (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 165)  She opined that this condition preexisted the work injury.  After this evaluation, 
the City did not authorize any additional medical treatment for Mr. Locke and he 
continued to seek out treatment on his own initially with Dr. Walsh.  He was, of course, 
legally entitled to do this since the claim was denied. 
Dr. Walsh continued to treat Mr. Locke conservatively.  In January 2020, she 
noted that he had completed physical therapy, continued to use a TENS unit and has 
undergone two pain injections with limited lasting benefit.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 101)  His 
symptoms at that time, continued to be substantially limiting.  Dr. Walsh continued to 
recommend conservative treatment, however, he again brought up the possibility of 
surgery.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 106)  Thereafter, Mr. Locke sought pain management treatment 
in February 2020.  (Jt. Ex. 10, pp. 190-191; Jt. Ex. 8, p. 181) 
Mr. Locke finally sought out medical treatment at the Mayo Clinic on September 
1, 2020.  Keith Bengston, M.D., took a full history and documented his symptoms 
thoroughly. 
Currently he describes pain in his neck, right shoulder, low back, right 
buttock and right greater than left posterior thigh and calf with nighttime 
cramping in his right calf and foot.  Symptoms are worse with bending, 
lifting, and twisting.  He also has trouble with prolonged standing is limited 
to 10 minutes at a time.  He gets pain with driving greater than 45 minutes.  
He also has intermittent numbness and paresthesias involving both hands 
and this occurs at night, driving and with gripping activities. 
(Jt. Ex. 11, p. 194)  Dr. Bengston diagnosed the following: 
1. Grade 2 L5 on S1 spondylolytic spondylolisthesis with right greater 
than left L5 foraminal stenosis and pseudoclaudication 
2. Mechanical neck pain 
3. Bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome 
4. Right shoulder pain of uncertain etiology 
5. Head injury with subsequent tinnitus 
(Jt. Ex. 11, p. 195)  The plan was to focus on the low back condition first and then revisit 
the other conditions if necessary.  (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 195)  A week later, on September 8, 
2020, Mr. Locke saw Arjun Sebastian, M.D., also at Mayo.  Dr. Sebastian 
recommended fusion surgery to deal with the low back issues.  (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 196)  

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 6 
Surgery was scheduled for October 12, 2020. 
Ms. Huddleston testified that the City did not learn Mr. Locke was seeking 
surgery until shortly before the surgery was scheduled.  (Tr., p. 89)  Once the City 
learned that Mr. Locke was seeking surgery, it reopened the investigation of his claim.  
On September 9, 2020, the day after surgery was recommended, counsel for the City 
wrote to Chad Abernathey, M.D., a well-known back surgeon in Cedar Rapids.  (Jt. Ex. 
12, p. 299)  He set forth the facts of the case from the City’s point of view, enclosed 
numerous appropriate records and asked various medical causation questions.  (Jt. Ex. 
12, p. 300)  Dr. Abernathey apparently examined Mr. Locke at some point and provided 
the following responses: 
1. A component of Mr. Locke’s current low back symptoms could be 
related to his October 31, 2018 work injury depending upon the 
veracity of his oral history.  If the patient was symptom free prior to his 
injury and he subsequently developed persistent back pain following 
the injury, then the two events would be related.  I believe that Mr. 
Locke was destined to undergo a lumbar fusion at L5-S1 based upon 
the presence of long-standing L5-S1 spondylolisthesis and prior 
symptomatology, in spite of any intervening trauma. 
2. I believe Mr. Locke does require surgery to correct the L5-S1 
spondylolisthesis.  The fusion proposed by Dr. Sebastian is 
appropriate. 
(Jt. Ex. 12, p. 302)  On October 2, 2020, defense counsel wrote to claimant’s counsel 
stating that Mr. Locke’s request for surgery was denied based upon Dr. Abernathey’s 
report.  (Def. Ex. F, p. 41) 
The agency record in File No. 19700544.03 reflects that Mr. Locke filed an 
alternate medical care claim on October 2, 2020 and the hearing was scheduled for 
October 14, 2020.  It appears claimant filed immediately once he received the report 
from Dr. Abernathey in an effort to preserve his surgery scheduled for October 14, 
2020.  On October 3, 2020, Dr. Abernathey prepared a “check box” report for claimant’s 
counsel (on firm letterhead).  Claimant’s counsel clearly sought to clarify Dr. 
Abernathey’s opinions.  Dr. Abernathey agreed with the following statements: 
1. Prior to the October 31, 2018 work injury Jerry had some preexisting 
conditions in his lumbar spine. 
2. Even if Jerry did not have the October 31, 2018 work injury, he was 
destined to undergo a lumbar fusion at L5-S1. 
3. Even if the October 31, 2018 work injury did not occur and assuming 
Jerry was destined to undergo a lumbar fusion at L5-S1 in the future, 
that future date was unknown and speculative as of October 31, 2018. 
4. As far as you know, Jerry was performing his assigned work duties 
prior to and on October 31, 2018 without restrictions or limitations. 
5. Even with Jerry’s long-standing preexisting condition at L5-S1, if 
Jerry’s oral history about how the October 31, 2018 work injury 
occurred is accepted as accurate and true, the October 31, 2018 work 
injury was a material contributing factor in: 

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 7 
a. Accelerating the need for the proposed fusion at L5-S1; and  
b. Was a material contributing factor in leading to the proposed L5-
S1 fusion. 
(Jt. Ex. 12, pp. 304-305) 
Around the same time that the City sought to involve the medical expert Dr. 
Abernathey, Mr. Locke sought the involvement of his own expert Farid Manshadi, M.D.  
On September 2, 2020, claimant’s counsel wrote a lengthy letter to Dr. Manshadi 
outlining the underlying facts and attaching numerous appropriate medical records.  (Cl. 
Ex. 1, pp. 1-7)  Supplemental information was sent to Dr. Manshadi over the next few 
days.  (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 8-12)  Dr. Manshadi evaluated Mr. Locke on September 8, 2020.  
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 13)  He prepared an expert report on October 5, 2020.  Dr. Manshadi 
opined that Mr. Locke’s work injury “caused significant aggravation of his pre-existing 
low back pathology.”  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 17)  He opined on Mr. Locke’s other alleged 
conditions as well.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 18)  Specifically, he opined the shoulder condition 
(impingement), neck pain and depression were all connected to the work injury.  (Jt. Ex. 
1, p. 18) 
On October 12, 2020, Mr. Locke underwent the fusion surgery at the Mayo Clinic.  
(Jt. Ex. 11, pp. 201-202)  On October 12, 2020, the same day, Dr. Abernathey then 
clarified in a similar “check box” report for defense counsel.  He opined the surgery was 
not urgent and he could wait until Mr. Locke was evaluated at the University of Iowa 
Hospitals and Clinics.  (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 306) 
On October 13, 2020, the City filed a formal answer which, for the first time, 
formally admitted liability on the claim.  It is important to note that this was the first time 
in this claim that the City had ever formally admitted liability for any ongoing low back 
condition.  The City had previously denied liability on the claim on at least two prior 
occasions.  The answer stated that the City admits liability for the low back claim but 
denies “responsibility for the surgery” at Mayo Clinic because the City had never 
authorized such treatment.  (Def. Answer)  On October 8, 2020, claimant’s counsel 
again wrote to defense counsel requesting treatment, not just for the low back but for 
the neck, right shoulder and tinnitus.  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 134)  On October 9, 2020, the City 
responded to claimant’s counsel indicating the intent to admit liability for his low back 
and asking Mr. Locke to cancel his surgery.   
The alternate medical care hearing was held on October 14, 2020.  Claimant did 
not participate in the hearing as he was still recovering from his surgery.  He was not 
discharged from Mayo until October 15, 2020.  Counsel presented exhibits and made 
arguments in this recorded hearing.  On October 15, 2020, I awarded alternate medical 
care to the claimant, finding the following: 
I find the employer’s attempt to change the care on the eve of surgery 
would unreasonably delay claimant’s treatment.  I find the employer’s 
attempt to change the care on the eve of surgery would cause substantial 
inconvenience to claimant’s treatment.  I find that the employer’s attempt 
to change the care on the eve of surgery would unreasonably interfere  
 
 

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 8 
with claimant’s efforts to receive quality care which is reasonably suited to 
treat his injury. 
(Alternate Care Decision, p. 6)1 
Following the alternate care proceedings, Mr. Locke continued to treat with Mayo 
Clinic.  The follow up treatment since then has been substantial.  (Jt. Ex. 11, pp. 228-
298)  Mr. Locke was off work from the surgery until he was released to modified duty on 
March 1, 2021.  (Jt. Ex. 11, pp. 288-289)  The City paid healing period benefits during 
this timeframe.  On May 26, 2021, Dr. Sebastian released Mr. Locke to return to 
activities as tolerated with no restrictions.  (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 295)  The City accommodated 
Mr. Locke.  Mr. Locke’s supervisor, Matt Boquist, testified live and under oath at 
hearing.  His testimony is highly credible.  He testified that Mr. Locke has been able to 
perform the tasks of an equipment operator, however, he is assigned lighter tasks and 
not asked to perform tasks outside of his abilities.  (Tr., p. 102)  Mr. Locke has 
continued to work for the City with the same or better earnings up through the date of 
hearing, although his position appears to be highly accommodated. 
Mr. Locke testified that, while the surgery improved his symptoms, he is not 
completely better.  He still has significant symptoms from the back injury which he 
described in some detail.  He testified that he has difficulty bending and twisting.  He 
only feels comfortable lifting about 30 pounds.  He has challenges walking on stairs or 
uneven surfaces.  He has difficulty sitting and standing.  His sleep is not good.  (Tr., pp. 
35-39)  He was observed standing for a portion of the hearing. 
Aside from his low back condition, claimant contends that he has suffered 
permanent conditions in various other parts of his body, specifically neck pain, right 
shoulder pain, depression and tinnitus.  He also complains of carpal tunnel symptoms 
and post-surgical erectile dysfunction.  The medical workup for these conditions is not 
nearly as complete as it is with his low back condition, however, there are numerous 
expert medical opinions in the record. 
As set forth above, Dr. Jabbari provided medical causation opinions on January 
8, 2020, which served as a basis for the continued denial of Mr. Locke’s claim.  (Jt. Ex. 
4, p. 164)  In that report she opined that when Mr. Locke was released on November 
15, 2018, all of his work-connected conditions were resolved.  She went on to opine that 
all of her complaints thereafter were merely related to his various underlying 
degenerative conditions.  (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 164-165)  She relied quite heavily on Mr. 
Locke’s November 15, 2019, examination, showing his pain had resolved.  Dr. Jabbari 
updated her opinions in an October 9, 2020, “check box” opinion reports on defense 
counsel letterhead.  She checked “No” to the following questions: 
1. Is Mr. Locke’s neck condition related to the 10/31/18 work injury or Mr. 
Locke’s employment with the City of Waterloo? 
 
 
                                                 
1 It is noted that the City timely sought judicial review of this decision and the matter appears to be pending in 
Black Hawk County District Court. 

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 9 
2. Does Mr. Locke require any present treatment for any present 
treatment for a neck condition that is related to his 10/31/18 work injury 
or Mr. Locke’s employment with the City of Waterloo? 
3. Is Mr. Locke’s right shoulder condition related to the 10/31/18 work 
injury or Mr. Locke’s employment with the City of Waterloo? 
4. Does Mr. Locke require any present treatment for a right shoulder 
condition that is related to his 10/31/18 work injury or Mr. Locke’s 
employment with the City of Waterloo? 
5. Is Mr. Locke’s tinnitus condition related to the 10/31/18 work injury or 
Mr. Locke’s employment with the City of Waterloo? 
6. Does Mr. Locke require any present treatment for the tinnitus condition 
that is related to his 10/31/18 work injury or Mr. Locke’s employment 
with the City of Waterloo? 
(Def. Ex. A, pp. 1-2)  The City repeatedly asked whether any of these conditions were 
“related to” his work injury without ever defining the phrase.  Since it was a “check box” 
report there is really no analysis or explanation for her opinions. 
Dr. Jabbari checked boxes on a subsequent report dated April 29, 2021, where 
she opined that claimant’s carpal tunnel syndrome, mental health conditions and 
erectile dysfunction, were not “causally connected” to Mr. Locke’s work injury.  (Def. Ex. 
A, pp. 3-4)  To summarize, Dr. Jabbari opined that on November 15, 2018, Mr. Locke 
was completely healed from the effects of his October 31, 2018, work injury, and none 
of his ongoing health complaints are related to or causally connected to that injury 
including the conditions that the City now admits are causally related to the injury.  Dr. 
Jabbari is Board Certified in Occupational and Environmental Medicine.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 
6)  The opinions of Dr. Jabbari are rejected.  I find that Dr. Jabbari did not have a 
complete history of the underlying factual circumstances of Mr. Locke’s conditions.  I 
find that Dr. Jabbari used vague, undefined terms and never specifically answered the 
question whether Mr. Locke’s conditions were materially aggravated or lit up by the 
work injury.  A number of her causation opinions have actually been rejected by the 
defendant and their own more qualified experts.  I find that Dr. Jabbari does not have 
equivalent expertise as the other experts in this case. 
Dr. Manshadi provided his initial report on September 2, 2020, just prior to Mr. 
Locke’s low back surgery.  (Cl. Ex. 1)  He examined Mr. Locke again following the 
recuperation from his low back surgery on May 11, 2021.  He prepared an expert report 
dated May 17, 2021, wherein he reviewed records and examined Mr. Locke.  (Cl. Ex. 1, 
pp. 28-30)  He opined that all of Mr. Locke’s treatment at Mayo Clinic was reasonable 
and necessary.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 31)  He opined that the back surgery caused Mr. Locke’s 
erectile dysfunction.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 31)  He reaffirmed his earlier opinion that Mr. Locke 
had sustained permanent damage to his right shoulder as a result of his work injury.  He 
assigned a 10 percent right upper extremity rating pursuant to the AMA Guidelines to 
the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, Chapter 16, pages 475-479.2  
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 31)  He also recommended permanent restrictions for this condition.  (Cl. 
Ex. 1, p. 32)  He reaffirmed his earlier opinion that Mr. Locke had sustained permanent 
                                                 
2 Ten percent of the upper extremity converts to 6 percent of the body as a whole. AMA Guides, Fifth Ed. Table 16-
3, page 439. 

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 10 
damage to his neck as a result of his work injury.  He assigned a 5 percent impairment 
rating pursuant to the AMA Guides, Chapter 15, Table 15-5.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 32)  He also 
recommended that Mr. Locke avoid any activity which requires to use his neck in 
extreme range of motion.  He also assigned a 2 percent rating for depression, which he 
stated was based upon the AMA Guides, although he provided no citation or reference.  
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 32)  I reject Dr. Manshadi’s assignment of a 2 percent whole body rating 
for the mental health condition.  Dr. Manshadi does not explain this rating at all, and it 
seems to be counter to the AMA Guides position on numeric impairment ratings for 
mental health conditions.  Dr. Manshadi’s expertise is in Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 34-44) 
Dr. Abernathey also provided follow-up expert opinion reports.  As set forth 
above, he prepared a number of reports around the time of Mr. Locke’s low back fusion 
surgery in October 2020.  (Jt. Ex. 12, pp. 302-306)  Dr. Abernathey evaluated Mr. Locke 
on June 23, 2021 and prepared an additional report for the City opining on his 
impairment and restrictions.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 21a)  He assigned a 25 percent whole body 
rating and assigned no restrictions.  He recommended further treatment and work-up for 
his groin complications related to the surgery. Dr. Abernathey provided an additional 
“check box” report to claimant’s counsel on June 24, 2021.  Dr. Abernathey agreed that 
all of Mr. Locke’s groin and erectile dysfunction symptoms were caused by his October 
12, 2012 surgery, including his need for urological treatment.  (Jt. Ex. 12, pp. 307-308)  
Dr. Abernathey is a Board Certified Neurosurgeon.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 12) 
Finally, with regard to Mr. Locke’s tinnitus claim, both parties retained hearing 
loss experts prior to hearing.  In the hearing report, the City has admitted that claimant’s 
tinnitus is causally related to his October 31, 2018, work injury.  (Hearing Report, 
paragraphs 2-3)  The City retained Timothy Simplot, M.D., who prepared a report 
containing expert opinions on March 21, 2021.  (Def. Ex. D)  He reviewed a number of 
medical records but never evaluated Mr. Locke.  (Def. Ex. D, pp.  24-25)  He undertook 
a substantial and serious review of Mr. Locke’s tinnitus condition which dated back to at 
least 2010 and ultimately reached the following conclusion.  “Based on his correlation of 
an increase in ringing and the mechanism of injury with a reasonable degree of medical 
certainty the increased sensation of tinnitus he is experiencing could have at least in 
part been related to this alleged incident.”  (Def. Ex. D, p. 26)  Dr. Simplot assigned an 
impairment rating of 2 percent using the AMA Guides.  (Def. Ex. D, p. 27) 
Claimant retained Richard Tyler, Ph.D., a well-known hearing expert in Iowa City.  
Dr. Tyler prepared an expert report dated April 11, 2021.  (Cl. Ex. B)  He reviewed 
records and interviewed Mr. Locke by telephone.  He also had him fill out numerous 
forms documenting his subjective difficulties with tinnitus.  Dr. Tyler opined that the work 
injury caused Mr. Locke’s tinnitus.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 67)  I find Dr. Tyler’s report to be 
somewhat confusing and disjointed.  He assigned an extremely high whole body 
impairment rating for this (75%), although he seemed to concede that the AMA Guides, 
only allow for a maximum of a 5 percent impairment rating.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 71)  In any 
event, claimant only appears to be requesting an assignment of a 5 percent rating 
pursuant to the Hearing Report.  (See Hearing Report, paragraph 5; Cl. Brief, p. 14) 
 
 

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 11 
On May 26, 2021, claimant obtained a “check box” expert medical report from 
Patrick O’Connor, Ph.D., providing medical opinions in relation to Mr. Locke’s alleged 
mental health conditions.  (Cl. Ex. 7)  He opined Mr. Locke has the diagnosis of 
moderate episode of major depressive disorder.  He opined Mr. Locke’s work injury was 
a substantial contributing or aggravating factor to this condition and he would benefit 
from further mental health treatment.  (Cl. Ex. 7, p. 177) 
Mr. Locke submitted an affidavit of medical expenses which outlined substantial 
medical expenses from a number of medical providers.  (Cl. Ex. 6)  These expenses are 
not broken out in detail.  The claimant did provide detailed travel expense 
documentation, including mileage, and other travel expenses such as meals and 
lodging.  (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 171-175) 
The City presented evidence that Mr. Locke has continued to maintain hunting 
and fishing licenses after his work accident.  (Def. Ex. L) 
Having reviewed all of the evidence in the record, including the competing expert 
reports, I find the following: 
1. Mr. Locke’s injury is a substantial causal or material aggravating factor of 
claimant’s low back, neck, right shoulder, groin, mental health and tinnitus 
conditions. 
2. The treatment obtained by Mr. Locke for these conditions prior to hearing has 
been reasonable and necessary. 
3. Mr. Locke’s low back, neck, right shoulder and tinnitus conditions have 
resulted in permanent impairment. 
4. The best impairment ratings in the record for each of Mr. Locke’s permanent 
conditions are as follows: 
a. Low back: Dr. Abernathey 25 percent whole body. 
b. Neck: Dr. Manshadi 5 percent whole body. 
c. Right shoulder: Dr. Manshadi 6 percent whole body. 
d. Tinnitus: Dr. Simplot 2 percent whole body. 
5. These ratings combine under the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, Combined 
Values Chart, page 604, combine to 35 percent whole body functional 
impairment. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The parties have stipulated that Mr. Locke sustained an injury which arose out of 
and in the course of his employment on October 31, 2018.  The first question submitted 
is what medical conditions are causally connected to this stipulated work injury.  The 
City has stipulated that claimant suffered injury to his low back and aggravated the 
condition of tinnitus.  The City has denied that any of Mr. Locke’s other alleged 
conditions are, in any way, causally connected to the work injury. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 12 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
It has long been the law of Iowa that Iowa employers take an employee subject 
to any active or dormant health problems and must exercise care to avoid injury to both 
the weak and infirm and the strong and healthy. Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 
176 N.W. 823 (1920). A material aggravation, worsening, lighting up or acceleration of 
any prior condition has been a viewed as a compensable event ever since initial 
enactment of our workers’ compensation statutes. Ziegler v. United States Gypsum Co., 
252 Iowa 613; 106 N.W.2d 591 (1960). While a claimant must show that the injury 
proximately caused the medical condition sought to be compensable, it is well 
established in Iowa that a cause is “proximate” when it is a substantial factor in bringing 
about that condition. It need not be the only causative factor, or even the primary or the 
most substantial cause to be compensable under the Iowa workers’ compensation 
system. Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-
American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980). 
An employer may be liable for a sequela of an original work injury if the employee 
sustained a compensable injury and later sustained further disability that is a proximate 
result of the original injury. Mallory v. Mercy Medical Center, File No. 5029834 (Appeal 
February 15, 2012). 
The Iowa Supreme Court held long ago that “where an accident occurs to an 
employee in the usual course of his employment, the employer is liable for all 
consequences that naturally and proximately flow from the accident.” Oldham v. 
Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 266 N.W. 480, 482 (1936). 
A sequela can be an after effect or secondary effect of an injury. Lewis v. Dee 
Zee Manufacturing, File No. 797154, (Arb. September 11, 1989). One form of sequela 
of a work injury is an adverse effect from medical treatment for the original injury. Where 
treatment rendered with respect to a compensable injury itself causes further injury, the 
subsequent injury is also compensable. Young v. United Fire & Casualty Co., 256 Iowa 
813, 129 N.W.2d 75 (1964). For example, the death of a claimant who died on the 

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 13 
operating table during surgery for a work injury may be compensable, since the injury 
caused the need for surgery. Breeden v. Firestone Tire, File No. 966020, (Arb. February 
27, 1992). As another example, a claimant who fell as a result of dizziness from 
medication he was taking to treat a work injury is to be compensated for both the 
original injury and the resulting fall as a sequela of the first injury. Hamilton v. Combined 
Ins. of America, File Nos. 854465, 877068, (Arb. February 21, 1991).  
A sequela can also take the form of a secondary effect on the claimant's body 
stemming from the original injury. For example, where a leg injury causing shortening of 
the leg in turn alters the claimant's gait, causing mechanical back pain, the back 
condition can be found to be a sequela of the leg injury. Fridlington v. 3M, File No. 
788758, (Arb. November 15, 1991). 
A sequela can also take the form of a later injury that is caused by the original 
injury. For example, where a leg injury leads to the claimant's knee giving out in a 
grocery store, the resulting fall is compensable as a sequela of the leg injury. Taylor v. 
Oscar Mayer & Co., Ill Iowa Ind. Comm. Rep. 257, 258 (1982). 
This is a complicated case with prolific medical exhibits because Mr. Locke is 
claiming the work injury resulted in a number of different conditions.  In addition, Mr. 
Locke had numerous preexisting conditions in those same body parts.  For the reasons 
set forth in the findings of fact, I found that Mr. Locke proved, by a preponderance of 
evidence that the following conditions were either substantially caused by, and/or 
materially aggravated by his October 31, 2018, work injury: 
1. Low back 
2. Tinnitus 
3. Right shoulder 
4. Neck 
5. Mental health (depression) 
6. Groin 
The City relied upon the expert opinions of their chosen occupational medicine 
physician to deny that the right shoulder, neck, depression, and groin conditions were in 
any way connected to the work injury.  The problem for the City is that when they 
engaged in further investigation and sought expert medical evidence from more 
qualified specialists, many of Dr. Jabbari’s opinions had to be rejected by the City itself.  
Dr. Jabbari relied too heavily in her opinions upon the November 15, 2018, report of Dr. 
McMains, which documented that Mr. Locke was basically as good as new.  The facts 
at hearing are convincing that he was, in fact, not completely healed.  Given that the 
City stipulated at hearing that at least two of Dr. Jabbari’s causation opinions were 
wrong, I find it difficult to rely on any of Dr. Jabbari’s medical causation opinions.  Her 
opinions regarding Mr. Locke’s right shoulder and neck conditions are essentially the 
same as her opinion regarding the low back.  She blamed his condition on underlying 
preexisting conditions.  Because the City was facing a potentially significant medical bill 
regarding the low back condition, it chose to reopen that portion of the claim and 
question Dr. Jabbari’s medical causation opinion by seeking the opinion of a respected 
neurosurgeon, Dr. Abernathey.  The City, however, did not engage in the same further 
investigation for any of Mr. Locke’s other conditions (other than the tinnitus). 

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 14 
Because I have rejected the opinions of Dr. Jabbari, the only remaining opinions, 
at least with respect to claimant’s neck and right shoulder are the opinions of Dr. 
Manshadi.  I find no good reason in the record to reject Dr. Manshadi’s opinions. Dr. 
Abernathey has provided a highly-convincing opinion regarding Mr. Locke’s groin 
condition as being a sequela of the work injury caused by his fusion surgery.  (Def. Ex. 
C, p. 12) 
Mr. Locke also contends that he has the condition of carpal tunnel in both wrists.  
There has been very little workup of this condition and he has not been examined for 
this condition in some time.  There is no evidence in the record that this condition is 
disabling in any way at this time or requires further treatment.  While it is clear how the 
nature of the accident caused aggravation to his neck and shoulder, it is less clear to 
me in this record how the injury aggravated his carpal tunnel.  He may be entitled to 
further treatment for this condition upon further evaluation and expert medical opinion 
on causation. 
I also find Mr. Locke has proven by a preponderance of the evidence that his 
depression is a sequela of his work injury.  His pre-surgery medical records showed no 
signs of depression.  Following surgery, Mr. Locke developed depression and Dr. 
O’Connor provided unrebutted medical evidence that the work injury is a causal factor. 
The next issue is whether Mr. Locke is entitled to permanent partial disability 
benefits, and if so, to what extent? 
The claimant’s disability is a scheduled disability under Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v) (2019).  While the claimant’s injury has affected his whole body, the parties 
agree that he has not lost any income as a result of his injury and his damages are 
limited to the extent of the functional impairment rating at this time.  Therefore, the only 
function of the agency in assessing the degree of disability to the claimant’s body as a 
whole, is to choose one of the impairment ratings in the record. 
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs 
“a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability 
and not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides 
to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
medical association, as adopted by the workers’ compensation 
commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency 
expertise shall not be utilized in determining loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or 
paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not loss of 
earning capacity. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) (2019). Thus, the law, as written, is not concerned with 
an injured worker’s actual functional loss or disability as determined by the evidence, 
but rather the impairment rating as assigned by the adopted version of the AMA Guides.  
The only function of the agency is to determine which impairment rating should be 
utilized.  The statute itself provides no guidance for assigning an impairment rating,  
 
 

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 15 
however, it is assumed that the rating which most closely reflects the injured worker’s 
actual functional loss should be adopted. 
As set forth in the findings of fact, I have found the following impairment ratings 
are most appropriate given the evidence in this case: 
1. Low back: Dr. Abernathey 25 percent whole body. 
2. Neck: Dr. Manshadi 5 percent whole body. 
3. Right shoulder: Dr. Manshadi 6 percent whole body. 
4. Tinnitus: Dr. Simplot 2 percent whole body. 
Using the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, Combined Values Chart, page 604, these 
ratings combine to 35 percent whole body functional impairment. 
I conclude that this finding entitles Mr. Locke to 175 weeks of compensation 
commencing on May 17, 2021, as stipulated by the parties. 
The next issue is past medical expenses.  Claimant seeks over $200,000.00 in 
medical expenses, mostly from the Mayo Clinic.  (Cl. Ex. 6)  The City contends that 
these expenses are (1) not reasonable and necessary, (2) not causally connected to the 
work injury and (3) not authorized. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening, October 1975). 
Claimant is entitled to an order of reimbursement only if he has paid treatment 
costs; otherwise, to an order directing the responsible defendants to make payments 
directly to the provider.  See, Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988).  Defendants 
should also pay any lawful late payment fees imposed by providers.  Laughlin v. IBP, 
Inc., File No. 1020226 (App., February 27, 1995). 
Evidence in administrative proceedings is governed by section 17A.14.  
The agency’s experience, technical competence, and specialized knowledge 
may be utilized in the evaluation of evidence.  The rules of evidence followed in 
the courts are not controlling.  Findings are to be based upon the kind of 
evidence on which reasonably prudent persons customarily rely in the conduct of 
serious affairs.  Health care is a serious affair.  
Prudent persons customarily rely upon their physician’s recommendation for 
medical care without expressly asking the physician if that care is reasonable.  Proof of 
reasonableness and necessity of the treatment can be based on the injured person’s 
testimony.  Sister M. Benedict v. St. Mary’s Corp., 255 Iowa 847, 124 N.W.2d 548 
(1963).  

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 16 
It is said that “actions speak louder than words.”  When a licensed physician 
prescribes and actually provides a course of treatment, doing so manifests the 
physician’s opinion that the treatment being provided is reasonable.  A physician 
practices medicine under standards of professional competence and ethics.  Knowingly 
providing unreasonable care would likely violate those standards.  Actually providing 
care is a nonverbal manifestation that the physician considers the care actually provided 
to be reasonable.  A verbal expression of that professional opinion is not legally 
mandated in a workers' compensation proceeding to support a finding that the care 
provided was reasonable.  The success, or lack thereof, of the care provided is 
evidence that can be considered when deciding the issue of reasonableness of the 
care.  A treating physician’s conduct in actually providing care is a manifestation of the 
physician’s opinion that the care provided is reasonable and creates an inference that 
can support a finding of reasonableness.  Jones v. United Gypsum, File 1254118 (App. 
May 2002); Kleinman v. BMS Contract Services, Ltd., File No. 1019099 (App. 
September 1995); McClellon v. Iowa Southern Utilities, File No. 894090 (App. January 
1992).  This inference also applies to the reasonableness of the fees actually charged 
for that treatment.   
An employer ordinarily has the right to control the care provided to the employee.  
Iowa Code section 85.27(4).  In Trade Professionals, Inc. v. Shriver, 661 N.W.2d 119, 
124 (Iowa 2003), the Supreme Court allowed that the employer can lose this right in two 
circumstances:   
The commissioner has interpreted this section to mean that,   
In Iowa, an employer and its insurer have the right to control the 
medical care claimant receives, with two exceptions.  The first is where 
the employer has denied liability for the injury.  The second is where 
claimant has sought and received authorization from this agency for 
alternative medical care.   
Trade Professionals, Inc. v. Shriver, 661 N.W.2d at 124 (quoting Freels v. Archer 
Daniels Midland Co., #1151214 (July 30, 2000)).  Once an abandonment of care has 
occurred, the claimant is free to seek care on his own at defendant’s cost.  See West 
Side Transport v. Cordell, 601 N.W.2d 691 (Iowa 1999) (the court upheld the holding 
that the defendant employer had “lost the right to choose the care” and that “allow and 
order other care” language is broad enough to include treatment by a doctor of the 
employee’s choosing). 
As an initial matter, I reject the authorization defense asserted by the City.  The 
City did initially accept this claim and direct treatment through their chosen clinic.  
Thereafter, however, the City repeatedly denied care, denied causal connection and/or 
otherwise abandoned the medical care.  When Mr. Locke first asked for additional 
medical care in June 2019, the City refused to authorize any treatment at all.  While the 
City did not formally deny the claim at this time, the City’s Human Resources manager 
responded with the following:  “We don’t normally open up a closed claim after that 
length of time since many things both on and off the job could have occurred in a 7-
month time frame.”  (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 162)  No appointment was arranged and there was no 
further inquiry by the City.  After Mr. Locke retained counsel and filed this claim, his 

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 17 
attorney requested further care in December 2019. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 133)  In response, the 
City arranged an appointment with Dr. Jabbari, on January 8, 2020.  After receiving Dr. 
Jabbari’s report, the City again refused to provide any further treatment.  While there is 
no evidence that the City formally denied the claim by filing a Subsequent Report of 
Injury (SROI) as required under Rule 3.1(2), this was, in fact, undoubtedly a denial of 
liability based upon medical causation. 
Mr. Locke had firmly established medical care at this point in time with his family 
medical clinic and Dr. Marietta Walsh.  He was legally entitled to establish medical care 
with any provider of his choice at this time.  By the Fall of 2020, he had finally secured a 
surgical evaluation as recommended by Dr. Walsh at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, 
Minnesota.  In September 2020, again through his attorney, claimant requested further 
medical care.  This time, knowing claimant’s medical bills could be quite substantial at 
Mayo Clinic, the City reopened investigation into the compensability of this claim.  The 
City chose to secure evaluation and expert opinion from a respected neurosurgeon, Dr. 
Abernathey.  Initially, the City continued to deny the claim until claimant’s counsel 
obtained a clarification opinion utilizing the correct legal standard for medical causation.  
The City, however, did not formally accept the claim and attempt to reestablish direction 
of medical care, until after the claimant had undergone surgery.  All of this was resolved 
in the alternate care proceedings before the agency in File No. 19700544.03.3 
The alternate medical care proceedings were summary proceedings with limited 
evidence.  Having reviewed the entire body of evidence now following arbitration 
proceedings, I find no reason to alter my findings of fact or conclusions of law.  The 
defendants are barred from asserting any authorization defense following their initial 
denial of treatment in June 2019. 
It is important to note that the City could have performed further investigation of 
this claim at any time after Mr. Locke requested additional care in June 2019.  Had the 
City done so, this claim may have had quite different results.  Instead, the City 
responded with a simple statement that it does not “normally open up a closed claim”.  
When the City did perform further investigation in September/October 2020, it ultimately 
concluded that it was wrong.  Mr. Locke should have been getting further evaluation and 
treatment as far back as June 2019.  To allow the City to assert an authorization 
defense or otherwise reestablish direction of medical care in these circumstances would 
be to reward a party for failing to properly investigate a claim.  This would be contrary to 
the substantial legal precedent set forth above, as well as fundamental purpose of the 
Workers’ Compensation Act to expeditiously provide treatment for injured workers. 
Claimant’s Exhibit 6 provides a general overview of the expenses he claims are 
related to his work injury.  It is not broken down by date or treatment type in such a 
manner as to allow me to award specific dollar amounts for the treatment.  I find that the 
treatment Mr. Locke received for the conditions which have been found to be connected 
to his work injury (low back, neck, shoulder, tinnitus, groin, mental health) were 
reasonable and necessary. 
 
 
                                                 
3 Again, it is noted that this matter is on judicial review. 

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 18 
Therefore, I conclude that the claimant is entitled to reimbursement of all past 
medical expenses related to the causally connected conditions set forth in this decision 
from June 8, 2019, up through the date of hearing.  The City is responsible to reimburse 
the claimant for any expenses paid out of pocket.  Otherwise, the City is responsible to 
pay outstanding balances directly to the medical providers or otherwise reimburse any 
other party who has paid for such costs.  The City is responsible for the claimant’s 
transportation expenses (including mileage, meals and lodging where applicable) as set 
forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 6 pages 171 to 175, commencing on June 8, 2019, forward.  
The City is entitled to a credit for the medical expenses paid under their group plan as 
stipulated by the parties. 
While I have found that the City is barred from asserting an authorization 
defense, it is noted that I would alternatively find that the treatment set forth in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 6 should be awarded under the beneficial care rule.  Bell Brothers 
Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 209 (Iowa 2010).  In other 
words, even if his claim had not been denied, or even if I had found that the employer 
was entitled to reestablish care in October 2020, I now find that the claimant received 
beneficial care at the Mayo Clinic and he is entitled to reimbursement of Section 85.27 
medical expenses in any event. 
The next issue is future medical care.  Claimant seeks alternate medical care. 
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment – and seeking alternate care – 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable.  See 
Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995).  Determining what care is 
reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.  Id.  The employer’s obligation turns 
on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability.  Id.; Harned v. Farmland 
Foods, Inc., 331 N.W.2d 98 (Iowa 1983).   
An application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because 
claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving.  Mere dissatisfaction with 
the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical 
care.  Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not 
reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the 
claimant.  Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). 
An employer’s statutory right is to select the providers of care and the employer 
may consider cost and other pertinent factors when exercising its choice. Long, at 124. 
An employer (typically) is not a licensed health care provider and does not possess 
medical expertise. Accordingly, an employer does not have the right to control the 
methods the providers choose to evaluate, diagnose and treat the injured employee. An 
employer is not entitled to control a licensed health care provider’s exercise of 
professional judgment. Assmann v. Blue Star Foods, File No. 866389 (Declaratory 
Ruling, May 19, 1988). An employer’s failure to follow recommendations of an 
authorized physician in matters of treatment is commonly a failure to provide reasonable 
treatment. Boggs v. Cargill, Inc., File No. 1050396 (Alt. Care January 31, 1994). 
 
 

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 19 
The claimant seeks future treatment for all of his conditions which have been 
found to be work-related, including his groin condition, mental health, neck and right 
shoulder.  I find that Mr. Locke is entitled to future treatment for these conditions.  Mr. 
Locke has been evaluated for these conditions through various physicians he has 
chosen.  Since the City denied and has continued to deny these claims, Mr. Locke is 
entitled to direct his own medical treatment.  Specifically, Mr. Locke has sought 
treatment from Gayathry Inamdar, M.D., for his groin condition.  The City shall authorize 
treatment for the groin condition with Dr. Inamdar.  Mr. Locke has sought evaluation of 
his mental health condition with Dr. O’Connor, although it is unclear if he has 
established any treatment relationship prior to hearing.  In any event, the City is ordered 
to authorize treatment with Dr. O’Connor.   
The final issue is IME expenses and case costs. 
The next issue is claimant’s entitlement to an independent medical examination 
under Iowa Code Section 85.39. 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991). 
Iowa Code section 86.40 states: 
Costs.  All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall 
be taxed in the discretion of the commissioner. 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand 
reporter or presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential 
depositions, (2) transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service 
of the original notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as 
provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of 
doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs 
do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 
622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of notice and 
subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or agency by the 
party utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining 

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 20 
doctors’ or practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, 
doctors or practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called 
or by whom the report is requested. Witness fees shall be paid in 
accordance with Iowa Code section 622.74. Proof of payment of any cost 
shall be filed with the workers’ compensation commissioner before it is 
taxed. The party initially paying the expense shall be reimbursed by the 
party taxed with the cost. If the expense is unpaid, it shall be paid by the 
party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the 
deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation commissioner hearing the 
case unless otherwise required by the rules of civil procedure governing 
discovery.  This rule is intended to implement Iowa Code section 86.40. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.17 includes as a practitioner, “persons engaged 
in physical or vocational rehabilitation or evaluation for rehabilitation.”  A report or 
evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert constitutes a practitioner report under 
our administrative rules.  Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. 
November 23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. 
December 8, 2010)  The entire reasonable costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ reports 
may be taxed as costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.  Caven v. John Deere Dubuque 
Works, File Nos. 5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009).   
I find claimant is entitled to IME expenses in the amount of $2,000.00 as set forth 
in Claimant’s Exhibit 5, pages 168-169. 
I find the claimant is entitled to the following costs in the amount of $3,930.60: 
Filing Fee/Service  
 
 
 
$106.80 
Deposition 
 
 
 
 
 
$248.80 
Dr. Manshadi Report (5/11/21) 
 
 
$1,600.00 
Dr. Tyler Report (excluding examination)  
$1,975.00 
The City shall pay its own costs. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
All benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of six hundred and sixty-nine and 
06/100 ($669.06). 
Defendant shall pay the claimant one hundred seventy-five (175) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits per week commencing May 17, 2021. 
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendant shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 

LOCKE V. CITY OF WATERLOO 
Page 21 
Defendant shall be given credit for the weeks previously paid. 
Defendant shall pay past medical expenses incurred after June 8, 2019, as set 
forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 6, including transportation expenses for all conditions which 
have been found to be causally connected to the work injury in a manner consistent with 
this decision. 
Defendant shall authorize treatment for claimant’s groin condition with Dr. 
Inamdar. 
Defendant shall authorize treatment for claimant’s mental health condition with 
Dr. O’Connor. 
Claimant shall be allowed to direct his own medical treatment with regard to his 
other conditions which have been found to be causally connected to his work injury, 
including his neck and his right shoulder. 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant for his independent medical examination 
costs as set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 6, pages 168-169, in the amount of two thousand 
and 00/100 dollars ($2,000.00). 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendant as set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 5, in the amount of 
three thousand nine hundred thirty and 60/100 dollars ($3,930.60). 
Signed and filed this _28th __ day of March, 2022. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Gary Nelson (via WCES) 
Bruce Gettman (via WCES) 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
