Case Number: 1601726.01
Case Title:  KETELSEN, RHONDA V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Ketelsen Rhonda-1601726.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
RHONDA KETELSEN, 
  : 
 
 
  :                      File No. 1601726.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL 
  :  
DISTRICT, 
  :  
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
EMC INSURANCE, 
  : 
 
 
  :            Head Note Nos.:  1106, 1107, 1803 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant Rhonda Ketelsen seeks workers’ compensation benefits from the 
defendants, employer Denison Community School District (District) and insurance 
carrier EMC Insurance (EMC). The undersigned presided over an arbitration hearing on 
September 20, 2021. It was held by internet-based video under order of the 
Commissioner.  
Ketelsen participated personally and through attorney James Byrne. Darlene 
Liveringhouse was the representative for EMC. Scott Larson served as the District’s 
representative. The defendants both participated through attorney Paul Barta. 
ISSUES 
Under rule 876 IAC 4.149(3)(f), the parties jointly submitted a hearing report 
defining the claims, defenses, and issues submitted to the presiding deputy 
commissioner. The hearing report was approved and entered into the record via an 
order because it is a correct representation of the disputed issues and stipulations in 
this case. The parties identified the following disputed issues in the hearing report: 
1) Did Ketelsen sustain an injury on April 28, 2015, arising out of and in the 
course of her employment with the District? 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Apr-29  16:08:50     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 2 
2) What is the nature and extent of permanent disability, if any, caused by the 
alleged injury? 
3) Is Ketelsen entitled to taxation of the costs against the defendants? 
STIPULATIONS 
 
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between Ketelsen and the 
District at the time of the alleged injury. 
2) Ketelsen’s entitlement to temporary disability or healing period benefits is no 
longer in dispute. 
3) The commencement date for permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits, if 
any are awarded, is August 20, 2018. 
4) At the time of the stipulated injury: 
a) Ketelsen’s gross earnings were five hundred seventeen and 71/100 
dollars ($517.71) per week. 
b) Ketelsen was married. 
c) Ketelsen was entitled to three exemptions. 
5) Prior to hearing, the defendants paid to Ketelsen eighty-eight and 36/100 
(88.36) weeks of compensation at the rate of three hundred fifty-eight and 
65/100 dollars ($358.65) per week. 
The parties’ stipulations in the hearing report are accepted and incorporated into 
this arbitration decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. This decision 
contains no discussion of any factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations 
except as necessary for clarity with respect to disputed factual and legal issues. 
FINDINGS OF FACTS 
The evidentiary record in this case consists of the following:  
 Joint Exhibits (Jt. Ex.) 1 through 14; 
 Claimant’s Exhibits (Cl. Ex.) 1 through 2 and 4 through 6;  
 Defendants’ Exhibits (Def. Ex.) C through Q; and 
 Hearing testimony by Ketelsen and Larson. 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 3 
After careful consideration of the evidence and the parties’ post-hearing briefs, the 
undersigned enters the following findings of fact. 
Ketelsen was 56 years of age at the time of hearing. (Hrg. Tr. p. 11) She 
achieved average grades in high school. (Hrg. Tr. p.  11) She earned her high school 
diploma. (Hrg. Tr. p. 11) 
Ketelsen has not pursued postsecondary education outside of training through 
her job with the District. (Hrg. Tr. p. 11) In 2008, she obtained certification to be a 
teacher’s associate. (Hrg. Tr. p. 12) She took classes relating to her work as a teacher’s 
associate. (Hrg. Tr. p. 11–12) 
Ketelsen worked as a server at a café while in high school. (Hrg. Tr. p. 13; Cl. Ex. 
2, p. 31) It required her to carry trays to tables. She estimated the heaviest tray might 
weigh as much as 25 pounds. (Hrg. Tr. p. 13) Ketelsen had to stand and walk a lot while 
working as a server. (Hrg. Tr. p. 13–14) She credibly testified she is physically 
incapable of working as a server because the physical limitations she has from the work 
injury prevent her from standing for long periods on hard floors, carrying trays, and 
bending over to pick up objects. (Hrg. Tr. p. 14) 
Ketelsen next worked at Farmland Foods (now Smithfield) on the line at a 
meatpacking plant. (Hrg. Tr. p. 14) In that job, she had to lift boxes weighing up to 
seventy-five pounds. (Hrg. Tr. p. 14) Ketelsen either stood on the line or was on the 
floor packing boxes. (Hrg. Tr. p. 14) She testified she could not perform the duties of the 
job today because she could not stand on concrete or lift seventy-five pounds as the job 
required. (Hrg. Tr. p. 15) 
In 1998, the District hired Ketelsen. (Hrg. Tr. p. 15) Her first job was working in 
the kitchen, where she had to carry tubs of fruit, set up food on the line, and take out 
garbage. (Hrg. Tr. p. 16) It was a part-time job and she had to spend her shift standing 
and walking. (Hrg. Tr. p. 18) Ketelsen could not physically perform these job duties at 
the time of hearing due to her work restrictions. (Hrg. Tr. p. 16) 
The District next hired Ketelsen to work as a teacher associate working one-on-
one with a student on the autism spectrum. (Hrg. Tr. p. 17) One part of the job involved 
helping when the student had behavioral issues during the school day. (Hrg. Tr. p. 17) 
For example, Ketelsen was required to get down on the floor to help soothe the student 
or to give chase if the student eloped. (Hrg. Tr. 17) Because of Ketelsen’s work 
restrictions, she would be unable to engage in the acts of bending, stooping, lifting, or 
running required when she worked one-on-one as a teacher associate assigned to a 
student with a disability. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 17–18) 
Ketelsen next worked for the District as a teacher associate working for a teacher 
instead of one-on-one with a student. (Hrg. Tr. p. 18) Her job duties included making 
copies, leading group work with students, supervising the lunch room, recess duty, and 
supervising students arriving at and leaving school before and after the school day. 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 4 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 18) Ketelsen credibly testified she could not do the job at the time of hearing 
because of her work restrictions and her inability to stand to supervise the lunch room 
and oversee students at recess, before school, and after school. (Hrg. Tr. p. 19) She 
also could not navigate the uneven terrain as required during recess duty. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
19) 
Dennis Crabb, M.D., was Ketelsen’s primary care physician in Denison. (Hrg. Tr. 
p. 21) In or around the year 2000, Ketelsen sought care from Dr. Crabb for right-knee 
pain. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 1; Hrg. Tr. p. 21) The medical records from that appointment 
reference an earlier x-ray of her knee but Ketelsen could not recall when that occurred. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 1; Hrg. Tr. p. 21) Her symptoms resolved after conservative care. (Hrg. Tr. 
p. 21) 
In 2002, Ketelsen experienced back pain and sought care. (Hrg. Tr. p. 23) 
Ketelsen tested negative for rheumatoid arthritis and positive for strep throat. (Hrg. Tr. 
pp. 23–24) After medication, Ketelsen’s symptoms resolved. (Hrg. Tr. p. 24) 
In 2006, Ketelsen fell while working for the District. (Hrg. Tr. p. 21) The District 
provided care. (Hrg. Tr. p. 22) Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed: 
There is marked destruction of the anterior horn of the lateral meniscus 
which, in part, may reflect acute injury as well as significant degenerative 
change. There is severe loss of cartilage in the lateral joint space with 
large marginal osteophytes in all compartments. There is a moderate joint 
effusion. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 6) Ketelsen chose physical therapy over surgery and her symptoms 
resolved without an operation. (Hrg. Tr. p. 22) 
Ketelsen sought care from Dr. Crabb in 2009, complaining of bilateral knee pain. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 5; Hrg. Tr. pp. 22–23) Dr. Crabb noted she was “having a lot of knee pain 
problems.” (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 5) X-rays of the right knee showed: 
There are moderately advanced tricompartmental degenerative changes 
demonstrated with joint space narrowing and marginal osteophyte 
formation identified. Findings are most pronounced in the lateral 
compartment where there is significant joint space loss. There is a small 
joint effusion demonstrated. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 8) Left-knee s-rays showed: 
There is moderate to moderately advanced tricompartmental degenerative 
change demonstrated. Findings are most pronounced in the patella 
femoral compartment where there is a lateral tilt of the patella and 
significant joint space along the articulation of the lateral facet, and lateral 
femoral condyle. Large condylar spur is demonstrated. Joint effusion is 
present. 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 5 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 8) 
Dr. Crabb observed she was walking “with an antalgic gait pattern.” (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 
10) He noted, “She’s not really wanting to pursue getting knee replacement, although 
she’s going to come to that sooner rather than later.” (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 5) Ketelsen opted for 
conservative care in the form of physical therapy, which resolved her symptoms. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 23; Jt. Ex. 1, p. 5) Ketelsen did not experience knee pain or walk with a limp again 
until after the knee injury she sustained on April 28, 2015, when she fell while leaving 
work. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 25, 98–99) 
In 2015 and for several years prior, Ketelsen worked for the District at Broadway 
Elementary School. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 30, 85) The school is located on a street named 
Broadway in Denison. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 29, 85; Ex. K, p. 1) The District does not have a 
parking lot at Broadway Elementary School for staff to use. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 97–98)  
Most District employees who drive to work at Broadway Elementary School park 
their vehicles in street parking spots. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 31, 109) Some of the street parking 
spots on Broadway are abutted to the District’s property where the school is located but 
none were reserved for employees of the District. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 29, 94, 109, 110) The 
street parking spaces in front of Broadway Elementary School are not on District 
property. (Hrg. Tr. p. 85) Nonetheless, both the District and the City of Denison remove 
snow from the parking spaces. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 34, 95–97, 102, 111–13) The District is 
responsible for maintaining the green space between the sidewalk and parking spots, 
which includes grass and trees. (Hrg. Tr. p. 110) 
On April 28, 2015, Ketelsen drove her vehicle to work. (Hrg. Tr. p. 28) She 
parked in a parking spot immediately in front of the school. (Hrg. Tr. p. 32) This location 
was where she usually parked during her several years working at Broadway 
Elementary School. (Hrg. Tr. p. 32) After Ketelsen clocked out that day, she exited the 
school through the main entrance to the building and walked about seventy-five feet 
down a walkway on school property to the parking spot where she had parked her 
vehicle. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 29–31)  
Because of a tree and to avoid ruts in the ground, Ketelsen walked around the 
back of her vehicle to get to the driver’s door. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 32, 86) Three to five seconds 
after leaving school property and six to eight feet from its edge, Ketelsen tripped on a 
stick that was on the ground near the rear of her vehicle. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 26, 33, 86) She 
fell forward and landed partly in the parking space and partly in the street. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 
26, 88)  Ketelsen’s right knee was the first part of her body to strike the asphalt. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 26) As a result she sustained a direct blow to her right knee, which took most of 
the impact when she hit the ground. (Hrg. Tr. p. 26)  
When Ketelsen hit the asphalt, she immediately felt pain located primarily in her 
right knee. (Hrg. Tr. p. 27) Her pain was sharp and shooting in nature. (Hrg. Tr. p. 27) 
She got up, limped into the school, and reported her fall to a secretary in the office. 
(Hrg. Tr. p. 35) 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 6 
Dr. Crabb ordered x-rays, which were performed on April 30, 2015, compared to 
her 2009 x-rays, and showed in her right knee: 
Severe lateral joint space narrowing is noted. Associated sclerosis is 
noted. Medial and lateral osteophyte formation is seen. Patellofemoral 
osteophyte formation is noted. There is a small joint effusion. No acute 
fracture dislocation or destruction is evident. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 12) An MRI of Ketelsen’s right knee showed: 
1) Moderately advanced tricompartmental degenerative changes. There 
is eburnation of articular cartilage in the medial and lateral 
compartments. There is full thickness fissuring of articular cartilage in 
the trochlea and on the lateral facet of the patella. 
2) Chronic rupture of the anterior cruciate ligament with severe 
heterogeneous signal of the posterior cruciate ligament also likely 
related to sequela of prior injury. There may be a few intact PCL fibers. 
3) Maceration of the lateral meniscus. There is vertical free edge tearing 
of the medial meniscus. 
4) Laxity and thickening of the medial collateral ligament with tibial 
collateral pes anserine bursal fluid. Findings may be degenerative or 
may relate to sequela of prior injury. 
5) Heterogeneous signal in the distal aspect of the iliotibial band and in 
the fibular collateral ligament likely related to sequela of prior sprain. 
6) Lateral tilt of the patella. There is large joint effusion. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 13-14) 
Ketelsen was off work for about two and one-half months during summer break. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 15) She was in pain, but it was not as bad due to her ability to rest. (Jt. Ex. 
2, p. 15) After Ketelsen returned to work at the start of the school year, her pain level 
increased due to the need to stand and walk on a hard surface to perform her job 
duties. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 15)  
Dr. Crabb referred Ketelsen to Steven Goebel, M.D. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 95) Dr. Goebel 
examined Ketelsen on October 7, 2015, and noted her weight was a problem because it 
limits treatment options. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 96) Dr. Goebel noted she would likely need a total 
knee replacement someday but did not recommend such a procedure, only aggressive 
physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 96)  
Ketelsen participated in physical therapy as Dr. Goebel recommended. (Jt. Ex. 2, 
pp. 15–54) Ketelsen’s lower back pain reemerged in early November of 2015, which 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 7 
she attributed at the time to having more work to get ready for Veteran’s Day. (Jt. Ex. 2, 
p. 18) Gail Schlueter, P.T., noted on November 17, 2015, “Her back pain has been an 
issue with increasing her exercise program although she has made some good 
improvements in strength and pain.” (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 19–20)  
On November 18, 2015, Ketelsen followed up with Dr. Goebel. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 
101–02) He stressed weight loss to her because she needed a total knee replacement 
but needed to lose seventy-five pounds before he could perform the surgery. (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 102) Dr. Goebel prescribed continued physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 102) He advised 
EMC in a letter dated the same day that Ketelsen required conservative treatment until 
appropriate weight loss before eventual total knee replacement surgery. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
100) 
On December 3, 2015, Jamie Gross, D.P.T., noted an antalgic gait. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 
22) Gross also recorded that Ketelsen complained of left knee pain while completing her 
standing exercises. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 22) However, according to Gross’s notes Ketelsen had 
no complaints of back pain during the exercise regimen she performed that day. (Jt. Ex. 
2, p. 22)  
Ketelsen next saw Dr. Goebel on December 21, 2015, who noted her work at 
physical therapy resulted in a loss of twenty-two pounds. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 107) Dr. Ketelsen 
noted she was going to concentrate on weight loss and continue physical therapy. (Jt. 
Ex. 4, p. 107) He opined she will be a knee replacement candidate but the “arthritic 
aspect” of her knee condition “was not caused by the Work Comp injury.” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
107) 
Physical therapy providers did not note complaints about back or left-knee pain in 
notes from Ketelsen’s physical therapy in January and February of 2016. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 
23–25) In a progress note dated February 15, 2016, Schlueter noted Ketelsen shared 
she continued to feel unsteady, fell on occasion due instability, and usually fell to her 
right. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 25) However, she made no mention of Ketelsen experiencing left-
knee or back pain. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 25) Neither did Dr. Geobel in the notes from his 
February 1, 2016 examination of her. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 110) 
Physical therapy notes from March 2016 also contain information about 
Ketelsen’s physical limitations and pain in her right knee but do not mention any 
complaints of back or left-knee pain. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 26–27) Schlueter did not mention 
Ketelsen experiencing pain in her back or left knee in her March 25, 2016 progress 
note. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 28) 
Dr. Goebel saw Ketelsen on April 4, 2016. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 112–13) He noted she 
was “gradually worsening again” after “doing great for three weeks.” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 112) 
Dr. Goebel continued physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 29)  
Schlueter’s note regarding the plan for this round of physical therapy made no 
mention of back or left-knee pain. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 29–30) It references issues regarding 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 8 
her right knee. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 29–30) From then through September 8, 2016, none of 
Ketelsen’s medical records reference her experiencing pain in her back or left knee 
while performing exercises or in her everyday life. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 31–36; Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
116) 
In a note from September 12, 2016, Schlueter noted Ketelsen “reports a little bit 
more discomfort with being up on her feet a lot over the weekend. She feels like the 
right knee is going to give out, but also feels that the left knee is more uncomfortable for 
her.” (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 37) Two days later, Schlueter notes “the left knee is bothering some 
due to increased use and relying on that knee more.” Jt. Ex. 2, p. 38)  
On September 16, 2016, Dr. Goebel examined Ketelsen but did not note any 
issues with her left knee. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 119–20) But on September 19, 2016, he 
evaluated Ketelsen’s left knee. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 121) He noted increasing pain and that she 
was “compromised secondary to the right knee with the instability that she has.” (Jt. Ex. 
4, p. 121) Dr. Ketelsen noted x-rays showed “medial joint line bone-on-bone 
osteoarthritis as well as patellofemoral end stage osteoarthritis.” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 121) He 
diagnosed her with end stage osteoarthritis. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 121) Ketelsen rejected an 
injection to treat her symptoms, opting instead to live with the pain. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 121) 
Ketelsen saw Dr. Goebel again on December 19, 2016. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 125) Her 
right knee was still unstable and caused her pain. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 125) Dr. Goebel noted 
she would have a choice to make in two months about whether to proceed with a total 
knee replacement or accept her functional limitations. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 125) Ketelsen 
continued physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. _–_)  
On February 20, 2017, Dr. Goebel recounted her case. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 129–32) He 
noted at that time she “ambulates with an antalgic gait.” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 129) Dr. Goebel 
also described her ongoing right-knee symptoms, including pain and instability, and 
made no reference to any back or left-knee complaints. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 129–30) After a 
long discussion, Ketelsen decided to undergo right total knee replacement surgery 
pending approval by EMC. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 130) 
EMC did not approve the surgery. Instead, the defendants sent Ketelsen for an 
IME with Erik Otterberg, M.D. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 194–96) Dr. Otterberg agreed with Dr. 
Goebel’s conclusion that Ketelsen required a right total knee replacement. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
195) However, he felt Ketelsen needed to participate in a medical weight loss program 
before doing so to reduce her weight and the risk of post-knee-replacement 
complications with it. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 195) 
Ketelsen returned to Dr. Goebel on May 22, 2017. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 134) He agreed 
that a medical weight loss program would be beneficial. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 134) Dr. Goebel 
developed a plan for her lose to fifty pounds before surgery. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 134) Ketelsen 
got her weight down to two hundred and ninety-four pounds on December 4, 2017, and 
Dr. Goebel decided to move forward with surgery because of her ongoing pain and 
instability in her right knee. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 140–43) 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 9 
On February 1, 2018, Dr. Goebel performed a total knee replacement surgery on 
Ketelsen’s right leg. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 197–202) Dr. Goebel prescribed physical therapy for 
gait training, range of motion, and quad strengthening as part of her post-surgery 
rehabilitation. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 144) Ketelsen followed up with Dr. Goebel and participated in 
physical therapy as directed. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 145–64; Jt. Ex. 6, p. 202)  
On March 9, 2018, records from her physical therapy note she “tends to lean 
over to the left side with her body to take the weight off of the right leg as much as 
possible even though there isn’t much pain.” (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 44) On March 13, 2018, her 
physical therapy records note, “after last session, increase in back pain when going 
from sitting to standing. Does work itself out after she is up and moving for a while.” (Jt. 
Ex. 2, p. 45) As of March 19, 2018, her back pain prevented her from being able to do a 
straight leg raise. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 46) Ketelsen also had a “slight antalgic gait pattern 
during stance phase of gait cycle” and “use[d] a single point cane on left side for 
support” to prevent an “increased antalgic gait.” (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 46) 
Dr. Goebel’s notes from Ketelsen’s April 19, 2018 exam state: 
The patient states she is doing well and is noticing improvement on a daily 
basis. She is ambulating well without any assistive device. She admits her 
scar is still sensitive, specifically to the touch, as well as noticing an 
occasional clicking in the knee. She continues with therapy. She has no 
other concerns at this time. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 153) There is no mention of pain in her back or left knee. (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 153) Ketelsen felt ready to return to work but had concerns about working full 
days so Dr. Goebel released her to return to work to do full days and half-days as 
needed. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 153, 155) 
On May 21, 2018, Dr. Goebel noted Ketelsen was “only getting better” and was 
“happy with the knee.” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 156) He felt she was “doing very well.” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
156) Consequently, Dr. Goebel scheduled Ketelsen for a follow-up in August at which 
time he anticipated finding her at maximum medical improvement (MMI). (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
156) He released her to work full duty. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 156, 161) 
Ketelsen saw Dr. Goebel as planned on August 20, 2018. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 162) He 
noted she had returned to work at the start of the school year and was experiencing 
some aching in her right knee but was doing much better overall. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 162) Dr. 
Goebel found Ketelsen at MMI, released her from care, assigned no permanent work 
restrictions, and prescribed follow-up x-rays in February of 2019. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 162) 
After Dr. Goebel released Ketelsen from care for her right knee, she began 
having issues with pain that radiated from her buttock around to her groin and down the 
back side of her leg when driving and going from a sitting to standing position. (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 165) On examination, Dr. Goebel noted unequal hip heights with the right higher than 
the left. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 165)  

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 10 
Leg x-rays showed no complicating factors in the right knee and left-knee 
arthritis. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 165) X-rays of the lumbar spine showed degenerative disc 
disease. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 165) Dr. Goebel noted: 
With having her total knee done and straightening and lengthening the leg 
greater than the left, which she is not used to, thus causing aggravated 
symptoms of her low back, we would like to try a 9/16 heel wedge in the 
left shoe to see if this can help realign and help relieve her symptoms. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 166) 
Dr. Goebel opined in a letter to EMC on October 12, 2018, that Ketelsen had 
reached MMI for the work injury to her right knee. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 171) She required no 
work restrictions from the injury in his view. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 171) On permanent 
impairment, Dr. Goebel used Table 17-33 of the Fifth Edition of American Medical 
Association (AMA) Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (Guides) to find 
Ketelsen had sustained a forty percent impairment to her right lower extremity. (Jt. Ex. 
4, p. 171) 
Twelve days later, Ketelsen returned for follow-up care to address her newly 
developed right-leg pain. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 172) The left-heel lift had helped reduce her pain 
but she still had some lateral pain, including when driving. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 172) Dr. Goebel 
recommended a custom 9/16 of an inch heel life with arch support. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 172) 
Ketelsen continued to have radicular symptoms in her right leg when she saw Dr. 
Goebel on January 3, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 176) Dr. Goebel noted her x-rays showed 
degenerative scoliosis with a curve present. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 176) He opined: 
I think all of her symptoms that she is having down the right lower 
extremity are really related to her back. Since surgical intervention, she 
does have a longer right lower extremity than left lower extremity, and this 
is possibly causing little accentuated curvature in her spine that could 
push on the nerve root with underlying stenosis and giving her radicular 
symptoms down the right lower extremity. We did fit her at her last visit 
with a heel lift, and this has only been in after an adjustment over the 
course of the last week. I would like to see what happens with this and see 
if this helps resolve some of her back pain and radicular pain. 
**** 
Whether this is work comp related or not is difficult to assess. Obviously, 
the scoliosis is not workers comp related, but with straightening of her leg 
and bringing her back out to length of what she was years ago, this has 
caused a longer right lower extremity than the left. With the underlying 
changes she has on her left knee, this may contribute a little to the 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 11 
increased curvature in her spine, which could cause some radicular 
symptoms, especially with underlying stenosis. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 176) 
On March 26, 2019, Kelly Blessen, R.N., noted Ketelsen called Dr. Goebel’s 
clinic to express frustration with the heel lift because she did not feel it holds up well and 
only works with one pair of shoes. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 170) Ketelsen wanted to know if a total 
left-knee replacement would correct her leg-length discrepancy and help alleviate her 
back pain. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 179) Blessen spoke with Dr. Goebel, who stated he was 
hesitant to perform a total left-knee replacement because she was not experiencing any 
pain in her left knee. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 179) 
On May 6, 2019, Ketelsen saw Dr. Goebel, who noted: 
She is here to talk about a left total knee [replacement]. She is currently 
being treated for a workmen’s comp injury for her right knee. She is 
concerned as her back continues to hurt and she has shortening of the left 
lower extremity that this will cause more problems. She states that she 
has neck pain and lumbar pain and multiple areas of pain but her left knee 
does hurt a lot and it limits her ambulation and safety. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 180)  
Two days later, Ketelsen called Dr. Goebel’s clinic and spoke with Blessen. (Jt. 
Ex. 4, p. 186) Blessen noted Ketelsen wanted to try a heel lift that builds up her shoe on 
the outside instead of surgery. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 186) According to Blessen’s nurse note, 
“She is not in a position to do the left total knee surgery this summer and she isn’t 
necessarily having much in the way of left knee pain.” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 186) Dr. Goebel 
concluded Ketelsen only needed to follow up with him on an as-needed basis moving 
forward. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 186) 
On November 2, 2018, Ketelsen had a physical therapy appointment with 
Alexander Smith, P.T., D.P.T., who noted muscle weakness, pain in both feet, unequal 
limb length, and other abnormalities of gait and mobility. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 204) Smith 
assessed Ketelsen as presenting “with signs and symptoms consistent with left foot 
pain caused by gait deficits resulting after right knee replacement.” (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 204) 
On November 19, 2018, Smith fitted Ketelsen with a sole support orthotic that 
corrected her gait and advised her to ease into its use. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 206) Ketelsen 
returned on December 26, 2018, when Smith noted her “gait improved with orthotics but 
still significant lean over left stance leg when weight bearing suggesting major hip 
weakness and potential compensation at the low back level that has the potential to 
increase low back pain.” (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 208) 
Dr. Goebel referred Ketelsen to Nebraska Spine and Pain Center, where J.P. 
Ladd, M.D., saw her on January 24, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 209–15) Dr. Ladd noted 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 12 
Ketelsen was experiencing “low back pain that radiates to both buttocks and down the 
right leg. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 210) She informed Dr. Ladd  she “noticed trouble with low back 
and right leg pain when she would drive to and from her doctor’s visits, causing her to 
get our and walk around frequently.” (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 210) Ketelsen associated returning to 
full-duty work with “an increase in her back and lower extremity pain over this time, 
particularly with learning over desks to help children with their schoolwork.” (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 
210) She also told Dr. Ladd she “felt her gait never really normalized.” (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 210) 
In September of 2018, Ketelsen began to experience symptoms even when sitting. (Jt. 
Ex. 8, p. 210) An MRI showed multilevel degenerative changes with focal moderate 
spinal stenosis at L3-L4, so Dr. Ladd recommended conservative treatment starting with 
physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 218; Jt. Ex. 9, pp. 263–65)  
On March 21, 2019, Ketelsen reported minimal change from physical therapy. 
(Jt. Ex. 8, p. 222) Dr. Ladd noted her physical therapist felt she would not experience 
improvement through physical therapy until her leg length discrepancy was addressed. 
(Jt. Ex. 8, p. 222) He agreed that her leg length discrepancy was “playing a reasonably 
big role in the patient’s ongoing symptoms with the low back,” discontinued physical 
therapy for the time being, and agreed with her seeking a second opinion on her heel 
insert or shoe build-up. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 225) Ketelsen went to the Hanger Clinic for an 
evaluation regarding her left-shoe lift on May 17, 2019, and received a new lift. (Jt. Ex. 
8, pp. 228–33)  
On September 23, 2019, Ketelsen followed up with Dr. Ladd, who noted, “Her 
distribution of pain does match spine pathology and stenosis.” (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 238) He 
informed Ketelsen that he did not have any additional conservative treatment to offer 
other than epidural steroid injections. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 238) Dr. Ladd opined he would 
consider Ketelsen to have reached MMI for her back if she refused injections. (Jt. Ex. 8, 
p. 238) Ketelsen underwent an injection on December 5, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 247–49) It 
provided pain relief for a short period of time and then her symptoms returned. (Jt. Ex. 
8, p. 251) During Ketelsen’s follow-up examination post-injection, Dr. Ladd opined she 
was at MMI and he had no additional conservative treatment to recommend for her back 
symptoms. (Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 257, 259–60) 
Ketelsen saw Daniel Nelson, M.D., regarding her leg length discrepancy and left-
knee arthritis on October 24, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 268) Dr. Nelson noted: 
I do believe that with a left total knee arthroplasty I would correct some of 
her limb length discrepancy because we would correct her valgus 
deformity and also make up for lost cartilage. However, just correcting her 
limb length discrepancy would not necessarily significantly improve her 
other symptoms. If that were the case, the shoe lift should provide 
significant benefit and it does not seem to be providing as much as she 
would hope. We did discuss that the major reason you would want to 
perform a left total knee arthroplasty is for primary pain and functional 
limitation in the knee itself. She does not have this at this point, so I am 
not recommending surgery. I did discuss that physical therapists often 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 13 
place more emphasis on limb length discrepancy than orthopedic 
surgeons do, and I do not necessarily think that a surgery to correct her 
limb length discrepancy primarily would improve her symptoms.  
(Jt. Ex. 10, p. 269) 
On February 4, 2020, Ketelsen telephoned Nebraska Spine and Pain Center and 
spoke to Sheila Woitaszewski, who noted she was having trouble sleeping due to right-
side pain in her back. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 261) According to Woitaszewski’s note, Ketelsen 
said she was trying to use one foot to push the shoe off her other foot when she felt a 
pop in her back and shooting pain down her left side. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 261) She called 
seeking treatment recommendations. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 261) 
On February 14, 2020, Ketelsen was in a car crash. Another vehicle rear-ended 
the vehicle Ketelsen was driving. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 61–62) The crash caused Ketelsen pain 
in her left ribs, neck, and back. (Hrg. Tr. p. 62) But the back pain differed from the back 
pain she experienced following her 2015 fall. (Hrg. Tr. p. 62) The pain following the 
crash felt like a sore muscle and resolved with time. (Hrg. Tr. p. 62) 
Claimant’s counsel arranged for Ketelsen to undergo an IME with Sunil Bansal, 
M.D., on June 29, 2020. (Cl. Ex. 1) As part of the IME, Dr. Bansal reviewed medical 
records from 2006 through March 17, 2020. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 2–13) He also performed a 
physical examination. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 14–16) He then issued an IME report. (Cl. Ex. 1) 
In Dr. Bansal’s report, he notes tenderness to palpation over her entire right knee 
with it worse over the medial joint line. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 14) He tested range of motion and 
flexion of one hundred twenty-six degrees and no lag on extension. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 15) 
Manual muscle testing was uniformly five out of five. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 15)  
Dr. Bansal diagnosed Ketelsen with an aggravation of right-knee arthritis. (Cl. Ex. 
1, p. 16) In his opinion, the aggravating event was Ketelsen falling and striking her knee 
on asphalt while leaving work. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 16–17) Dr. Bansal agreed with Dr. Goebel’s 
conclusion that she had reached MMI for her right-knee injury on August 20, 2018. (Cl. 
Ex. 1, p. 16) He opined on permanent disability, “With reference to the [Guides], 
specifically Table 17-33, she is assigned a 37% lower extremity impairment for her right 
knee replacement.” (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 20) 
Dr. Bansal also examined Ketelsen’s left knee and noted positive valgus 
stressing, positive varus stressing, pes anserine bursal swelling, +2 creptius, and 
tenderness on the medial joint line. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 15) He measured her flexion at one 
hundred eight degrees and manual muscle testing of five out of five. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 15) 
On extension, Dr. Bansal noted no lag and four out of five manual muscle testing. (Cl. 
Ex. 1, p. 15) His range-of-motion measurements showed: flexion, seventy-five degrees; 
extension, twenty-four degrees; left lateral flexion, thirty-five degrees; and right lateral 
flexion, thirty-two degrees. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 15) 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 14 
Based on his review of the records and examination, Dr. Bansal diagnosed 
Ketelsen with an aggravation of osteoarthritis. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 16) He placed her at MMI 
for the condition as of June 29, 2020, the date of his examination. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 16) On 
the question of causation, Dr. Bansal opined: 
It is my medical opinion that Ms. Ketelsen’s left knee pain is a sequela of 
her right knee injury, causing her to overcompensate with her left knee 
and aggravating her left knee degenerative changes. 
Walking, especially from overcompensating with a limp, further aggravated 
by her leg length discrepancy, would increase the ground reaction force as 
more pressure is exerted against the surface, accelerating the left knee 
degenerative changes.  
From a biophysical standpoint, this awkward mechanical loading would 
increase the ground reaction force, accelerating her knee degenerative 
changes. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 18)  
Dr. Bansal issued the following impairment rating for Ketelsen’s left knee: 
Ms. Ketelsen has developed a gait derangement secondary to her 
longstanding right knee pathology. Consistent with that, she has 
developed left knee pathology from overcompensation. She now requires 
the use of a cane for ambulation. This is not her main functional deficit. 
Per the [Guides], Section 17.2C, Table 17-5 is most appropriate for rating, 
and is bolded as being reserved for persons who are dependent on 
assistive devices. This impairment is all inclusive in regard to other 
impairments for her back or knee, as that table appreciates the proximal 
and distal sequelae related to gait derangement. 
Reviewing Table 17-5, we find that she meets the criteria for mild c., as 
she requires the use of a cane. Therefore, she is assigned a 15% 
impairment of the body as a whole. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 20) 
Dr. Bansal states Ketelsen “requires the use of a cane” but she testified at 
hearing she stopped using a cane for the most part while still keeping it with her if she 
ever needs it. This incorrect understanding of Ketelsen’s cane use and the fact that Dr. 
Crabb informed her she would need a left-knee replacement before her work injury,= 
combine to prevent Ketelsen from proving by a preponderance of the evidence her left-
knee issues are a sequela to her 2015 work injury. 
With respect to Ketelsen’s back complaints, Dr. Bansal opined: 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 15 
In regard to her back pain, my diagnosis is sacroiliitis that has 
progressively worsened in intensity from the altered gait secondary to her 
right knee pathology. Dr. Cohen from John Hopkins University Medical 
School states that risk factors for sacroiliitis included leg length 
discrepancy or altered gaits. It is logical that the back pain manifested 
months after her right knee injury, as this is a cumulative process. As her 
right knee pathology and pain is permanent, it follows that her back 
pathology is permanent, as it is being aggravated by her antalgic gait 
resulting from her knee condition. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 19–20) 
Dr. Bansal assigned Ketelsen the following work restrictions:  No lifting more than 
20 pounds. Limit stairs, standing, sitting, twisting, and bending. Ketelsen had not given 
the work restrictions prescribed by Dr. Bansal to the District. She testified credibly at 
hearing that the District’s attorney got the restriction and the library associate position 
she was working when Dr. Bansal assigned them was within those restrictions. 
Ketelsen saw Michael Luft, D.O., for what he diagnosed as lumbar radiculopathy 
on October 6, 2020, and prescribed a Medrol Dosepak. (Jt. Ex. 11, pp. 270–72) On 
November 30, 2020, Ketelsen had a routine follow-up exam for her surgically repaired 
right knee. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 189–92) Ketelsen shared her right knee was doing well. (Jt. 
Ex. 4, pp. 189, 191) However, she had other complaints, including back pain. (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 189) 
Ric Jensen, M.D., examined Ketelsen on December 23, 2020, for back pain 
radiating into her legs. (Jt. Ex. 12, pp. 273–75) He prescribed Soma and Lyrica. (Jt. Ex. 
12, p. 274) Dr. Jensen ruled out surgery to address the right lateral recess narrowing 
she had at her L3-4 lumbar segment because it would add mechanical instability. (Jt. 
Ex. 12, p. 274–75) He recommended maintaining a conservative approach to care. (Jt. 
Ex. 12, p. 275) 
The District has one certified librarian who travels from school to school to work 
in the libraries. Each school also has a librarian associate, who helps the librarian. 
Ketelsen knew that her ability to perform the duties of her associate job was hindered by 
her physical limitations. Consequently, she applied to work in the library, for a job with 
less demanding job duties. The District hired her to fill the position. 
Claimant’s counsel sent Dr. Jensen a check-box letter dated March 26, 2021, 
that contained a summary of Ketelsen’s care to date followed by a series of assertions 
with space for Dr. Jansen to indicate whether he agrees or disagrees. (Jt. Ex. 12, pp. 
276–87) In response, Dr. Jensen indicated Ketelsen’s work injury and right total knee 
replacement were a substantial factor in causing her altered gait which in turn caused in 
substantial part Ketelsen to have mechanical back pain secondary to sagittal and 
coronal lumbopelvic spinal imbalance. (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 285) Dr. Jensen also indicated 
Ketelsen may have additional injuries and that she would be a candidate for surgery if 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 16 
she lost weight. (Jt. Ex,. 12, p. 286) Moreover, he indicated Dr. Bansal’s opinions 
regarding permanent work restrictions, diagnosis of Ketelsen’s left-knee injury, and the 
cause of her left-knee injury. (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 286) Dr. Jensen signed and dated his 
responses April 16, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 12, p. 286) 
Ian Crabb, M.D., reviewed medical records, examined Ketelsen, and issued an 
IME report dated April 20, 2021. (Ex. Q) He also answered a series of questions from 
defense counsel. (Ex. Q, pp. 7–10) With respect to Ketelsen’s right-knee injury, Dr. 
Crabb found her to have reached MMI and adopted Dr. Goebel’s permanent impairment 
rating. (Ex. Q, p. 9) 
Defense counsel asked Dr. Crabb one question on whether Ketelsen’s right-knee 
injury and the surgery to repair it caused her back pain or left-leg pain. (Ex. Q, p. 8) On 
whether Ketelsen’s right-knee injury substantially contributed to her left knee injury, Dr. 
Crabb opined: 
With regards to the left knee, the patient has x-ray evidence of moderately 
advanced arthritis involving the left knee which is preexisting. Certainly, 
the patient’s obesity and significant valgus deformity contribute to her 
arthritic progression on the left. There is no evidence to suggest that 
having a contralateral knee replacement should somehow increase the 
forces on the left knee. It is my opinion that the patient’s left knee arthritis 
is entirely unrelated to her workplace accident of April 28, 2015. 
(Ex. Q , p. 8) 
In response to the question of whether her right-knee injury substantially 
contributed to her back pain, Dr. Crabb stated: 
Ms. Ketelsen complained of back pain in the fall of 2018. Evaluation at 
that time showed that the patient had a congenital scoliosis as well as 
moderately advanced changes consistent with degenerative arthritis of the 
spine. It is more likely than not that the patient’s underlying degenerative 
arthritis of the spine is a personal medical condition contributed to by her 
scoliosis and obesity.  
The idea that the patient’s leg length has been altered substantially by her 
total knee replacement exists throughout the chart and in the patient’s 
understanding. This is almost certainly not the case. Although the patient 
does have a moderately thick spacer on the right knee, she is still in 
valgus alignment, very similar to her other knee. It is unlikely this altered 
her leg length by very much. The patient is currently using a 9/16-inch 
shoe life on her left. This is 14 mm in height. 
There is a medical literature on leg length and back pain. Dr. Sheha, M.D., 
et al published a review in the Journal of Bone & Joint Surgery entitled 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 17 
“Leg Length Discrepancy, Functional Scoliosis, and Low Back Pain.” In 
this article, they review the evidence for leg-length discrepancy and back 
pain, and they conclude, “Given the equivocal nature of the results at this 
point, we conclude that the correlation between low back pain and leg-
length discrepancy is weak at best.” They note that patients with childhood 
leg-length discrepancy and particularly severe leg-length discrepancy can 
over time develop degenerative changes. They further go on to say that 
leg-length discrepancy of less than 20 mm does not result in back pain, 
regardless of prolonged or repetitive loading. 
Accordingly, based on the medical literature, and the short period of time 
in which the patient was subjected to a small amount of leg-length 
discrepancy, it is my opinion that more likely than not this did not 
aggravate or alter the patient’s underlying degenerative spondylosis. 
Furthermore, if this were actually the case, this would have been 
adequately and completely corrected by her shoe lift on the left side. 
It is therefore my opinion that the patient has a personal medical condition 
of scoliosis and degenerative spondylosis of the lumbar spine that has not 
been aggravated or altered by her right total knee replacement. 
(Ex. Q, p. 7–8) 
Claimant’s counsel shared additional medical records with Dr. Bansal, who 
reviewed them, and provided a supplement to his original IME report. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 22–
26) Dr. Bansal signed and dated his supplemental report July 26, 2021. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 
26) He opined that he stands by the opinions in his first report. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 26) With 
respect to Dr. Jensen’s check-box-letter responses, Dr. Bansal opined, “I concur with 
Dr. Jensen’s opinion that Ms. Ketelsen’s altered gait secondary to her right knee 
pathology is an aggravating factor toward her lumbar spine condition.” (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 26) 
In response to Dr. Crabb’s report, Dr. Bansal stated: 
I also reviewed Dr. Crabb’s report, and respectfully disagree with his 
conclusion that Ms. Ketelsen does not have a significant leg length 
discrepancy, and therefore it is not contributory toward her lumbar spine 
condition. There are several issues with his analysis. For one, he was not 
able to measure the length of Ms. Ketelsen’s leg length discrepancy. I did 
measure it, and found a difference of 19 mm. Second, he cites an article 
that states that it never found back issues in patients with less than 20 mm 
of length discrepancy. It should be noted that he cites to a review article 
that summarized numerous studies. He selectively references a finding 
from only one of the studies. The other studies had markedly different 
conclusions: 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 18 
‘Friberg, in a study of 653 Finnish military recruits with chronic low back 
pain and 359 asymptomatic controls, reported an LLD >5 mm in 75% of 
the low back pain group, compared with 44% of the control group (p , 
0.001)6. He further noted that symptomatic patients were 5.32 times more 
likely than asymptomatic patients to have an LLD >15 mm.’ 
As stated above, I measured Ms. Ketelsen’s leg length discrepancy which 
was 19 mm, markedly greater than the 5 mm or 15 mm quoted in the 
above study, and almost the 20 mm quoted by Dr. Crabb. 
Furthermore, a leg length discrepancy is not the only contributor to an 
altered gait. Other factors include an antalgic gait that is caused by the 
knee pathology itself, as an individual will shift weight to the other leg and 
in turn aggravating that leg (knee) as well. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 26) 
The defendants submitted as Exhibit L, “Leg-Length Discrepancy, Functional 
Scoliosis, and Low Back Pain,” JBJS Reviews 2018;6(8):e6, by Evan D. Sheha, M.D., et 
al. Dr. Crabb relied on the article to support his opinion on whether Ketelsen’s right-
knee injury was a substantial factor in causing her back pain. The authors surveyed 
forty-seven articles on the subject—among them is the Friberg study, part of the article’s 
summary of which Dr. Bansal quotes in his response to Dr. Crabb’s report. The final 
sentence of the paragraph from the article which Dr. Bansal quotes states that Friberg 
“reported that, among symptomatic patients treated conservatively with a shoe lift and 
followed for at least 6 months, 91% reported either decreased or resolved symptoms. 
Active patients who spent substantial time standing and those with spondylolysis and 
spondylolisthesis experienced a particular positive response.” (Ex. L, p. 4)  
Friberg’s findings regarding the highly successful use of heel lifts to resolve 
symptoms undermines Dr. Bansal’s theory on causation. Accepting arguendo Friburg’s 
findings of correlation between leg length discrepancy and back pain, conservative 
treatment with a heel lift should have resolved the pain. Dr. Nelson opined as much, 
noting that “just correcting her limb length discrepancy would not necessarily 
significantly improve her other symptoms. If that were the case, the shoe lift should 
provide significant benefit and it does not seem to be providing as much as she would 
hope.” (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 269) 
Further undermining Dr. Bansal’s opinion on causation with respect to Ketelsen’s 
back pain is the conclusion Sheha, et al., reach after surveying the literature on leg-
length discrepancy (LLD): 
Much effort has been devoted to understanding the association between 
low back pain and LLD, but many of the existing studies are small and 
there have been few randomized controlled trials. Given the equivocal 
nature of the results at this point, we conclude that the correlation between 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 19 
low back pain and LLD is weak at best. It is likely that a certain magnitude 
of LLD plays a role in low back pain, although it is unclear at this time what 
degree of LLD is required to cause symptoms. Furthermore, given 
changes in multiple parameters that tend to occur with LLD (e.g., sacral or 
pelvic tilt and lumbar scoliosis), it is likely that confounders are at play. 
Therefore, the true drivers of low back pain in these patients have yet to 
be fully elucidated. 
(Ex. L, p. 5) Thus, while Friburg found a high correlation in his study, the larger survey 
of studies showed “the correlation between low back pain and LLD is weak at best.” (Ex. 
L, p. 5) Consequently, Dr. Crabb’s opinion, which is based in part on the conclusions 
from the overall survey as opposed to one of the articles surveyed, on whether 
Ketelsen’s leg length discrepancy is a significant factor in causing her back pain is most 
persuasive.  
With respect to causation regarding Ketelsen’s left-leg pain as it relates to her 
right-knee injury, surgery, and resultant leg length discrepancy, Dr. Bansal’s opinion is 
unpersuasive due to the timeline of events. Ketelsen developed left-knee pain after she 
received a heel lift, which would have mitigated the effects of the leg-length 
discrepancy. Further, Dr. Bansal’s causation opinion and impairment rating are based 
on gait derangement, which he appears to have had an incorrect understanding of 
because he rated her disability based on requiring routine use of a cane using Table 17-
5 on page 529 of the Guides when Ketelsen did not require routine use of a cane at the 
time of hearing. For these reasons, it is more likely than not her right-knee injury is not a 
substantial factor causing her pain. Ketelsen has failed to prove a sequela to her left 
knee. 
Lastly, there is the question of permanent impairment to Ketelsen’s right leg due 
to her injury. Dr. Goebel is a specialist with experience performing total knee 
replacements. He treated Ketelsen for an extended period of time, which allowed him to 
develop familiarity with her condition. For these reasons, Dr. Goebel’s permanent 
impairment rating is most credible. It is adopted. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
In 2017, the Iowa legislature amended the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
See 2017 Iowa Acts, ch. 23. The 2017 amendments apply to cases in which the date of 
an alleged injury is on or after July 1, 2017. Id. at § 24(1); see also Iowa Code § 3.7(1). 
Because the injury at issue in this case occurred after July 1, 2017, the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act, as amended in 2017, applies. Smidt v. JKB Restaurants, LC, File 
No. 5067766 (App. December 11, 2020). 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 20 
1 .  
Zo n e  o f  P r o t e c t i o n.  
The defendants initially admitted Ketelsen’s injury arose out of and in the course 
of her employment. Before hearing, they moved to withdraw their admission. The 
undersigned granted leave to withdraw this admission over Ketelsen’s resistance. 
The parties’ dispute now stems from when and where Ketelsen sustained her 
injury. The defendants argue that because Ketelsen fell after she clocked out for the 
workday and in a parking spot on the street that is maintained by the City of Denison 
and not the District, the injuries that resulted from her fall did not arise out of and in the 
course of her employment. Ketelsen contends that the circumstances of her injuries 
have a sufficient nexus with her employment for the District to fall within the purview of 
chapter 85. 
Under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, covered employers must generally 
pay workers’ compensation “for any and all personal injuries sustained by an employee 
arising out of and in the course of employment.” Iowa Code § 85.3(1). The legislature 
codified definitions for purposes of the Act in Iowa Code section 85.61. Subsection 7 
provides in pertinent part: 
The words ‘personal injury arising out of and in the course of the 
employment’ shall include injuries to employees whose services are being 
performed on, in, or about the premises which are occupied, used, or 
controlled by the employer, and also injuries to those who are engaged 
elsewhere in places where their employer's business requires their 
presence and subjects them to dangers incident to the business. 
The Iowa Supreme Court considered the scope of this definition in Frost v. S.S. 
Kresege Co., 299 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 1980). In post-hearing briefing, both parties 
discuss Frost, a case in which the claimant slipped and fell while walking in wintry 
conditions on a sidewalk from the employee parking lot to employer’s building, where 
she worked. Id. The agency determined Frost’s injury did not arise out of and in the 
course of her employment because it did not occur on the employer’s premises and 
certain recognized exceptions to the “going and coming” rule did not apply. Id. at 648.  
In this case, the defendants argue the “zone of protection” test is part of the 
formalized “extension of premises” exception to the “going and coming” rule under the 
Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. (Def. Post-Hearing Brief, pp. 7–12) But this reading 
incorrectly conflates the two distinct reasons the Iowa Supreme Court found the 
agency’s decision in Frost to be erroneous under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
The Frost court held: (1) The injury arose out of and in the course of the claimant’s 
employment independent of any formalized exception to the “going and coming” rule 
under a “zone of protection” test; and (2) The “extension of premises” exception to the 
“going and coming” rule also applied to make injury compensable under the Act. Id. at 
649–50; see also id. at 650–51 (Schultz, J. concurring in part and dissenting in part) 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 21 
(concurring with application the “extension of premises” exception to the “going and 
coming” rule and dissenting with the majority’s adoption of the “zone of protection” test).  
Thus, independent of the “going and coming” rule, the court held that the 
claimant’s injury arose out of and in the course of her employment under what are now 
codified as Iowa Code sections 85.3(1) and 85.61(7) because “the site of the injury was 
so closely related in time, location, and employee usage to the work premises to bring 
the claimant within the zone of protection” under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. 
Id. at 649. The court ruled the risk did not have to be unique or special to employees to 
arise out of and in the course of employment. Id. The court concluded, “The nexus of 
the work relationship [was] so strong that protection under chapter 85 is appropriate 
without regard to any formalistic exception to the going and coming rule.” Id. “[C]hapter 
85 provides coverage since this fall was closely connected in time, location, and 
employee usage to the work premises itself.” Id. at 649–50.  
Under Frost, the “zone of protection” test is used to determine whether there is a 
nexus strong enough to bring an injury within the coverage of the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act. The strength of the nexus is evaluated by determining how closely 
connected the injury was to the work premises with respect to: 
1) Time; 
 
2) Location; and 
3) Employee usage. 299 N.W.2d at 248. 
If these factors combine to establish a strong nexus between the injury and 
employment, the injury is compensable under the Act without consideration of the 
“going and coming rule” or its formalized exceptions. Id. at 649. Employer control of the 
area where the injury occurred is not a factor considered under the “zone of protection” 
test. See id. 
In Frost, the claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of her 
employment under the Act when she fell on her way to attend an 8:00 a.m. birthday 
breakfast before an 8:30 a.m. work meeting. Id. at 647. The court concluded the time at 
which this injury occurred sufficed to create to a strong nexus in the court’s view. Id. 
In the current case, the time of Ketelsen’s injury is after the end of her workday 
as opposed to before its start, as in Frost, but this is a distinction without a difference in 
the analysis. Ketelsen’s injury occurred less than ten minutes after she clocked out, 
which is closer in time to the end of her workday than the claimant’s injury in Frost was 
to the beginning of hers. Therefore, the time of Ketelsen’s injury relative to her working 
hours is close enough to support finding of a strong nexus between her employment at 
the District and the injury under the “zone of protection” test. 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 22 
In Frost, the claimant fell while walking on a public sidewalk when she slipped on 
ice as far as twenty feet from her work site. Id. The court found twenty feet to be in close 
enough proximity to establish a strong nexus between the claimant’s employment and 
the injury. Id. at 647–50. In this case, Ketelsen fell about eight feet from the District’s 
property where she worked, less than half the distance in feet from the distance in 
Frost. Consequently, the location where Ketelsen’s injury occurred relative to her work 
site supports a finding of a strong nexus between it and her employment with the 
District. 
The final factor of the “zone of protection” test is employee usage of the area 
where the claimant’s injury took place. The claimant in Frost fell on a public sidewalk 
used by all employees to enter the work site. Id. at 647. The court found this high rate of 
employee usage weighed in favor of finding a strong nexus between the claimant’s 
injury and her employment. Id. at 647–50. 
Here, the school where Ketelsen worked does not have a parking lot. All District 
employees park on the street, like Ketelsen did on the date she fell and injured her leg, 
in street parking spots, like the one in which Ketelsen fell and sustained the injury in 
question. While every District employee did not use the particular parking where 
Ketelsen fell, every District employee who drives to work uses a similar parking spot on 
the street. The facts in this case cause the employee usage factor to weigh in favor of 
finding a strong nexus between Ketelsen’s injury and her employment with the District. 
For these reasons, Ketelsen has met her burden of proof on whether she 
sustained an injury to her right knee that arose out of and in the course of her 
employment with the District on April 28, 2015. Under the Frost “zone of protection” test, 
the evidence establishes a strong nexus between Ketelsen’s injury and her 
employment. Because Ketelsen’s injury satisfies the Frost “zone of protection” test, this 
decision does not address whether an exception to the “going and coming” rule applies.  
2 .  
C a u s a t i o n o f  S e q u e l a e .  
The parties dispute whether Ketelsen’s right-knee injury and the surgery to treat 
it caused sequelae to her left knee and back. The defendants contend neither her leg-
length discrepancy nor her altered gait after right total knee replacement caused either 
injury. Ketelsen contends her leg-length discrepancy and altered gait caused both. 
Under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, “where an accident occurs to an 
employee in the usual course of his employment, the employer is liable for all 
consequences that naturally and proximately flow from the accident.” Oldham v. 
Scofield & Welch, 266 N.W. 480, 482, opinion modified on denial of reh'g, 269 N.W. 925 
(Iowa 1936). “[T]he burden of proof is on the claimant to prove some employment 
incident or activity was a proximate cause of the health impairment on which he bases 
his claim.” Anderson v. Oscar Mayer & Co., 217 N.W.2d 531, 535 (Iowa 1974). “[A] 
possibility is insufficient; a probability is necessary.” Id. The claimant must prove 
causation by a preponderance of the evidence. See, e.g., St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 23 
N.W.2d 646, 652 (Iowa 2000) (citing Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 
(Iowa 1996)). 
“‘Whether an injury has a direct causal connection with the employment or arose 
independently thereof is essentially within the domain of expert testimony.’” IBP, Inc. v. 
Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410, (Iowa 2001) (quoting Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire & Cas. Co., 526 
N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 1995)). The agency, “as the fact finder, determines the weight to 
be given to any expert testimony.” Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312, 321 (Iowa 
1998). The agency must weigh the evidence in a case and accept or reject an expert 
opinion based on the entire record. Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 853. In doing so, it may 
accept or reject an expert opinion in whole or in part. Sherman, 576 N.W.2d at 321. 
As found above, Ketelsen has not satisfied the burden of proof with respect to 
medical causation of the sequelae she alleges to her left knee or back. The evidence 
establishes it is more likely than not that neither the work injury to her right knee or the 
surgery to treat it were a substantial factor in causing the injuries Ketelsen alleges to her 
left knee or back. Neither alleged sequela is compensable under the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act. 
3 .  
P e r m a n e n t  D i s a b i l i t y.  
In 2017, the legislature amended the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act. See 
2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23. Before the 2017 amendments, the agency could use all 
evidence in the administrative record, as well as agency expertise, when determining 
the permanent disability of an injured worker. See, e.g., Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 
525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Under agency rules before the 2017 amendments, 
the Guides were considered a “useful tool in evaluating disability.” Seaman v. City of 
Des Moines, File Nos. 5053418, 5057973, 5057974 (App. Oct. 11, 2019) (quoting 
Bisenius v. Mercy Med. Ctr., File No. 5036055 (App. Apr. 1, 2013)); see also Westling, 
810 N.W.2d at 252. However, in cases involving injuries on or after July 1, 2017, the 
Guides are now more than a tool; they are dispositive. 
[W]hen determining functional disability and not loss of earning capacity, 
the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be 
determined solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent 
impairment, published by the American medical association, as adopted 
by the workers’ compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 
17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not be utilized in determining 
loss or percentage of permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity. 
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(x).  
Thus, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act now limits the determination of what, 
if any, permanent disability an injured employee has sustained to only the employee’s 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 24 
functional impairment. In making that determination, the agency is prohibited from using 
lay testimony or agency expertise by Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x). Under the statute, 
that determination must be made “solely by utilizing” the Fifth Edition of the Guides.  
As found above, Dr. Goebel’s opinion on the permanent disability to Ketelsen’s 
right knee is most persuasive. It is adopted by this decision. It is more likely than not 
Ketelsen sustained a permanent partial disability following total right knee replacement 
of forty percent to her lower extremity. 
Under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(p), entitlement to benefits is based on 
multiplying the percentage impairment by two hundred twenty weeks. Forty multiplied by 
two hundred twenty equals eighty-eight. Therefore, Ketelsen is entitled to eighty-eight 
weeks of compensation for the permanent partial disability to her right leg caused by the 
work injury to her knee. 
4 .  
R a t e .  
The parties stipulated Ketelsen’s gross earnings on the stipulated injury date 
were five hundred seventeen and 71/100 dollars ($517.71) per week. They also 
stipulated she was married and entitled to three exemptions at the time in question. 
Based on the parties’ stipulations, Ketelsen’s workers’ compensation rate is three 
hundred fifty-eight and 65/100 dollars ($358.65) per week. 
ORDER 
Based on the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) The defendants shall pay to Ketelsen eighty-eight (88) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits at the rate of three hundred fifty-eight and 65/100 
dollars ($358.65) per week from the stipulated commencement date. 
2) The defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
3) The defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein 
as set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
4) The defendants shall be given the credit for benefits previously paid for the 
stipulated amount of eighty-eight and 36/100 (88.36) weeks at the rate of 
three hundred fifty-eight and 65/100 dollars ($358.65) per week. 
5) The defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by Rule 876 
IAC 3.1(2). 
6) The defendants shall pay to Ketelsen the following amounts for the following 
costs: 
a. One hundred three dollars and 00/100 ($103.00) for the filing fee; and 

KETELSEN V. DENISON COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT 
Page 25 
b. Fourteen and 10/100 dollars ($14.10) for the cost of the service of 
original notice. 
7) The parties shall be responsible for paying their own hearing costs. Each 
party shall pay an equal share of the cost of the transcript.  
Signed and filed this _29th _ day of April, 2022. 
 
 
 
                       BEN HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
James Byrne (via WCES) 
 
Paul Barta (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal pe riod 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
