Case Number: 20009501.01
Case Title:  SMITH, MARK V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Smith Mark-20009501.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MARK SMITH, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
               File No. 20009501.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                   ARBITRATION DECISION 
BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION, 
  : 
 
 
  :                        
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ACE AMERICAN INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
     Head Notes: 1402.40; 1803; 2501; 
 
 
  : 
       2505; 2701; 2907; 3002; 4000.2 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Mark Edward Smith filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against Barr-Nunn Transportation, employer, and Ace American 
Insurance Company, insurer, for an accepted work injury date of May 4, 2019.  The 
case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on December 18, 2020. 
This case was scheduled to be an in-person hearing occurring in Des Moines. However, 
due to the outbreak of a pandemic in Iowa, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner ordered all hearings to occur via video means, using CourtCall. 
Accordingly, this case proceeded to a live video hearing via CourtCall with all parties 
and the court reporter appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded without significant 
difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 7, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 11, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through Q, S and T.  
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. Patricia “Patty” Nichols also testified on 
behalf of claimant. Wendy Noring and John Timothy “Tim” Lehman testified on behalf of 
the defendants. The evidentiary record was left open after the hearing to allow for the 
parties to submit clarifying evidence with respect to Dr. Taylor’s impairment rating. The 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Oct-07  14:34:32     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SMITH V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 2 
 
parties submitted post-hearing briefs on February 1, 2021, and the case was considered 
fully submitted on that date. 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care and associated 
temporary disability benefits; 
 
2. 
Whether claimant has reached maximum medical improvement, and if so, the 
extent of permanent disability to his left lower extremity; 
 
3. 
The proper rate for weekly compensation benefits; 
 
4. 
Whether penalty benefits should be assessed pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.13;  
 
5. 
Payment of certain medical expenses; and 
 
6. 
Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
his demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his 
veracity. Claimant is found credible.1 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 63-year-old person. (Tr., p. 48) He lives in 
Palm Harbor, Florida, with his girlfriend, Patricia “Patty” Nichols. (Defendants’ Exhibit A, 
p. 2; Deposition Transcript, p. 3) He completed school through the 9th grade. (Tr., p. 48) 
Between approximately 1970 and 2009, claimant worked as a musician. (Tr., pp. 48-49) 
Starting in approximately 1990, claimant also began working as a truck driver. (Tr., p. 
49) Claimant’s answers to interrogatories list approximately 11 different companies for 
which he has worked as a truck driver since 1990. (Claimant’s Exhibit 5, pp. 33-36) 
There is a gap in claimant’s employment history between 1997 and 1998, when 
claimant was off work for a period recovering from a traumatic brain injury. (Tr., pp. 49-
50) 
 
                                                                 
1 Defendants submitted claimant’s deposition, dated August 31, 2020, into evidence. (Defendants’ Exhibit 
A) There was a great deal of testimony and evidence regarding whether claimant was “coached” during 
his deposition, as it was conducted via Zoom and there are several instances of an “unidentified speaker” 
appearing on the transcript. Having considered the testimony and other evidence submitted regarding this 
issue, I find that the “unidentified speaker” on the deposition transcript was more likely than not an echo 
or other audio interference, and that claimant was not “coached” during his deposition.  

SMITH V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 3 
 
In 2014, claimant began working as a truck driver for Barr-Nunn Transportation. 
(Cl. Ex. 5, p. 34) While driving for Barr-Nunn, claimant testified that his routes covered a 
large part of the country between the East Coast and the Midwest. (Tr., pp. 51-52) 
Typically, his job would begin in the morning with a pre-trip inspection of his vehicle, 
after which he would either pick up an empty or fully loaded trailer to transport to 
another location. (Tr., p. 54) When claimant would arrive at a Barr-Nunn terminal, he 
testified that he would usually wait there to find out where his next load was located. 
(Tr., p. 52) He described that there was often a driver’s lounge at the terminal where 
employees could sleep, do laundry, bathe, and watch television. When claimant did not 
have a load right away he would stay at the lounge until the next day when a load was 
brought in. Sometimes he would be asked to take a tractor for detailing or other work, or 
to run other errands while on these stays. (Tr., pp. 52-53) 
 
Claimant testified he felt he was in good shape physically prior to the work injury. 
(Tr., p. 55) He had high blood pressure and some chronic back pain, but nothing that 
prevented him from doing his job. (Tr., pp. 55-56) 
 
Claimant was injured on May 4, 2019, around 11:00 p.m. (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 2) 
Claimant testified that he had just arrived at the terminal in Granger, Iowa, and had 
parked his trailer in the back. (Tr., p. 58) He “bobtailed” back around to the front with his 
tractor, and parked it in front because he was going to use it the next morning. 
Claimant’s testimony is that as he was climbing out of the tractor, he grabbed the yellow 
tractor brake, and when he did that his foot slipped from the railing and he fell off the 
truck. (Tr., pp. 58-59) He landed in the parking lot, and as he was lying there the tractor 
rolled backwards and rolled over his left foot. (Tr., p. 59) He testified that he immediately 
felt like his foot was “on fire,” and he started yelling. He thought he was going to lose his 
foot. (Tr., p. 59) He called the night dispatcher on duty to help him, and that person 
called an ambulance and called Wendy Noring, the workers’ compensation compliance 
manager for Barr-Nunn. (Def. Ex. A, p. 31; Tr., p. 113) 
 
Emergency medical services arrived and transported claimant by ambulance to 
MercyOne Hospital in Des Moines. (Joint Exhibits 1, 2, 3) By the time claimant arrived 
at the hospital, it was approximately 12:06 a.m. on May 5, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 7) His left 
foot was numb, purple, and swollen, and there was no palpable pulse. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 11) 
There was a concern for compartment syndrome of the foot, so claimant was admitted 
for evaluation. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 13) X-rays showed no acute bony trauma or fracture, but 
there was soft tissue swelling over the dorsum of the foot. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 14; 19) He was 
evaluated by Kamaldeen Aderibigbe, M.D., who found no signs of compartment 
syndrome of the left foot. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 21) Dr. Aderibigbe could not rule out ligamentous 
injury, and had claimant admitted for observation. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 32) Claimant was 
discharged from the hospital on May 6, 2019, once his pain was adequately controlled 
and he was comfortable using crutches. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 33-35) He was told to follow up 
with his primary care provider in Florida in one week, and to remain off work until that 
time. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 36) 
 

SMITH V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 4 
 
While claimant was in the hospital in Iowa, Wendy Noring advised him that his 
claim would not be filed as workers’ compensation. (Tr., p. 33; Cl. Ex. 10, p. 79; Dep. 
Tr., p. 22) Ms. Noring testified at hearing and also provided deposition testimony prior to 
hearing, a transcript of which is in evidence. (Tr., p. 113; Cl. Ex. 10) Ms. Noring’s 
testimony was consistent and her demeanor at the time of hearing gave the 
undersigned no reason to doubt her veracity. Ms. Noring has worked for Barr-Nunn for 
approximately 25 years, and has been involved with handling workers’ compensation 
claims for about 20 of those years. (Tr., pp. 124, 128; Cl. Ex. 10, p. 75; Dep. Tr., p. 7) At 
her deposition, Ms. Noring testified that on the night of May 4, 2019, she was on-call for 
emergent safety situations. (Cl. Ex. 10, p. 77; Dep. Tr., p. 15) She received a call from 
one of the overnight staff in Granger informing her that claimant had run over his foot 
with his tractor and EMS had been called. (Cl. Ex. 10, p. 77; Dep. Tr., pp. 15-16) The 
next morning she was advised that he had been admitted to MercyOne Hospital. (Cl. 
Ex. 10, p. 78; Dep. Tr., p. 20) 
 
The next morning, May 5, 2019, Ms. Noring contacted claimant to discuss the 
injury, and “let him know that we’re not filing it as a work comp claim at this time.” (Cl. 
Ex. 10, p. 79; Dep. Tr., p. 22) She testified that because claimant was “logging off duty,” 
had already parked the truck and done some things in the terminal and gotten back into 
the truck, she did not view it as a work injury. (Cl. Ex. 10, p. 79; Dep. Tr., p. 23) She 
stated that the decision to deny the claim was made “almost immediately. It would have 
been in the first 24 hours because I would have already known at that point that he was 
not under a load, he was not logging in as on duty. Everything pointed to it was his 
personal time.” (Cl. Ex. 10, p. 79; Dep. Tr., p. 24) No additional investigation was 
conducted regarding compensability of the claim. (Cl. Ex. 10, p. 81; Dep. Tr., pp. 29-32) 
At hearing, Ms. Noring testified that claimant did not question the denial, so it was not 
investigated any further. (Tr., p. 129)  
 
Claimant testified that he knew he had sustained a work injury, but was worried 
that he would be fired because it was “his fault” that he was injured. (Tr., pp. 61-62) As 
such, he continued with treatment using his personal health insurance. After he was 
discharged from the hospital in Iowa, he returned to his home in Florida. He was seen at 
Atlantis Clinic in Oldsmar, Florida, on May 13, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 37-38) The 
diagnoses were “foot contusion” and “foot cellulitis.” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 37) X-rays taken that 
day were negative. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 38) He returned to the clinic on May 16, 2019, at which 
time FMLA paperwork was completed. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 39-45) The FMLA paperwork 
indicated that claimant was unable to ambulate on the left foot or drive. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 43) 
The estimated ending date for the period of incapacity was May 27, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
44) 
 
Claimant testified that he asked the doctor to send him back to work, as he had 
no money coming in and had bills to pay. (Tr., p. 63) Claimant did return to his regular 
job on May 27, 2019. He testified that his pain level in his foot was at an 8 out of 10 
when he returned to work, and he consistently experienced pain levels between 7 and 
10 while working. (Tr., pp. 66-69) He took tramadol that was prescribed by his 
physician, and over-the-counter Advil. (Tr., pp. 63-64) At some point, he started to use 

SMITH V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 5 
 
CBD oil, as he had heard that it might help with his pain. (Tr., p. 65) He was further 
under the impression that the CBD oil would not affect the results of a random drug test 
or otherwise jeopardize his employment. (Tr., p. 64) Unfortunately, claimant was 
incorrect, and was terminated from employment effective August 12, 2019, after testing 
positive for marijuana on a random drug test. (Def. Ex. H, p. 25) It is claimant’s 
understanding that the CBD oil caused the positive test result. (Tr., pp. 65-66) 
 
For a time following his termination from Barr-Nunn, claimant worked as a driver 
for Lyft. (Tr., p. 74) At his deposition on August 31, 2020, claimant had not taken a Lyft 
customer since early July. (Def. Ex. A, p. 2; Dep. Tr., p. 4) At hearing, claimant testified 
that he was again driving for Lyft, and that he generally does not work for more than 
three hours per day due to his foot pain. (Tr., p. 74) He stated that he usually starts 
early in the morning, and after three hours he goes home for a break. If his foot is doing 
good, he may go back out for a little while. (Tr., p. 74) In May of 2020, claimant applied 
for a job as a greeter at Walmart. (Tr., pp. 104-105) While he recognizes this job would 
have required standing on his feet, claimant testified that he was going to try it, because 
“I wouldn’t know until I tried it.” (Tr., p. 105) Ultimately, claimant did not get the job at 
Walmart. (Def. Ex. A, p. 13; Depo. Tr., p. 47) 
 
After his termination from Barr-Nunn, claimant no longer had health insurance. 
(Tr., p. 76) He returned to Atlantis Clinic on August 14, 2019, for a refill of his tramadol. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 46) The record makes no mention of foot pain, and indicates the tramadol 
is related to claimant’s chronic low back pain. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 46) The next time claimant 
saw any medical provider was December 23, 2019, at which time he saw Marcia 
Gainer, APRN, at Community Health Center. (See Def. Ex. E) Again, the medical record 
makes no mention of foot pain. (Def. Ex. E, pp. 15-21) 
 
Claimant filed a petition for workers’ compensation benefits in Florida in 
September of 2019. (Cl. Ex. 10, p. 81; Dep. Tr., p. 30; Ex. 3, p. 16) That petition 
indicated that the injury occurred in Florida and contained the incorrect date of injury, so 
it was denied. (Cl. Ex. 10, p. 81; Dep. Tr., pp. 30-31) Claimant then filed a petition in 
Iowa on November 20, 2019, which indicated the injury occurred in Dallas County on 
May 5, 2019. (Cl. Ex. 10, p. 81; Dep. Tr., p. 31) On December 17, 2019, defense 
counsel wrote to claimant’s attorney and advised that the claim would be denied based 
on the incorrect date, as well as “inconsistencies that exist between representations in 
the Florida petition, the Iowa petition, and the Atlantis Clinic medical note.” (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 
16) 
 
On January 20, 2020, claimant amended his petition to change the date of injury 
to May 4, 2019. (See Claimant’s Amendment to Petition) Based on the amended 
petition and “further explanation provided to the employer,” defendant accepted 
compensability of the claim on January 31, 2020. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 19) 
 
Ms. Noring testified at her deposition that upon receipt of the Florida petition, she 
did have an understanding of what she thought it was referring to, despite the incorrect 
date and state. (Cl. Ex. 10, p. 81; Dep. Tr., p. 31) Again, after receiving the Iowa 

SMITH V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 6 
 
petition, Ms. Noring testified that she had an awareness of what incident was being 
referenced in the petition. (Cl. Ex. 10, p. 81; Dep. Tr., pp. 31-32) No additional 
investigation was conducted by the employer after receiving the petitions, but defense 
counsel was contacted. (Cl. Ex. 10, pp. 81-82; Dep. Tr., pp. 32-33) 
 
After compensability was accepted, claimant’s attorney made a formal request 
for additional medical care on February 11, 2020. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 21) Claimant then 
returned to Marcia Gainer, APRN, on February 13, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 47) Defendants 
argue that this visit was not authorized. Claimant reported that he continued to 
experience swelling and pain in the left foot, especially the great toe. APRN Gainer 
recommended a referral to podiatry, as well as x-rays and an MRI. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 51) 
 
Claimant was then sent to the authorized treating provider, Brandon Taylor, M.D., 
who he saw for the first time on April 2, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 59) At that time, claimant 
reported pain up to level 10 of 10 on an intermittent basis since the injury occurred. He 
reported pain increased with weight bearing. On physical examination, Dr. Taylor noted 
an antalgic gait. Claimant had tenderness around the left midfoot and the 2nd and 3rd 
TMT joints, as well as pain with motion. Dr. Taylor noted swelling in this part of the foot. 
Claimant also demonstrated decreased range of motion in his left ankle compared to 
the right. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 59) 
 
Dr. Taylor obtained x-rays, which did not show any acute fracture, but did show a 
possible old fracture of the 3rd metatarsal. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 60) Dr. Taylor found no 
displacement of the Lisfranc joint on weightbearing views. Dr. Taylor ordered an MRI in 
order to look at the soft tissues of the midfoot. He noted that claimant may have a 
chronic Lisfranc injury with scar tissue in the area. He also ordered a nerve conduction 
(NCV) study and EMG, as he suspected claimant may have had a crushing injury of the 
deep peroneal nerve and possibly the superficial peroneal nerve. He prescribed 
Neurontin as well, to help with claimant’s nerve pain and burning in his foot. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 
60) 
 
Claimant had an MRI of the left foot on April 9, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 68) The MRI 
showed mild degenerative changes in the left foot. His nerve conduction study and 
EMG took place on April 10, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 69-70) The EMG/NCV was normal. He 
followed up with Dr. Taylor on April 22, 2020, to discuss the results. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 61) 
There is no dictation in evidence from that date, but the handwritten notes indicate that 
Dr. Taylor reviewed the studies with claimant, and recommended that he give himself 
more time to heal, and continue with the medication to help with the nerve pain. (Jt. Ex. 
6, p. 61) Dr. Taylor also indicated that claimant reached maximum medical improvement 
(MMI) on that date, but would need to continue the Neurontin until symptoms subside. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 63) He was not assigned any permanent work restrictions. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 63) 
 
On June 24, 2020, Dr. Taylor issued an additional office note. (Def. Ex. F, p. 22) 
He noted that claimant did have a crush injury to his foot in May of 2019, and described 
numbness over his great toe at his last visit. The MRI showed mild degenerative 
changes around the 1st and 3rd TMT joints. The nerve conduction study did not show 

SMITH V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 7 
 
evidence of compressive neuropathy. However, claimant did show improvement on 
Neurontin, which may be related to a nerve injury that would not be seen on the NCV or 
EMG if mild, and also would not show on the MRI. Dr. Taylor clarified that the 
prescription for Neurontin is for this problem and not any pre-existing problem. (Def. Ex. 
F, p. 22) 
 
On July 15, 2020, Dr. Taylor issued a note for further clarification of claimant’s 
injury. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 64) He indicated that it is possible that claimant reached MMI on 
May 27, 2019, when he was released to return to work. However, as Dr. Taylor did not 
see claimant at that point, he could not confirm MMI, “but it is likely that is correct.” 
Again, with respect to a return to driving, Dr. Taylor noted that as he did not see 
claimant in May of 2019, the earliest he can opine that claimant would have been able 
to drive would have been his last visit on April 22, 2020. Dr. Taylor then stated that “it is 
reasonable for him to have temporary work restriction based on the character of his 
injury.” He did not provide any additional information regarding what type of restriction 
or the time period involved. With respect to permanency, he provided a 1 percent rating 
related to “musculoskeletal system based on the AMA Guidelines.” Finally, he noted 
that even though a nerve conduction study may result in normal findings, at times there 
can still be up to 20 to 25 percent nerve damage. As such, claimant may continue to 
improve with Neurontin over the course of 18 to 24 months after the injury. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 
64) On July 29, 2020, Dr. Taylor issued an addendum to this note, changing the 
language of his impairment rating to 1 percent related to “musculoskeletal system lower 
extremity based on AMA Guidelines 5th Edition.” (Def. Ex. F, p. 23) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Taylor on September 16, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 65) He 
continued to report tingling and numbness in his toes, as well as burning and throbbing 
pain. He had discontinued gabapentin2 at that point, but continued to take tramadol. He 
had also obtained a medical marijuana card and was using that at night. Dr. Taylor’s 
note indicated that he discussed nerve regeneration with claimant and explained that 
the maximum use with Neurontin is 2 years, after which any remaining nerve damage is 
likely permanent. He reportedly told claimant that he should feel some type of relief over 
the next 6 months, and continued him on Neurontin. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 65) 
 
Claimant’s attorney arranged for claimant to have an independent medical 
evaluation with Mark Bornstein, D.P.M., on October 1, 2020. (Cl. Ex. 1) Dr. Bornstein 
notes in his report that he reviewed medical records from Atlantis Medical Clinic, FMLA 
Paperwork, Barr-Nunn baseline performance screen, Granger Fire and EMS Units, 
Mercy Trauma Services, and Dr. Brandon Taylor’s medical records and DWC-25 
reports. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 2) On physical examination, Dr. Bornstein noted a “severely 
painful” left lower extremity with pain on ambulation. He noted a limping antalgic gait 
pattern, as well as moderate pain and guarding to range of motion of the left forefoot. 
Dr. Bornstein found a palpable bone enlargement on the dorsal left Lisfranc’s area with 
radiating pain proximally and distally on tapping the cutaneous and deep peroneal 
nerves running through that area. He also found palpable painful masses in the 2nd and 
                                                                 
2 Gabapentin is the generic form of Neurontin. 

SMITH V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 8 
 
3rd interspaces, consistent with traumatic neuromas. He noted palpable pain in the 
fibular sesamoid area with plantar swelling as well. Finally, Dr. Bornstein had x-rays 
taken in his office, and indicated they showed post-traumatic Lisfranc’s joint damage 
with arthritis, as well as a stress fracture in the 3rd metatarsal shaft. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 2) 
 
Dr. Bornstein’s diagnoses were 1) Traumatic Lisfranc’s injury with resultant 
boney overgrowth and traumatic arthritis/arthrosis left mid-foot; 2) Traumatic 
nerve/crush injury with nerve damage to the deep peroneal and cutaneous nerves left 
mid and forefoot; 3) Traumatic neuromas 2nd and 3rd interspace left foot; 4) Traumatic 
stress fracture 3rd metatarsal left foot; and 5) Traumatic fibular sesamoid injury left foot. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 2) 
 
In response to questions from claimant’s attorney, Dr. Bornstein further opined 
that claimant had not yet reached MMI, and no rating is applicable if he receives 
medically necessary additional care. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 3) However, in the event claimant 
does not receive additional care, Dr. Bornstein provided a total combined impairment 
rating of 21 percent of the body as a whole, based on the 5th Edition of the AMA Guides 
to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment. This rating is based on impairment of toes 
2, 3, and 4, which is equal to 2 percent of the whole person; moderate impairment for 
traumatic arthritis of the left mid-foot, which is equal to 21 percent of the foot, 10 percent 
of the lower extremity, and converts to 7 percent of the whole person; severe decreased 
motion of the hindfoot, which is 7 percent of the foot, 5 percent of the lower extremity, 
and 2 percent of the whole person; and traumatic nerve damage and neuromas, which 
combined added up to 24 percent of the lower extremity, which is 10 percent of the 
whole person.3 
 
Dr. Bornstein recommended that claimant continue to receive treatment with a 
board certified podiatrist and certified pain management specialist. He opined that 
claimant should be “in a no work status” since the date of the injury and into the 
foreseeable future. He noted that permanent restrictions without additional care would 
be no stand or walk continuous for more than 30 minutes and then a 30-minute 
elevation break; no lift or carry greater than 15 pounds; no stoop, bend, climb stairs or 
ladders and no pushing or pulling. He acknowledged that claimant was able to work 
following his injury, but stated that his conditions have “significantly worsened” over 
time, and any type of work now will continue to worsen his conditions. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 3) 
 
With respect to future treatment, Dr. Bornstein indicated that treatment should 
include regular office visits every month; oral and topical anti-inflammatory and pain 
medications, and custom molded orthotics. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4) He further recommended 
“extensive gait retraining and physical therapy.” Finally, he stated that more likely than 
not, claimant will need to have surgical repair of the traumatic damage to his foot, 
                                                                 
3 Claimant’s attorney contends that due to a typographical error in Dr. Bornstein’s report, the portion of 
the rating related to traumatic arthritis of the mid-foot should actually be 15 percent of the lower extremity. 
Claimant’s attorney also converts Dr. Bornstein’s whole body rating to a combined 41 percent impairment 
of the left lower extremity. (Claimant’s brief, p. 11) The undersigned is unable to determine how counsel 
reached this number, even if the alleged typographical error is considered.  

SMITH V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 9 
 
including surgical fusion and removal of the bone enlargement and arthritis in the left 
midfoot (Lisfranc’s area) as well as removal of the traumatic neuromas and extensive 
release of the nerve entrapments of the deep peroneal nerve and cutaneous nerves of 
the left foot. He will then have postoperative needs and physical therapy as well. (Cl. 
Ex. 1, p. 4) 
 
Defendants sent Dr. Bornstein’s report to Dr. Taylor in order to seek his opinions. 
Dr. Taylor reviewed the report and provided his response on December 9, 2020. (Def. 
Ex. Q) Dr. Taylor first noted that x-rays taken in his office did not reveal any significant 
arthritis, and the MRI did not show any signs of fracture in claimant’s foot. (Def. Ex. Q, 
p. 74) He noted that while the MRI showed some mild degenerative changes to the 
MTP joints, he did not find any objective data to indicate claimant would need surgical 
fusion of his midfoot. He further did not find any signs of a large neuroma that would 
need surgical treatment. Dr. Taylor noted that he looked for stress fractures, and did not 
find any objective findings consistent with stress fracture on x-ray or throughout 
claimant’s workup. The nerve conduction study was normal. Dr. Taylor again reiterated 
that some nerve conduction studies may show a false-normal test, but there is no 
objective data to recommend any nerve release surgery. He noted that claimant showed 
some subjective improvement on Neurontin and tramadol, which is why he 
recommended claimant continue the medication for 12 to 18 months to further stabilize 
his condition. (Def. Ex. Q, p. 74) 
 
Dr. Taylor further explained that one of the “indicators” during claimant’s 
treatment was that he was able to return to work following the injury. Dr. Taylor stated 
that if claimant had significant instability due to ligament damage, he would not expect 
him to have been able to return to work. Since instability was ruled out, he then looked 
for either a stress fracture or early post-traumatic arthritis. He did not find any significant 
arthritis or objective criteria to diagnose a fracture during his treatment. (Def. Ex. Q, p. 
74) He did not find any neuromas or fractures on physical examination or the MRI. (Def. 
Ex. Q, p. 75) He did not see any impairment in toes 2, 3, and 4, as most of claimant’s 
objective problems were through the midfoot. (Def. Ex. Q, p. 75) 
 
Dr. Taylor then reiterated his 1 percent whole body impairment rating, however it 
appears he used the 6th Edition of the AMA Guides. (Def. Ex. Q, p. 75) In responding to 
a letter authored by defendants’ attorney dated January 20, 2021, Dr. Taylor provided a 
1 percent impairment to the left lower extremity pursuant to the 5th Edition of the AMA 
Guides. (Def. Ex. T, p. 83) 
 
In reviewing the entirety of the medical evidence and considering the reports of 
Dr. Bornstein and Dr. Taylor, I find some flaws in both impairment ratings. It is difficult 
as both physicians practice in the state of Florida, which uses the 6th Edition of the AMA 
Guides for impairment ratings. It is clear that neither doctor was familiar with the 5th 
Edition, and both required assistance and prompting from counsel in order to provide a 
5th Edition rating. (See Def. Ex. S and T; Cl. Ex. 11) However, the problems with Dr. 
Bornstein’s report are more difficult to overcome. First, in his list of medical records 
reviewed, he makes no mention of records from Diagnostic Clinic Largo, where claimant 

SMITH V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 10 
 
had both an MRI and an EMG/NCV. The fact that he did not review these studies prior 
to making his recommendations for medical treatment, including surgery, is highly 
problematic. Additionally, his diagnoses are quite different from those of Dr. Taylor, who 
examined claimant on several occasions and also reviewed the MRI and EMG/NCV. 
The same is true of his impairment rating, which is difficult to follow, and seems to 
contain at least one typographical error. Finally, it cannot be overlooked that Dr. 
Bornstein only examined claimant one time, for the purposes of litigation, while Dr. 
Taylor provided ongoing treatment as claimant’s authorized treating physician.  
 
Additionally, Dr. Taylor reviewed Dr. Bornstein’s report, and provided explanation 
as to why he disagrees with Dr. Bornstein’s diagnoses and treatment recommendations. 
(Def. Ex. Q) His opinions are based on his examinations and treatment of claimant’s 
condition, and his review of the MRI and EMG/NCV studies that were conducted. Based 
on all of these factors, I find Dr. Taylor’s opinions regarding claimant’s diagnoses and 
future medical care more convincing. I also find Dr. Taylor’s opinion that claimant has 
reached maximum medical improvement more convincing. While claimant may continue 
to experience some pain relief while taking Neurontin, he has reached MMI. The parties 
stipulated that the commencement date for permanent partial disability, if any is 
awarded, is July 15, 2020. 
 
The flaw with Dr. Taylor’s impairment rating is that it does not provide any 
information as to how he reached the rating using the 5th Edition of the AMA Guides. 
(Def. Ex. T, p. 83) Claimant argues that Dr. Taylor’s rating cannot be trusted, as he 
simply changed his 1 percent rating under the 6th Edition to a 1 percent rating under the 
5th Edition. I note, however, that his 6th Edition rating is for 1 percent of the body as a 
whole, while his 5th Edition rating is for 1 percent of the lower extremity. (Compare Def. 
Ex. Q, p. 75 with Def. Ex. T, p. 83) There is no evidence in the record that leads me to 
conclude Dr. Taylor is providing a false 5th Edition rating. While it is somewhat 
problematic that Dr. Taylor did not provide any basis for his 1 percent rating, his overall 
opinions are more reliable than those of Dr. Bornstein, as noted above. Again, this case 
is difficult as I am left with two flawed impairment ratings. However, Iowa law requires 
that the extent of permanent impairment be determined solely by utilizing the 5th Edition 
of the AMA Guides. See Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x); 876 IAC 2.4. For the reasons 
stated above, I find Dr. Taylor’s 1 percent lower extremity rating to be the most 
convincing. Therefore, claimant is entitled to permanent partial disability benefits equal 
to 1 percent of the lower extremity, which is 2.2 weeks of benefits. 
 
Claimant is requesting alternate medical care. He testified that currently, the pain 
in his foot is “livable” during the day, due to the medication Dr. Taylor has prescribed. 
However, it gets worse the more he walks on it. (Tr., p. 81) The medications provide 
some relief, but the pain returns when they wear off. (Tr., pp. 81-82) Claimant further 
testified that he would be comfortable with transferring his care to Dr. Bornstein, as he 
believes he needs additional treatment. (Tr., p. 84) He is willing to do anything the 
doctor recommends to stop the pain. (Tr., p. 84) On a typical day, his pain is at a level 6 
of 10. (Tr., p. 92) With activities, it can get up to a 9 of 10. (Tr., p. 92) 
 

SMITH V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 11 
 
There is no indication defendants have withdrawn authorization for claimant to 
continue treatment with Dr. Taylor. Claimant has not proven that the defendants are 
failing to authorize reasonable care at this time. Dr. Taylor is providing care that is 
reasonably suited to treat claimant’s injury. As such, claimant is not entitled to alternate 
care at this time. 
 
There is also a dispute regarding the proper weekly benefit rate. Claimant has 
calculated the rate as $906.00, based on an average weekly wage of $1,574.63. (Cl. 
Ex. 7, p. 41) Defendants believe the proper rate to be $847.22, based on an average 
weekly wage of $1,434.57. (Def. Ex. M, p. 53) The difference in the two rate calculations 
stems primarily from week ending April 28, 2019, in which claimant earned $2,157.90; 
week ending March 31, 2019, in which claimant earned $2,285.36; and week ending 
March 10, 2019, in which claimant earned $2,213.77. Claimant included these three 
weeks in his rate calculation, while only excluding three weeks he considered to be too 
low. Defendants argue that these weeks do not represent claimant’s “customary 
earnings” because they are too high. Therefore, in addition to the three low weeks, 
defendants seek to also exclude these three “high” weeks from the rate calculation. 
 
In reviewing the wage records submitted into evidence and the two rate 
calculations, I find claimant’s calculation to be a more accurate representation of his 
customary earnings. There is no dispute regarding the three low weeks that were 
excluded from the calculations, primarily because those weeks are exceptionally low. 
However, the three weeks defendants seek to exclude as being too high are not 
unusually high when compared to the remainder of the earnings history in evidence. 
Therefore, I accept claimant’s rate calculation of $906.00 as the proper weekly benefit 
rate. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
 
The first issue for consideration is whether claimant is entitled to alternate 
medical care with an associated running award of temporary total disability benefits.  
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish reasonable 
services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the right to 
choose the care. . . . The treatment must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee. If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury. If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
 
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment - and seeking alternate care - 

SMITH V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 12 
 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable. See Iowa 
R. App. P. 14(f)(5); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). 
Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact. Id. The 
employer’s obligation turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability. Id.; 
Harned v. Farmland Foods, Inc., 331 N.W.2d 98 (Iowa 1983). In Pirelli-Armstrong Tire 
Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433 (Iowa 1997), the court approvingly quoted Bowles v. 
Los Lunas Schools, 109 N.M. 100, 781 P.2d 1178 (App. 1989): 
 
[T]he words “reasonable” and “adequate” appear to describe the same 
standard. 
  
[The New Mexico rule] requires the employer to provide a certain standard 
of care and excuses the employer from any obligation to provide other 
services only if that standard is met. We construe the terms “reasonable” 
and “adequate” as describing care that is both appropriate to the injury 
and sufficient to bring the worker to maximum recovery. 
 
An application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because 
claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving. Mere dissatisfaction with 
the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical 
care. Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not 
reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the 
claimant. See Iowa Code § 85.27(4). Thus, by challenging the employer’s choice of 
treatment and seeking alternate care, claimant assumes the burden of proving the 
authorized care is unreasonable. See Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e) ; Long, 528 N.W.2d 
at 124.   
Additionally, the commissioner is justified in ordering alternate care when 
employer-authorized care has not been effective and evidence shows that such care is 
“inferior or less extensive” than other available care requested by the employee. Long; 
528 N.W.2d at 124; Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds; 562 N.W.2d 433, 437 (Iowa 
1997). 
 
Ultimately, determining whether care is reasonable under the statute is a 
question of fact.  Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123. In this case, I found that defendants have 
not withdrawn authorization of Dr. Taylor as the treating physician. Dr. Taylor is 
providing reasonable care, which claimant testified has helped his condition. Claimant 
has not met his burden to provide that the authorized care is unreasonable. As such, he 
is not entitled to an order of alternate medical care at this time. 
 
As noted above, I also accepted Dr. Taylor’s opinion that claimant has reached 
maximum medical improvement with respect to his foot injury. As such, he is not entitled 
to a running award of temporary benefits. 
 

SMITH V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 13 
 
The next issue to determine is the extent of claimant’s permanent partial 
disability. The parties have stipulated that the disability is a scheduled member disability 
to the left lower extremity. 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or as an unscheduled injury pursuant to the provisions of section 
85.34(2)(v). The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured 
worker is entitled is determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is 
"limited to the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. 
Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 
312 (Iowa 1998).   
Iowa Code section 85.34(x) states:  
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the workers' compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining 
functional disability and not loss of earning capacity.  
Iowa Code section 85.34 (x).  
This agency has adopted The Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, published by the American Medical Association for 
determining the extent of loss or percentage of impairment for permanent partial 
disabilities.  See 876 IAC 2.4.  
Claimant argues that he is entitled to an award equal to 41 percent loss of the 
lower extremity based on Dr. Bornstein’s impairment rating. For the reasons stated 
above, I found both impairment ratings to have some flaws. Ultimately, however, I did 
not find Dr. Bornstein’s rating to be credible. Rather, I found Dr. Taylor’s 1 percent lower 
extremity rating to be the most convincing. Therefore, claimant is entitled to permanent 
partial disability benefits equal to 1 percent of the lower extremity, which is 2.2 weeks of 
benefits. 
 
The next issue to be decided is the proper weekly benefit rate. Both parties 
calculate their respective rates utilizing Iowa Code section 85.36(6) as the applicable 
code section. Section 85.36(6) states, “[i]f the employee was absent from employment 
for reasons personal to the employee during part of the thirteen calendar weeks 
preceding the injury, the employee's weekly earnings shall be the amount the employee 
would have earned had the employee worked when work was available to other 
employees of the employer in a similar occupation. A week which does not fairly reflect 

SMITH V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 14 
 
the employee's customary earnings shall be replaced by the closest previous week with 
earnings that fairly represent the employee's customary earnings.” 
The Iowa Supreme Court provided an in-depth analysis of what qualifies as 
“customary earnings” in the case of Jacobson Transp. Co. v. Harris, 778 N.W.2d 192 
(Iowa 2010). Ascertainment of an employee’s customary earnings does not turn on a 
determination of what earnings are guaranteed or fixed; rather, it asks simply what 
earnings are usual or typical for that employee [...] An employee need not justify the 
weekly variance with a particular explanation. The amount of the variance alone, by the 
magnitude of its departure from the usual earnings of the employee, may suffice to 
justify the exclusion of a week's earnings from the weekly rate calculation. (Id.). 
In Jacobson, the commissioner averaged the earnings of the claimant truck 
driver for thirty weeks prior to the injury. The commissioner then focused on the thirteen 
weeks of earnings prior to the injury, throwing out three weeks in which earnings were 
markedly less than average. The Supreme Court of Iowa rejected the employer's 
argument that it was irrational to exclude the lowest weeks without also excluding the 
highest weeks. In that particular case, the high weeks were not unusually high when 
compared to the rest of the claimant's earning history. 
Likewise, I found that in this case, the three “high” weeks that defendants wish to 
exclude from the rate calculation are not unusually high when compared to the rest of 
claimant’s wage records in evidence. Therefore, I find that the pay periods ending April 
28, 2019, March 31, 2019, and March 10, 2019, are representative of claimant’s 
customary earnings. I find that claimant’s rate calculation is reasonable and fairly 
reflects his earnings immediately prior to the date of injury. Therefore, I find the 
applicable weekly rate for benefits in this case is $906.00. 
The next issue to be addressed is claimant’s claim for penalty benefits. Claimant 
argues that he is entitled to penalty benefits due to defendants’ failure to timely pay 
healing period benefits. Iowa Code section 86.13 governs compensation payments.  
Under the statute’s plain language, if there is a delay in payment absent “a reasonable 
or probable cause or excuse,” the employee is entitled to penalty benefits, of up to fifty 
percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, delayed, or terminated without 
reasonable or probable cause or excuse. Iowa Code § 86.13(4); see also Christensen v. 
Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 260 (Iowa 1996) (citing earlier version of the 
statute). “The application of the penalty provision does not turn on the length of the 
delay in making the correct compensation payment.” Robbennolt v. Snap-On Tools 
Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229, 236 (Iowa 1996). If a delay occurs without a reasonable 
excuse, the commissioner is required to award penalty benefits in some amount to the 
employee.  Id. 
The statute requires the employer or insurance company to conduct a 
“reasonable investigation and evaluation” into whether benefits are owed to the 
employee, the results of the investigation and evaluation must be the “actual basis” 
relied on by the employer or insurance company to deny, delay, or terminate benefits, 
and the employer or insurance company must contemporaneously convey the basis for 

SMITH V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 15 
 
the denial, delay, or termination of benefits to the employee at the time of the denial, 
delay, or termination of benefits. Iowa Code § 86.13(4). An employer may establish a 
“reasonable cause or excuse” if “the delay was necessary for the insurer to investigate 
the claim,” or if “the employer had a reasonable basis to contest the employee’s 
entitlement to benefits.” Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. “A ‘reasonable basis’ for 
denial of the claim exists if the claim is ‘fairly debatable.’” Burton v. Hilltop Care Ctr., 813 
N.W.2d 250, 267 (Iowa 2012). “Whether a claim is ‘fairly debatable’ can generally be 
determined by the court as a matter of law.” Id. The issue is whether the employer had a 
reasonable basis to believe no benefits were owed to the claimant. Id. “If there was no 
reasonable basis for the employer to have denied the employee's benefits, then the 
court must ‘determine if the defendant knew, or should have known, that the basis for 
denying the employee's claim was unreasonable.’” Id. 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 86.13(4)(c), the employer bears the burden to 
establish that the reasonable cause or excuse for the delay in benefits was preceded by 
a reasonable investigation, that the results of that investigation are the actual basis for 
denial, and that the employer contemporaneously conveyed the basis to the claimant at 
the time of the delay or denial. 
There is no dispute that there was a delay in payment of healing period benefits. 
Defendants argue that a number of factors contributed to that delay, including the 
“reasonable investigation” the employer conducted in order to determine the facts 
surrounding the May 4, 2019 incident, as well as the “confusion” created by the claim 
initially filed in Florida, and then filed in Iowa with the incorrect date of injury. These 
factors do not amount to a reasonable cause or excuse for the delay in benefits.  
First, the employer’s “investigation” of the facts surrounding the incident lasted 
less than 24-hours. Ms. Noring testified that the decision to deny the claim was made 
“almost immediately. It would have been in the first 24 hours because I would have 
already known at that point that he was not under a load, he was not logging in as on 
duty. Everything pointed to it was his personal time.” (Cl. Ex. 10, p. 79; Dep. Tr., p. 24) 
No additional investigation was conducted regarding compensability, or whether legally, 
there was a reasonable basis to deny the claim. (Cl. Ex. 10, p. 81; Dep. Tr., pp. 29-32) 
At hearing, Ms. Noring testified that claimant did not question the denial, so it was not 
investigated any further at that time. (Tr., p. 129) Additionally, upon receipt of the 
petitions, no additional investigation was conducted regarding the facts of the incident. 
(Cl. Ex. 10, p. 81; Dep. Tr., p. 32) Defendants claim the petitions were initially denied 
because of being filed with the incorrect date, but Ms. Noring testified that she had an 
understanding of what she thought each petition was referring to. (Cl. Ex. 10, p. 81; 
Dep. Tr., pp. 31-32) The defendants’ initial investigation was not reasonable, and no 
renewed investigation was made upon receipt of the petitions. It is doubtful that the 
“confusion” regarding the petitions was the actual basis for the ongoing denial, as Ms. 
Noring admitted she was not confused. The claim was ultimately accepted as 
compensable on January 31, 2020, almost 9 months after the injury occurred. Penalty 
benefits are appropriate in this case. 
 

SMITH V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 16 
 
When considering an award of penalty benefits, the commissioner considers “the 
length of the delay, the number of the delays, the information available to the employer 
regarding the employee’s injuries and wages, and the prior penalties imposed against 
the employer under section 86.13.” Schadendorf v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 757 N.W.2d 
330, 336 (Iowa 2008). The purposes of the statute are to punish the employer and 
insurance company and to deter employers and insurance companies from delaying 
payments. Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 237. In this regard, the Commissioner is given 
discretion to determine the amount of the penalty imposed, with a maximum penalty of 
50 percent of the amount of the delayed, or denied, benefits. Christensen v. Snap-On 
Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 261 (Iowa 1996). Given the lack of investigation and the 
length of the delay, a 50 percent penalty for the delay in payment of healing period 
benefits is appropriate. 
The parties stipulated that claimant was entitled to healing period benefits from 
May 4, 2019 to May 27, 2019, which is 3.286 weeks. I found the proper weekly benefit 
rate to be $906.00, meaning claimant was entitled to $2,977.12 in total healing period 
benefits. Therefore, defendants shall pay claimant penalty benefits in the amount of 
$1,488.56 for the unreasonable delay in payment of healing period benefits. 
The next issue to determine is payment of certain medical expenses submitted 
by claimant. (See Cl. Ex. 8) Claimant is not entitled to reimbursement for medical bills 
unless claimant shows that they were paid from his own funds. See Caylor v. Employers 
Mutual Casualty Co., 337 N.W.2d 890 (Iowa Ct. App. 1983). Otherwise, claimant is 
entitled only to an order directing the responsible defendants to make such payments 
directly to the provider. See Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988). Where 
medical payments are made from a plan to which the employer did not contribute, the 
claimant is entitled to a direct payment. Midwest Ambulance Service v. Ruud, 754 
N.W.2d 860, 867-68 (Iowa 2008) (“We therefore hold that the commissioner did not err 
in ordering direct payment to the claimant for past medical expenses paid through 
insurance coverage obtained by the claimant independent of any employer 
contribution.”) See also: Carl A. Nelson & Co. v. Sloan, (Iowa App. 2015) 873 N.W.2d 
552 (Iowa App. 2015) (Table) 2015 WL 7574232 15-0323. Claimant has the burden of 
proving that the fees charged for such services are reasonable. Anderson v. High Rise 
Construction Specialists, Inc., File No. 850096 (App. July 31, 1990). 
 
It appears from defendants’ brief that the only claimed medical expenses they 
dispute are the costs related to claimant’s treatment at Community Health Centers of 
Pinellas (Cl. Ex. 8, pp. 58-59), and the charges from PharmacyOne (Cl. Ex. 8, pp. 65-
66) With respect to the charges from Community Health Centers, claimant has not 
proven that his treatment there on August 14, 2019 or December 23, 2019 was related 
to his work injury. There is no mention in the records from either date of claimant’s foot 
pain. As such, defendants are not responsible for any charges associated with either of 
those visits.  
 
Claimant was again seen at Community Health Centers on February 13, 2020, 
this time for his foot. However, that appointment was not authorized, and defendants 

SMITH V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 17 
 
had accepted compensability of his injury at that time. Once an employer acknowledges 
that the injured employee is seeking medical care for an injury compensable under the 
workers’ compensation statute, Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides that an “employer 
is obliged to furnish reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and 
has the right to choose the care.” Iowa Code § 85.27(4); Brewer-Strong v. HNI Corp., 
913 N.W.2d 235, 247 (Iowa 2018). Under Iowa law, there are essentially three 
situations in which employees may receive alternate medical care paid for by the 
employer. First, employees may choose their own medical care at the employer's 
expense during an emergency in which the employer “cannot be reached 
immediately.” Id.; see also Bell Bros. Heating and Air Cond. v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 
203-04 (Iowa 2010). Second, an employee may receive alternate medical care at the 
employer's expense when the employee and employer consent to such an 
agreement. Id. Third, “the workers’ compensation commissioner may order alternative 
care paid by the employer following a prompt, informal hearing when the employee is 
dissatisfied with the care furnished by the employer and establishes the care furnished 
by the employer was unreasonable.” Id. 
 
Outside of these situations, the employer retains the right to choose the 
employee’s medical care. Brewer-Strong, 913 N.W.2d at 248. However, the employer’s 
statutory right to choose medical care for the employee’s compensable injuries does not 
prohibit the employee from seeking his or her own medical care, at his or her own 
expense, when the employer denies compensability for the injury or the employee 
“abandons the protections of section 85.27 or otherwise obtains his or her own medical 
care independent of the statutory scheme.” Id., citing Bell Bros., 779 N.W.2d at 204. 
Thus, in Bell Bros., the Iowa Supreme Court held an employer’s duty to furnish 
reasonable medical care includes those claims for care by the employee that are 
unauthorized if the employee can prove “by a preponderance of the evidence that such 
care was reasonable and beneficial” under the totality of the circumstances. Id., citing 
Bell Bros., 779 N.W.2d at 206. “[U]nauthorized medical care is beneficial if it provides a 
more favorable medical outcome than would likely have been achieved by the care 
authorized by the employer.” Id. This burden of proof honors the employer's statutory 
right to choose the injured employee's medical care under Iowa Code section 85.27(4), 
yet provides the employee with reimbursement for unauthorized medical care when he 
or she can show by a preponderance of the evidence that the care was reasonable and 
beneficial. Id. It also aligns with the balance Iowa Code section 85.27(4) seeks to 
maintain between the employer's right to control medical care and the medical needs of 
the employee. Id., see also Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, 878 N.W.2d 759, 770–71 
(Iowa 2016). 
 
In this case, the employer had not yet authorized any care, despite accepting 
liability and despite claimant’s request for care. As such, it was reasonable for him to 
seek his own medical care at Community Health Center. The care was more beneficial 
than the “employer provided care” at that point, because the employer was not yet 
providing any care. It was not until April 2, 2020 that claimant was finally provided with 
authorized treatment for his injury. As such, I find defendants are responsible for the 

SMITH V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 18 
 
charges associated with claimant’s February 13, 2020 visit to Community Health 
Centers of Pinellas. 
 
 
With respect to the charges from PharmacyOne, claimant has not proven that 
any of the prescriptions listed are related to his work injury. The records from 
PharmacyOne are nearly illegible, but the charges appear to be related to medications 
for claimant’s hypertension, low back pain, and depression. (Cl. Ex. 8, pp. 65-66) The 
only medication claimant has been prescribed for his compensable foot injury is 
Neurontin, which does not appear on PharmacyOne’s statement. As such, defendants 
are not liable for any of the PharmacyOne expenses. 
 
 
The remainder of the expenses detailed in claimant’s exhibit 8 are related to the 
work injury. Defendants are responsible to reimburse claimant for the amounts he 
personally paid for those bills, and to pay any outstanding charges directly to the 
providers.  
 
 
The final issue is whether claimant is entitled to costs. Assessment of costs is a 
discretionary function of this agency. Iowa Code § 86.40. Costs are to be assessed at 
the discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation commissioner 
hearing the case. 876 IAC 4.33. Claimant has provided a summary of costs in 
claimant’s exhibit 9.4 I find that claimant was generally successful in his claim, and is 
entitled to costs. Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs, which include $91.00 for 
claimant’s deposition, $6.80 for service charges, and $100.00 for the filing fee. Claimant 
also seeks reimbursement for Ms. Noring’s deposition, but was unable to provide an 
invoice at the time of hearing. As such, I decline to award that cost.  
 
ORDER 
 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant two point two (2.2) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits, commencing July 15, 2020, at the rate of nine hundred six and 
00/100 dollars ($906.00). 
 
 
Defendants shall be entitled to a credit for all permanent partial disability benefits 
previously paid. 
 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (Appeal April 
2018). 
 
                                                                 
4 Prior to hearing, defendants agreed to pay for Dr. Bornstein’s IME report, so that cost is not included in 
this decision. 

SMITH V. BARR-NUNN TRANSPORTATION 
Page 19 
 
Defendants shall pay penalty benefits in the amount of one thousand four 
hundred eighty-eight and 56/100 dollars ($1,488.56). 
 
Defendants are responsible for payment of medical bills as outlined in this 
decision. 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of one hundred 
ninety-seven and 80/100 dollars ($197.80). 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
 
Signed and filed this ____7th _____ day of October, 2021. 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Casey Steadman (via WCES) 
Chris Scheldrup (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
 
 
