Case Number: 5066786
Case Title:  PINCKNEY, DENNIS V. MILLS FLEET FARM
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Pinckney Dennis-5066786D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DENNIS PINCKNEY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                         File No. 5066786 
MILLS FLEET FARM, 
  : 
 
 
  :                 ARBITRATION  DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SENTINEL INSURANCE 
  : 
COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :      Head Note Nos.:  1402.80, 1801.1, 1803 
 
Defendants. 
  :      2206, 2502, 2907 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Dennis Pinckney, filed a petition in arbitration for workers’ 
compensation benefits against Mills Fleet Farm, Inc., defendant employer, and Sentinel 
Insurance Company, defendant insurer.  The undersigned heard this case on 
December 10, 2019, in Des Moines, Iowa.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing.  On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.   
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 9, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 6, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through F.  Claimant testified on his own behalf.  
Lisa Reitan, a representative from the defendant employer, also provided testimony.  
The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.   
Counsel for the parties requested the opportunity to file post-hearing briefs.  
Their request was granted.  All parties filed their post-hearing briefs on January 28, 
2020, at which time the case was deemed fully submitted to the undersigned.   
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Jul-07  13:11:29     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

PINCKNEY V. MILLS FLEET FARM 
Page 2 
 
 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution in File No. 
5066786: 
1. Whether the stipulated injury caused temporary disability and, if so, the extent of 
claimant’s entitlement to temporary disability benefits, if any; 
2. Whether the stipulated injury caused permanent disability and, if so, the nature 
and extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits, if any;  
3. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for the medical expenses in 
Exhibit 2, and, if awarded, the reasonableness of the independent medical 
examination (IME) fees; 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an IME under Iowa Code 
section 85.39 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of penalty benefits under Iowa Code 
section 86.13; and 
6. Costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Dennis Pinckney was born in May 1954, making him 65 years old on the date of 
the evidentiary hearing.  (Hearing Transcript, page 8)  Mr. Pinckney did not graduate 
from high school; however, he did obtain a High School Equivalency Certificate, or 
GED.  (Hr. Tr., p. 36)  Claimant’s employment history largely consists of work as a 
delivery driver for various companies.  (Exhibit 3, p. 11)  Claimant worked as a driver for 
Victoria Cleaners from January 2007 to January 2015.  (Ex. B, p. 1)  In this role, 
claimant would drive to various locations and pick-up or deliver items.  At hearing, 
claimant testified he left Victoria Cleaners because the job required him to work too 
many hours of overtime.  (Hr. Tr., p. 38)  A medical record from a prior workers’ 
compensation claim reports claimant left Victoria Cleaners because he was unable to 
pick up certain items due to his low back symptoms.  (See Ex. E, p. 1)  Claimant 
subsequently worked a few months as a part-time delivery driver for Pizza Hut.  (Hr. Tr., 
p. 39)  He would later accept a position with the defendant employer.   
Pinckney began working as a part-time service technician in the automotive 
department for the defendant employer on May 15, 2015.  (Hr. Tr., p. 9)  He transitioned 
into full-time work approximately six months thereafter.  (Hr. Tr., p. 11)  Claimant’s job 
duties consisted of servicing automobiles, which included changing oil, adjusting 
alignments, installing various auto parts, and repairing various auto parts such as tires, 
shocks, and exhausts.  (Hr. Tr., p. 9) 

PINCKNEY V. MILLS FLEET FARM 
Page 3 
 
 
On August 24, 2018, Pinckney was working for Mills Fleet Farm and engaged in 
his normal job duties.   Claimant was lifting a large tire onto a machine when his back 
“popped.”  (Hr. Tr., p. 14)  Pinckney reported the injury to his supervisor and finished out 
his shift.  (Id.)  Defendants concede that Pinckney injured his low back as a result of 
lifting the tire, but dispute whether claimant has proven he sustained a permanent injury. 
(Hearing Report) 
The next day, claimant presented to work and told the same supervisor he could 
hardly walk.  Claimant filled out an injury report and requested medical treatment.  (Hr. 
Tr., p. 15)  The injury report provides that claimant did not initially think much of the 
injury, because it had been a “reoccurring incident.”  (Ex. 4, p. 20) 
At hearing, claimant testified that the pain he experienced after the August 24, 
2018, incident was in the same location as the pain he experienced following an injury 
at Victoria Cleaners in November 2013.  (Hr. Tr., p. 46) 
At this juncture, it is worth discussing claimant’s pre-existing low back treatment 
and symptoms. 
Medical records in evidence reflecting Pinckney’s pre-existing low back treatment 
and symptoms date back to 2006. (See JE2, p. 6; JE3, p. 1)  While the actual report is 
not in evidence, medical records reference the fact claimant obtained an MRI of his 
lumbar spine in August 2006.  (See JE2, p. 6; JE3, p. 1)   
Claimant sustained a prior injury to his lumbar spine while working for Victoria 
Cleaners in November 2013.  (Hr. Tr., p. 40; See Ex. E)  On the date of injury, claimant 
and a co-worker were picking up a cast iron sewing machine when claimant felt a “pop” 
in his low back.  (Ex. E, p. 2)  Claimant experienced immediate pain in his low back that 
he described as a tight, burning sensation.  (Id.)  Initially, claimant was diagnosed with a 
lumbar strain.  His authorized treating physician prescribed him medication and referred 
him to physical therapy.  (Id.)  Despite complaints of ongoing pain, claimant’s treating 
physician discharged him from medical treatment in December 2013.  (Ex. E, p. 3)   
On or about July 19, 2014, claimant aggravated his low back condition while 
loading some landscaping bricks into his truck.  (Hr. Tr., p. 42; See Ex. E, p. 3)  On 
July 21, 2014, claimant also noticed an increase in pain and numbness down his lower 
extremity after lifting an 80-pound bag at work.  (JE2, p. 1)  Claimant complained of 
bilateral low back pain and numbness in his foot.  (Id.)  At hearing, claimant testified he 
experienced pain in his low back, buttocks, and bilateral lower extremities following the 
July 2014 incident.  (Hr. Tr., p. 49) 
An MRI, dated August 11, 2014, revealed mild midline disk herniation at L1-L2, a 
small extruded disk herniation at L3-L4, and a broad based, left-sided disc protrusion at 
L4-L5 that produced mild mass effect on the budding left L5 nerve root.  (Id.) 

PINCKNEY V. MILLS FLEET FARM 
Page 4 
 
 
Claimant presented to David Hatfield, M.D. for an orthopedic evaluation on 
August 21, 2014.  He continued to describe low back, bilateral buttock, and left leg pain.  
(JE4, p. 2)  Claimant’s pain diagram depicts the feeling of numbness/tingling down the 
left lower extremity, with burning, numbness/tingling in the bilateral feet.  (JE4, p. 6)  
Claimant relayed that his pain was sharp, burning, and constant throughout the day.  
(Id.)  Dr. Hatfield documented a positive straight leg raise, bilaterally.  (Id.)  Dr. Hatfield 
did not feel claimant was a surgical candidate at the time.  Instead, he recommended 
epidural steroid injections (ESI); however, claimant did not pursue the same.  (See JE4, 
p. 1)  At hearing, claimant confirmed Dr. Hatfield offered him epidural steroid injections.  
(Hr. Tr., p. 67) 
Between August 2014 and May 2015, claimant regularly presented for 
chiropractic treatments in Altoona, Iowa.  (See Ex. E, p. 3) 
Claimant presented to Robin Sassman, M.D. for an IME on May 13, 2015.  (Ex. 
E, p. 1)  He described pain in his low back, left hip, groin, and left testicle.  (Ex. E, p. 4)  
Claimant told Dr. Sassman that he is never pain free.  (Id.)  Claimant was not operating 
under any restrictions at the time of his examination; however, he did relay that he self-
restricted his lifting.  (Id.)  Dr. Sassman diagnosed claimant with low back pain with 
radiculopathy, and MRI evidence of disk herniation at L1-L2, L3-L4, and L4-L5.  (Ex. E, 
p. 6)  Like Dr. Hatfield, Dr. Sassman recommended claimant pursue epidural steroid 
injections through a pain management specialist.  (Id.)  Dr. Sassman further opined that 
if the ESI was ineffective, claimant should pursue a second opinion from a 
neurosurgeon due to the multiple levels of herniation and his ongoing symptoms.  (Id.)  
In terms of permanent impairment, Dr. Sassman assigned 18 percent impairment to the 
whole person for deficits in range of motion and multiple disk herniations.  (Ex. E, p. 7)  
For permanent restrictions, Dr. Sassman recommended claimant limit lifting, pushing, 
pulling, and carrying to 20 pounds, rarely, from floor-to-waist, 20 pounds, occasionally, 
from waist to shoulder, and 20 pounds, rarely, above shoulder height.  Dr. Sassman 
also recommended that claimant limit sitting, standing, and walking to an occasional 
basis.  (Id.)   
At hearing, claimant could not recall whether Dr. Sassman recommended 
permanent restrictions in 2015.  (Hr. Tr., p. 55)  In any event, it does not appear as 
though claimant adopted or adhered to the recommendations contained in Dr. 
Sassman’s IME report.  
Claimant ultimately settled his workers’ compensation claim for the November 
2013 work injury on a compromise settlement basis in January 2016.  (Ex. D)  
Returning to the matter at hand, defendants initially authorized medical treatment 
through Concentra Occupational Health; however, because Concentra was not open on 
Saturday, August 25, 2018, defendants authorized medical treatment through 
Broadlawns Medical Center.  (Hr. Tr., p. 16; See JE6, p. 1)  

PINCKNEY V. MILLS FLEET FARM 
Page 5 
 
 
Lisa Klock, D.O., of Broadlawns administered a Toradol injection and ordered x-
rays of claimant’s lumbar spine.  The x-rays revealed degenerative changes, but no 
other acute abnormalities.  (JE6, p. 3) 
Claimant presented to Carlos Moe, D.O. of Concentra on August 28, 2018.  (See 
JE7)  Dr. Moe prescribed physical therapy and returned claimant to work with 
restrictions of no lifting or pushing greater than 10 pounds, no bending at the waist, and 
no kneeling.  (JE7, p. 10)   
Dr. Moe continued to treat claimant throughout September and part of October 
2018.  (See JE7, pp. 4-72)  In total, claimant presented for 6 medical appointments with 
Dr. Moe and 11 physical therapy appointments.  (Hr. Tr., pp. 19-20; See JE7)  Claimant 
consistently reported low back pain and decreased range of motion throughout his 
course of treatment.  (See JE7, pp. 6, 18-19, 22-23, 26-27, 30-31, 36-37, 41-42, 53-54, 
57-58, 63, 66, 70)  The majority of the Concentra medical records in evidence are from 
physical therapy.    
While it does not appear the incident resulted in a material aggravation, it is 
worth noting that at his September 11, 2018, physical therapy appointment, claimant 
relayed that he had recently attempted to lift a tire at his home and experienced an 
aggravation of his low back pain.  Claimant acknowledged that such an activity fell 
outside of his 10-pound lifting restriction.  (JE7, p. 26) 
On September 21, 2018, claimant presented to physical therapy with 4/10 pain in 
the lumbar spine.  Claimant told his physical therapist that this was his “normal 
soreness.”  (JE7, p. 45)  Claimant reported that he was often sore following work.  
Claimant’s physical therapist explained to claimant that such soreness was rather 
normal and expected.  (Id.)   
On September 24, 2018, claimant again reported 4/10 pain and provided this 
was his usual level of pain “from years ago.”  (JE7, p. 49) 
Claimant last presented to Dr. Moe on October 15, 2018.  (JE7, p. 66)  At this 
final visit, claimant continued to complain of pain, tenderness, and decreased range of 
motion with some radicular symptoms down the left lower extremity.  (Id.)  At claimant’s 
request, Dr. Moe referred him for an independent evaluation to assess his current status 
and need for permanent work restrictions.  (JE7, p. 67)   
On February 8, 2019, claimant presented to Todd Harbach, M.D. for an 
orthopedic evaluation.  (JE8, p. 1)  Dr. Harbach diagnosed claimant with lower back 
pain, lumbar spondylosis, and left lower extremity pain.  (Id.)  Following his examination, 
Dr. Harbach ordered an MRI of claimant’s lumbar spine.  (Id.) 
The MRI, dated March 6, 2019, revealed loss of disk height at L1-L2, L2-L3, and 
L3-L4, posterior high intensity zones indicative of annular tears at L3-L4 and L4-L5, and 

PINCKNEY V. MILLS FLEET FARM 
Page 6 
 
 
a small posterior disk bulge to the right at L3-L4 that could be compressing the exiting 
right L4 nerve root.  (See JE8, p. 6) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Harbach on March 11, 2019.  Claimant continued to 
complain of pain with activity; however, he noted that working part-time was helping to 
improve his pain.  After reviewing claimant’s MRI, Dr. Harbach opined claimant had 
reached a plateau in his treatment and placed claimant at maximum medical 
improvement (MMI).  At hearing, claimant confirmed he reported minimal complaints to 
Dr. Harbach in March 2019.  (Hr. Tr., p. 67)  Dr. Harbach released claimant to full duty 
work, without restrictions, on March 20, 2019.  (JE8, p. 6)  Dr. Harbach opined,  
I would not recommend he get into a manual labor-type job where he does 
heavy, heavy lifting because of his age and the normal degeneration of his 
lumbar spine.  His work or any work is not responsible for normal 
degeneration but work can aggravate that degeneration.  His work could 
have done that and he is now recovered to his baseline with just minimal 
discomfort. 
(Id.)  At hearing, claimant testified he continued to experience issues within his 
low back at the time Dr. Harbach released him to full duty work.  (Hr. Tr., p. 23)   
Two days after his release, claimant applied for a part-time position as a delivery 
driver at Hy-Vee.  (Ex. C, p. 1; Hr. Tr., p. 62)  Claimant testified he was hired 
immediately.  (Hr. Tr., p. 61)  On his application for employment, claimant provided that 
he would have no problems being on his feet for extended periods of time, or repeatedly 
bending and lifting.  Claimant further provided he could meet the physical expectations 
of the job.  (Ex. C, p. 3)   
Claimant terminated his employment with the defendant employer, citing 
“[r]etirement” and “better pay,” on March 21, 2019.  (Hr. Tr., pp. 34, 60, 82)  His last day 
of work for the defendant employer was March 16, 2019.  Ms. Reitan testified claimant 
did not indicate he was terminating his employment as a result of issues related to his 
back injury.  (Hr. Tr., p. 82)  Ms. Reitan also testified claimant’s regular, full-time position 
would have been available to him had he not quit on March 21, 2019.  (Hr. Tr., pp. 83-
84) 
As a delivery driver, claimant loads and unloads a van with food and delivers said 
food to customers.  (Hr. Tr., p. 35)  He works alone.  (Hr. Tr., p. 65)  The physical 
requirements of the delivery driver position include the ability to perform medium work, 
“occasionally lifting or carrying objects of no more than 50 pounds, with frequent 
standing, walking, and lifting/carrying of objects of no more than 25 pounds.”  (Ex. C, 
p. 5) 
Claimant continues to work 25 hours per week at Hy-Vee.  (Hr. Tr., p. 34)  He is 
meeting all of the physical expectations of his position.  (Hr. Tr., p. 64)  He plans to 
continue working for Hy-Vee indefinitely.  (Hr. Tr., pp. 43-44) 

PINCKNEY V. MILLS FLEET FARM 
Page 7 
 
 
There is some dispute as to whether claimant personally notified the defendant 
employer of Dr. Harbach’s release to full-duty work.  Claimant asserts he provided the 
medical release to the defendant employer, and the defendant employer did not offer to 
return him to his full-duty position.  Defendants assert claimant did not provide the 
medical release to the defendant employer and instead sought out and obtained 
alternative employment.  Defendants imply claimant had no motivation to return to his 
full-time, full duty position given his voluntary transfer to the gate guard position, and his 
decision to seek a different part-time job through Hy-Vee.  Defendants further assert 
that claimant would have been able to return to his full duty position if they were aware 
of the medical release, assuming claimant wanted to return to the same.    
Dr. Harbach’s medical release was generated and signed on March 12, 2019.  
(See JE8, p. 6)  Claimant did not specifically testify that he provided this particular 
medical release to the defendant employer; however, he did testify he brought 
paperwork to his supervisor after every medical appointment.  (Hr. Tr., p. 24)  The 
parties appear to agree that the claims adjustor received the medical release at some 
point in time; however, they disagree as to when the adjustor received the report.  
Claimant asserts the adjustor would have received the medical release immediately, 
while defendants assert the adjustor did not receive the medical release until March 20, 
2019, when the document shows it was faxed from Dr. Harbach’s office.  (See JE8, p. 
6)   
Presumably, this dispute arises out of the 2017 amendment to Iowa Code section 
85.34, providing injured workers are only entitled to payment of their functional 
impairment if they return to work or are offered work for which they will receive or would 
receive the same or greater wages than they received at the time of the injury.  If 
claimant was not offered a return to his full duty position, an argument would exist that 
he is entitled to industrial disability benefits. 
Outside of independent medical examinations, claimant did not present for any 
additional medical treatment related to his low back condition between March 20, 2019, 
and the date of the evidentiary hearing.  (Hr. Tr., p. 24)  Claimant is not currently 
presenting for any medical treatment related to his low back condition.  He does not 
have any plans to seek additional treatment at this time.  He is not taking any 
prescription or over-the-counter medications for pain.  (Hr. Tr., p. 66) 
Claimant relies upon the medical opinion of Sunil Bansal, M.D., in support of his 
claim that he sustained permanent disability as a result of the stipulated low back injury 
on August 24, 2018.  
Claimant presented for an independent medical examination, conducted by Dr. 
Bansal, on September 25, 2019.  (Ex. 1, p. 1)  Claimant continued to complain of low 
back pain, with radiating pain into his left lower extremity and foot.  (Ex. 1, p. 4)  
Claimant reported the ability to sit for one hour.  He provided he walks all day at work 
and can lift 30 pounds.  (Id.)  Dr. Bansal diagnosed claimant with annular tears and disc 
bulging at L3-L4 and L4-L5.  (Ex. 1, p. 6)  He agreed with Dr. Harbach that claimant 

PINCKNEY V. MILLS FLEET FARM 
Page 8 
 
 
reached MMI on March 11, 2019.  (Id.)  Dr. Bansal assigned five percent (5%) 
impairment to the body as a whole and recommended a 30-pound permanent lifting 
restriction.  (Ex. 1, p. 7)  Dr. Bansal further recommended claimant avoid frequent 
bending, twisting, and prolonged sitting greater than 30 minutes at a time.  (Id.) 
Dr. Bansal’s report includes a summary of the medical records he reviewed prior 
to reaching his ultimate conclusions.  The summary does not include the August 2006 
MRI, the August 2014 MRI, or any medical records pertaining to the November 2013 
and July 2014 injuries.  (See Ex. 1, pp. 1-4)  The report does, however, detail that 
claimant had previously injured his back after lifting a cast-iron object.  (Ex. 1, p. 5)  The 
report goes on to provide that claimant received chiropractic treatment, but no injections 
or surgical intervention.  (Id.)  The report provides claimant’s pain resolved with 
chiropractic manipulations.  (Id.) 
Claimant’s annular tears and disc bulging at L3-L4 and L4-L5 were objectively 
present on claimant’s pre-existing MRI report, dated August 11, 2014.  Dr. Bansal’s 
report does not address how the August 24, 2018, work injury materially aggravated or 
worsened claimant’s annular tears and disc bulges at L3-L5; his report does not 
address the 2014 MRI report at all.  Rather, Dr. Bansal attributes the annular tears and 
disc bulging to the August 24, 2018, work injury.  Moreover, Dr. Bansal incorrectly 
believed claimant’s 2013 and 2014 symptoms resolved following chiropractic treatment.  
At hearing, claimant acknowledged that he occasionally experienced problems within 
his low back prior to August 24, 2018.  (Hr. Tr., p. 60)  Due to the fact Dr. Bansal did not 
have an opportunity to review claimant’s pre-existing medical records, I find Dr. Bansal’s 
report is based on an inaccurate or incomplete medical history.   
Additionally, the evidentiary record does not support a finding that the restrictions 
recommended by Dr. Bansal accurately reflect claimant’s physical capabilities.  
Claimant certified on his job application that he was capable of performing all essential 
functions.  Claimant continues to perform work as a delivery driver for Hy-Vee Catering, 
which requires him to occasionally lift and carry up to 50 pounds, and frequently stand, 
walk, lift, and carry objects up to 25 pounds.  (Ex. C, p. 5)  He is able to perform all of 
the essential functions of his job and claimant plans to continue working for Hy-Vee as 
long as they will have him.  For these reasons, I decline to adopt the permanent 
restrictions recommended by Dr. Bansal.  
Due to the fact Dr. Bansal’s medical opinions are based on an inaccurate or 
incomplete medical history, and because I find Dr. Bansal’s restrictions do not 
accurately reflect claimant’s capabilities, I do not find Dr. Bansal’s report to be 
persuasive.   
It is clear claimant sustained an injury to his low back on August 24, 2018.  This 
much is stipulated to on the hearing report.  In order to prove he sustained permanent 
disability as a result of the August 24, 2018, work injury, claimant had to show that his 
pre-existing condition was materially and permanently aggravated by the August 24, 
2018, work injury.  I find claimant failed to do so.  When considering the evidentiary 

PINCKNEY V. MILLS FLEET FARM 
Page 9 
 
 
record as a whole, I find claimant sustained a temporary flare-up of his pre-existing low 
back condition on August 24, 2018.   
Mr. Pinckney asserts a claim for temporary partial disability (TPD) benefits 
between September 1, 2018, and March 11, 2019.  (Ex. 5, p. 37)  Exhibit 5 provides 
sufficient evidence of TPD benefits owed.  I find claimant is entitled to TPD benefits for 
the time period of September 1, 2018, to October 27, 2018, provided in Exhibit 5. 
Mr. Pinckney asserts a claim for temporary partial disability benefits between 
November 12, 2018, and March 11, 2019, based on the fact he sustained a temporary 
partial reduction in his earning ability after he was transitioned from a full-time position 
to a part-time position.  Defendants essentially contend Pinckney was offered light duty 
work consistent with his medical restrictions, but claimant declined the offered work by 
voluntarily transitioning to a part-time position.  In order to be compensable, the 
temporary reduction in earning ability must be a result of the work injury.   
The defendant employer was able to accommodate claimant’s restrictions.    
Claimant’s light duty work consisted of working as an advisor at the front of the auto 
service center on a full-time basis.  (Hr. Tr., pp. 79-80)  As an advisor, claimant 
answered phones and scheduled appointments for customers.  (Hr. Tr., pp. 29-30)  
Defendants elected to pay claimant his pre-injury rate of pay. (See Hr. Tr., p. 29)  
Claimant testified the advisor position was stressful.  (Hr. Tr., p. 30)   
Effective November 12, 2018, the defendant employer transferred claimant to the 
part-time position of gate guard.  (Hr. Tr., pp. 31-32)  As a part-time gate guard, 
claimant worked approximately 26 hours per week.  Due to the change to part-time 
work, claimant lost his full-time benefits and received significantly less money.  (Hr. Tr., 
p. 31)  Claimant worked as a gate guard for the remainder of his time with the defendant 
employer.  (Hr. Tr., p. 33)   
The parties dispute how it came to be that claimant was transferred to the gate 
guard position.  According to claimant, the transfer was an involuntary one, made by 
management.  (Hr. Tr., p. 30)  Claimant testified that he, “asked them if there was 
anyplace else [he could work].”  (Id.)  Claimant implies he was assigned to work the 
gate guard position and he then asked if there were any other positions he could move 
into.   
Lisa Reitan, the human resources business partner for the defendant employer, 
provided a different rendition of how it came to be that claimant was transferred to a 
part-time position.  According to Ms. Reitan and the defendant employer, claimant 
asked if there was “anyplace else” he could work other than the auto shop.  More 
specifically, Ms. Reitan provided,  
[Claimant] approached my office, said he had talked to his auto service 
center manager Mat Miner saying that he wanted to step to a part-time 
position.  However, there were no part-time positions in the auto service 

PINCKNEY V. MILLS FLEET FARM 
Page 10 
 
 
center at that time, so the only part-time position that we had at that time 
was a gate guard position.  I gave him the job description, let him know 
that the pay would be decreased and that his benefits would stop as a full-
time employee. 
(Hr. Tr., p. 80)  Ms. Reitan testified that the defendant employer did not, in any fashion, 
direct, coordinate, or begin the discussions regarding claimant’s change to a part-time 
position. (Hr. Tr., pp. 80-81)  Ms. Reitan further testified that claimant’s personnel record 
would only have contained paperwork memorializing a change in claimant’s job status if 
the change in job status was involuntary. (Hr. Tr., pp. 86-87)  The only document in the 
evidentiary record referencing a change in position provides, “As your employment with 
Fleet Farm has changed from Full-Time to Part-Time, please see the following 
allocation of benefits.”  (Ex. 4, p. 22)  In a perfect world, the defendant employer would 
include documentation explaining the reasoning behind all changes of employment.  
Clearly, that did not happen in this situation. 
After reviewing the evidentiary record and considering all testimony provided, I 
find claimant’s transition to the part-time gate guard position was likely voluntary.  
Ms. Reitan provided clear and convincing testimony regarding the events that preceded 
claimant’s transition to part-time employment.  In contrast, claimant did not address how 
it came to be that he was being transferred, only that he was in fact transferred and that 
it was at management's discretion.  Claimant was not positive he received the letter 
documenting the transition and its impact on his full-time benefits.  Claimant did not 
expressly dispute that the conversation between claimant and Ms. Reitan occurred.  He 
did, however, provide testimony that implied some form of communication occurred 
between he and management.  On cross-examination, claimant’s attorney did not 
address the alleged conversation with Ms. Reitan.  Claimant was not called to rebut the 
testimony of Ms. Reitan.  
While it is undisputed claimant made less money in the part-time gate guard 
position, it is claimant who bears the burden of proving the reduction in earnings was 
causally related to the work injury.  Claimant failed to carry that burden in this matter.  I 
found claimant failed to prove his transition to part-time employment was involuntary.  I 
further find claimant failed to prove the reduction in earnings he experienced after 
November 11, 2018, was a result of the work injury.  There is little to no evidence 
claimant was incapable of completing the job duties assigned to him in the full-time 
advisor position.  There is no evidence claimant sought a transfer due to ongoing pain 
or discomfort resulting from his light duty position.  For these reasons, I find claimant 
failed to carry his burden of proving entitlement to temporary partial disability benefits 
between November 12, 2018, and March 11, 2019. 
Based on the testimony provided at hearing, defendants no longer dispute 
liability for the Broadlawns medical bill contained in Exhibit 2. 

PINCKNEY V. MILLS FLEET FARM 
Page 11 
 
 
For reasons that will be discussed in the Conclusions of Law section, I find 
claimant is entitled to reimbursement for Dr. Bansal’s IME report under Iowa Code 
section 85.39.   
Claimant demonstrated a denial, delay in payment, or termination in benefits.  
Claimant is entitled to penalty benefits for the unreasonable delay in paying TPD 
benefits between September 1, 2018, and October 28, 2018. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The parties have stipulated that claimant sustained a work-related injury on 
August 24, 2018.  The initial dispute between the parties is whether claimant’s 
August 24, 2018, stipulated work injury resulted in temporary disability.   
Following the August 24, 2018, work injury, claimant was assigned a light duty 
position.  Claimant continued to work on a full-time basis.  He received the same rate of 
pay he was earning prior to the August 24, 2018, work injury.  (Hr. Tr., p. 29)  Claimant 
held this light duty position until November 11, 2018.  Although claimant was working on 
a full-time basis and receiving his pre-injury rate of pay, it cannot be said claimant was 
capable of returning to substantially similar employment during this time. 
An employee is entitled to appropriate temporary partial disability benefits during 
those periods in which the employee is temporarily, partially disabled.  An employee is 
temporarily, partially disabled when the employee is not capable of returning to 
employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of the injury, but is able to perform other work consistent with the 
employee's disability.  Temporary partial benefits are not payable upon termination of 
temporary disability, healing period, or permanent partial disability simply because the 
employee is not able to secure work paying weekly earnings equal to the employee's 
weekly earnings at the time of the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.33(2). 
Claimant seeks temporary partial disability benefits from September 1, 2018, 
through March 11, 2019. 
Claimant produced no evidence of the actual hours he worked for the week of 
September 1, 2018.  Claimant either failed to seek or failed to include the necessary 
documentation to establish his claim for TPD benefits for the week of September 1, 
2018.  Claimant did, however, produce evidence of his hours worked and total earnings 
for pay periods ending on September 29, 2018; October 13, 2018; and October 27, 
2018.  Claimant earned less than his average weekly wage during these time periods.  I 
find claimant’s TPD calculations to be correct for the abovementioned pay periods.  I 
find claimant has established entitlement to TPD benefits for pay periods ending on 
September 29, 2018; October 13, 2018; and October 27, 2018. 
With respect to all pay periods between November 12, 2018, and March 11, 
2019, I found claimant failed to produce convincing evidence that his transition to 

PINCKNEY V. MILLS FLEET FARM 
Page 12 
 
 
part-time employment was involuntary.  The party who would suffer loss if an issue were 
not established has the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the 
evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.14(6).  Therefore, claimant had the burden to establish 
entitlement to the temporary partial disability benefits he now seeks.  I did not find 
claimant’s testimony regarding his transition to part-time work convincing.  Instead, I 
found claimant voluntarily requested a transfer to part time work as testified to by 
Ms. Reitan.  As such, I find claimant failed to establish entitlement to any temporary 
disability benefits between November 12, 2018, and March 11, 2019. 
The next issue to be decided in this case is whether claimant’s August 24, 2018, 
injury resulted in permanent disability.   
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke's Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956).  If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961). 
The parties stipulated to claimant sustaining an injury arising out of and in the 
course of employment on August 24, 2018.  (Hearing Report, File No. 5066786).  As a 
result of this injury, defendants authorized treatment with Dr. Moe of Concentra Medical 
Center.  (JE7)  At claimant’s request, Dr. Moe referred claimant to orthopedic specialist, 
Dr. Harbach.  Dr. Harbach placed claimant at MMI for his August 24, 2018, injury, on 
March 11, 2019.  (JE8, p. 6)  Dr. Harbach opined claimant’s work for the defendant 
employer is not responsible for normal degeneration.  He further opined the August 24, 

PINCKNEY V. MILLS FLEET FARM 
Page 13 
 
 
2018, work injury could have aggravated the pre-existing condition; however, in his 
opinion, claimant had recovered and returned to baseline.  (Id.)  I understand this to be 
an opinion that claimant’s injury was temporary in nature.    
Dr. Harbach’s opinion is consistent with the evidentiary record as a whole.   
Like the injury claimant sustained in November 2013, claimant experienced a 
“pop” in his low back after lifting a heavy item.  Claimant received conservative 
treatment, including physical therapy.  Approximately one month after the August 24, 
2018, injury, claimant presented to physical therapy reporting “normal soreness” and his 
usual level of pain “from years ago.”  (JE7, pp. 45, 49)  Claimant’s physical therapist 
relayed that such soreness was rather normal and to be expected.  (JE7, p. 45)  The 
March 6, 2019, MRI report revealed annular tears at L3-L4 and L4-L5, and a small 
posterior disc bulge to the right at L3-L4.  (JE8, p. 6)  While there is no expert opinion 
addressing the similarities between the two MRI reports, the findings of the 2019 MRI 
report appear to be substantially similar to the 2014 MRI report.  (Compare JE8, p. 6 
with JE3, pp. 1-2)   
Claimant was placed at MMI on March 11, 2019.  Shortly thereafter, claimant 
presented for an IME with Dr. Bansal.  Dr. Bansal diagnosed claimant with annular tears 
and disc bulging at L3-L4 and L4-L5.  (Ex. 1, p. 6)  In May 2015, Dr. Sassman 
diagnosed claimant with low back pain with radiculopathy and MRI evidence of disk 
herniation at L1-L2, L3-L4, and L4-L5.  (Ex. E, p. 6)  In the same May 2015 report, Dr. 
Sassman assigned 18 percent impairment to the whole person as a result of claimant’s 
low back condition, and recommended permanent restrictions.  Dr. Sassman provided 
claimant should limit lifting, pushing, pulling, and carrying to 20 pounds from floor-to-
waist, rarely, 30 pounds from waist-to-shoulder, occasionally, and 20 pounds above 
shoulder height, rarely.  (Ex. E, p. 7)  In 2019, Dr. Bansal assigned 5 percent 
impairment to the whole person and recommended a blanket 30-pound permanent 
lifting restriction.  (Ex. 1, p. 7) 
Claimant was not a surgical candidate following the November 2013 and July 
2014 injuries, and no physician has opined claimant became a surgical candidate 
following the August 24, 2018, work injury.   
The undersigned is cognizant of the fact claimant obtained a full-time, full-duty 
position with the defendant employer following the November 2013 and July 2014 
injuries.  The undersigned is also cognizant of the fact there is no evidence in the record 
to show claimant had any difficulties completing his job duties for the defendant 
employer between his date of hire and August 24, 2018.  This is the strongest evidence 
that claimant sustained a permanent injury on August 24, 2018.  That being said, 
claimant was released without restrictions on March 11, 2019.  He has not presented for 
medical care related to his low back since that time.  Three days after being released 
without restrictions, claimant filled out a job application asserting he had “no problems” 
with being on his feet for extended periods of time, repetitive bending, or repetitive 
lifting.  (Ex. C, p. 3)  Claimant’s current position requires him to lift between 25 and 50 

PINCKNEY V. MILLS FLEET FARM 
Page 14 
 
 
pounds.  (Ex. C, p. 5)  At hearing, claimant testified he is meeting all of the physical 
expectations of his position.  (Hr. Tr., p. 64)  While it is true claimant’s current position is 
part-time, it is also true that claimant did not test his ability to return to his full-time, full-
duty position with the defendant employer.  Moreover, he did not test his ability to return 
to full-time employment with any employer.  Claimant applied for and accepted a part-
time position with Hy-Vee with the knowledge that he had been released to return to 
work without restrictions.     
Dr. Bansal is the only physician in the evidentiary record to provide claimant 
sustained permanent disability as a result of the August 24, 2018, work injury.  I found 
Dr. Bansal’s IME report was based on an incomplete medical history and his permanent 
restrictions do not accurately reflect claimant’s physical capabilities.  As such, I reject 
the opinions of Dr. Bansal in this case.   
Instead, I find the opinions of Dr. Harbach persuasive on the issue of whether 
claimant sustained permanent disability as a result of the August 24, 2018, work injury.  
As explained above, Dr. Harbach’s opinion is consistent with the evidentiary record as a 
whole.  Having found the opinions of Dr. Harbach most convincing, by a preponderance 
of the evidence, I found claimant failed to carry his burden of proving the August 24, 
2018, injury resulted in permanent disability.   
I specifically find that Mr. Pinckney has a long-standing, deteriorating spine 
condition in his low back.  He has had ongoing symptoms in his low back and lower 
extremities since at least November 2013.  I find that claimant has not proven the 
August 24, 2018, work injury caused or materially aggravated his pre-existing low back 
condition.  Mr. Pinckney likely experienced a temporary increase in symptoms 
subsequent to the lifting injury on August 24, 2018.  After approximately one month, 
claimant’s pain had returned to normal levels. 
Mr. Pinckney seeks an order requiring defendants to reimburse his independent 
medical examination fees pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.  Section 85.39 permits 
an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent examination by a physician of the 
employee's choice where an employer-retained physician has previously evaluated 
permanent disability and the employee believes that the initial evaluation is too low.  
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (Appeal April 26, 1991). 
The Iowa Workers' Compensation Commissioner has noted that the Iowa 
Supreme Court adopted a strict and literal interpretation of Iowa Code section 85.39 
in Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015).  
See Cortez v. Tyson Fresh Meats. Inc., File No. 5044716 (Appeal December 2015).  
The Commissioner has taken a similar strict interpretation of the pre-requisites set forth 
in Iowa Code section 85.39.  See Reh v. Tyson Foods, Inc., File No. 5053428 (Appeal 
March 2018). 

PINCKNEY V. MILLS FLEET FARM 
Page 15 
 
 
Prior to the court's decision in Young, this agency had held that a release to 
full-duty work coupled with the failure to expressly opine as to impairment produces an 
inference that the employer-retained physician did not believe the injured worker 
sustained permanent impairment related to the injury.  Countryman v. Des Moines 
Metro Transit Authority, File No. 5009718 (App. March 16, 2006); Kuntz v. Clear Lake 
Bakery, File No. 1283423 (Rehearing July 13, 2004). 
The supreme court's decision in Young, as well as several recent appeal 
decisions, support a finding that said inference is no longer applicable to open the door 
for injured workers to obtain a section 85.39 examination.  Instead, there must be a 
definitive permanent impairment rating rendered by a physician selected by the 
defendants before the injured worker qualifies for an independent medical evaluation 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
In cases where defendants have denied liability, the commissioner has 
concluded that medical opinions or reports obtained for the purposes of determining 
causation, regardless of whether they are obtained from a treating or expert physician, 
are not the equivalent of an impairment rating for purposes of Iowa Code section 85.39.  
See Reh, File No. 5053428 (App. March 2018); Soliz v. Farmland Foods, Inc., File 
No. 5047856 (App. March 2018). 
In cases where defendants have accepted liability but have not obtained an 
impairment rating, the commissioner has concluded that a release to full-duty work and 
placement at MMI, coupled with a failure to expressly opine as to impairment, is not the 
equivalent of an impairment rating for purposes of Iowa Code section 85.39.  Sainz v. 
Tyson Fresh Meats, Inc., File No. 5053964 (App. September 2018).   
Defendants still have an obligation, in the course of their ongoing duty to 
investigate an injured worker's claim, to inquire into the extent of permanent impairment 
following the end of a healing period.  See Moffitt v. Estherville Foods, Inc., File Nos. 
5029474, 5029475, and 5029476 (App. September 21, 2011).  Failure to make such an 
inquiry can result in the assessment of penalty benefits.  See Stroud v. Square D, File 
No. 5013498 (App. June 21, 2006). 
If defendants unduly delay in seeking an examination under section 85.39, or fail 
to obtain an evaluation of permanent impairment altogether, the supreme court has held 
that the injured worker's recourse is a request to the commissioner to appoint an 
independent physician to examine the injured worker and make a report.  See Young, 
867 N.W.2d 839, 845 (Iowa 2015); Iowa Code section 86.38.  In practice, the looming 
threat of penalty benefits for failure to investigate the extent of permanent impairment, 
once communicated, should encourage timely action. 
If an injured worker wants to be reimbursed for the expenses associated with a 
disability evaluation by a physician selected by the worker, the process established by 
the legislature must be followed. This process permits the employer, who must pay the 
benefits, to make the initial arrangements for the evaluation and only allows the 

PINCKNEY V. MILLS FLEET FARM 
Page 16 
 
 
employee to obtain an independent evaluation at the employer's expense if dissatisfied 
with the evaluation arranged by the employer. Young, at 847 (citing Iowa Code § 85.39) 
In this case, there is clear evidence that claimant requested to be seen by an 
independent physician for a disability evaluation. (JE7, p. 71)  Pursuant to claimant’s 
request, the authorized treating physician referred claimant for an “Independent Medical 
Exam.” (Id.)  At the time Dr. Moe referred claimant to Dr. Harbach, defendants had 
accepted claimant’s low back injury as compensable.  It cannot be said that defendants 
referred claimant to Dr. Harbach for purposes of obtaining a causation opinion.  By 
scheduling claimant for an appointment with Dr. Harbach, the defendants “[made] the 
initial arrangements for the evaluation.” Young, at 847 (citing Iowa Code § 85.39)  
Claimant, dissatisfied with the evaluation arranged by the employer, presented to 
Dr. Bansal for an independent evaluation.  This case is distinguishable from Sainz, as 
claimant definitively requested an IME from defendants prior to seeking his own 
independent evaluation, he was not simply released by his authorized treating 
physician.  Claimant took an active role in securing a disability evaluation from the 
defendant employer.  While the disability evaluation did not result in an impairment 
rating, this does not change the substance of the evaluation.   
Therefore, I conclude that claimant met his burden of establishing entitlement to 
reimbursement of Dr. Bansal's independent medical examination fees pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.39.  I further find defendants failed to provide convincing evidence that 
Dr. Bansal’s IME fees are unreasonable.  As such, I find Dr. Bansal’s IME fees are 
reasonable.   
The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to penalty 
benefits under Iowa Code section 86.13 and, if so, how much.   
Iowa Code section 86.13(4) provides: 
a. If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits 
occurs without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the 
employer or insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, 
or termination of benefits, the workers' compensation commissioner shall 
award benefits in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or 
chapter 85, 85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that 
were denied, delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause 
or excuse. 
b. The workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
under this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following facts: 
(1) The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in 
payment, or termination in benefits. 

PINCKNEY V. MILLS FLEET FARM 
Page 17 
 
 
(2) The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of 
benefits. 
c. In order to be considered a reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse under paragraph “b”, an excuse shall satisfy all of the 
following criteria: 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable investigation 
and evaluation by the employer or insurance carrier into whether 
benefits were owed to the employee. 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and evaluation 
were the actual basis upon which the employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits. 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously 
conveyed the basis for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of 
benefits to the employee at the time of the denial, delay, or termination 
of benefits. 
In Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 (Iowa 1996), and Robbennolt 
v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996), the supreme court said: 
Based on the plain language of section 86.13, we hold an employee is 
entitled to penalty benefits if there has been a delay in payment unless the 
employer proves a reasonable cause or excuse.  A reasonable cause or 
excuse exists if either (1) the delay was necessary for the insurer to 
investigate the claim or (2) the employer had a reasonable basis to 
contest the employee's entitlement to benefits.  A “reasonable basis” for 
denial of the claim exists if the claim is “fairly debatable.”  
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
An issue of law is fairly debatable if viable arguments exist in favor of each party.  
Covia v. Robinson, 507 N.W.2d 411 (Iowa 1993).  An issue of fact is fairly debatable if 
substantial evidence exists which would support a finding favorable to the employer.  
Gilbert v. USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001). 
An employer's bare assertion that a claim is fairly debatable is insufficient to 
avoid imposition of a penalty.  The employer must assert facts upon which the 
commissioner could reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.”  Meyers v. 
Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996). 
The employer's failure to communicate the reason for the delay or denial to the 
employee contemporaneously with the delay or denial is not an independent ground for 

PINCKNEY V. MILLS FLEET FARM 
Page 18 
 
 
imposition of a penalty.  Keystone Nursing Care Center v. Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 299 
(Iowa 2005). 
If the employer fails to show reasonable cause or excuse for the delay or denial, 
the commissioner shall impose a penalty in an amount up to 50 percent of the amount 
unreasonably delayed or denied.  Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 
(Iowa 1996).  The factors to be considered in determining the amount of the penalty 
include the length of the delay, the number of delays, the information available to the 
employer and the employer's past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 238. 
By this decision, the undersigned determined claimant is entitled to TPD benefits.  
At the time of the evidentiary hearing, defendants had paid no TPD benefits to claimant.  
As such, unpaid benefits exist.  Claimant has established a delay in payment of benefits 
as required by section 86.13(4). 
Pursuant to section 86.13(4)(b)(2), the burden therefore shifts to defendants to 
establish a reasonable or probable cause or excuse for the delay.  Section 86.13(4)(c) 
sets forth the elements defendants must satisfy in order to establish the existence of a 
reasonable or probable cause or excuse for the delay.   
In their post-hearing brief, defendants maintain that claimant is not entitled to 
TPD benefits.  Defendants offer no other argument regarding penalty.  Defendants 
failed to establish the existence of a reasonable or probable cause or excuse for their 
delay.  As such, penalty benefits are warranted on this basis.  Penalty benefits are 
applicable for the TPD benefits in question at the rate of 50 percent.  Fifty (50) percent 
of $327.91 is $163.96.   
The final issue for determination is a specific taxation of costs pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 86.40 and rule 876 IAC 4.33.  
Claimant requests taxation of the cost of the filing fee ($100.00).  Defendants 
concede liability for the cost of the filing fee ($100.00).   
ORDER 
Defendants shall pay claimant temporary partial disability benefits from 
September 29, 2018, through October 27, 2018, for a combined total amount of three 
hundred twenty-seven and 91/100 dollars ($327.91), as set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 5, 
page 36.   
The employer and insurance carrier shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump 
sum together with interest payable at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury 
constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled 
as of the date of injury, plus two percent, as required by Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants have agreed to pay the outstanding Broadlawns medical bill 
contained in Exhibit 2.   

PINCKNEY V. MILLS FLEET FARM 
Page 19 
 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for Dr. Bansal's independent medical 
evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39 in the amount of two thousand six 
hundred forty-one and 00/100 dollars ($2,641.00). 
Defendants shall pay claimant penalty benefits in the amount of one hundred 
sixty-three and 96/100 dollars ($163.96). 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant costs totaling one hundred and 00/100 
dollars ($100.00). 
Pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2), defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury 
as required by this agency. 
Signed and filed this        7th       day of July, 2020. 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Thomas A. Palmer (via WCES) 
Lee Pomeroy Hook (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
