Case Number: 20002580.01
Case Title:  PACHTINGER, JEANNA V. FAMILY DOLLAR SERVICES, LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Pachtinger Jeanna- 20002580.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JEANNA PACHTINGER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
             File No. 20002580.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                      
FAMILY DOLLAR SERVICES, LLC, 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SAFETY NATIONAL CASUALTY CORP.,: 
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos. 1803, 1108, 4000.2 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :            
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Jeanna Pachtinger, filed a petition for arbitration and seeks 
workers’ compensation benefits from Family Dollar Services, LLC, employer, and Safety 
National Casualty Corporation, insurance carrier. The claimant was represented by 
Randy Schueller. The defendants were represented by Dru Moses. Madison Lewis was 
also present for defendants. 
The matter came on for video hearing on July 27, 2023, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom. The record in 
the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 6; Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 4; and 
Defense Exhibits A through F. The claimant testified at hearing. Lori Massanelli served 
as the court reporter. The matter was fully submitted on August 28, 2023. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Nature and extent of permanent partial disability. 
2. Penalty benefits. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Nov-17  10:39:21     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

PACHTINGER V. FAMILY DOLLAR SERVICES, LLC 
Page 2 
 
1.  The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
2. Claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on February 20, 2020. 
3. Temporary disability/healing period and medical benefits are no longer in 
dispute. 
4. The weekly rate of compensation is $385.52. 
5. Medical expenses are not in dispute. 
6. Affirmative defenses have been waived. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Jeanna Pachtinger was 38 years old as of the date of hearing. She 
resides in the small town of Monmouth, Iowa. She testified live and under oath at the 
Zoom hearing on July 27, 2023. I find her testimony to be highly credible. She was not a 
sophisticated witness; however, she was an excellent historian. Her answers were 
straightforward and consistent with other portions of the record. There was nothing 
about her demeanor which caused me any concern about her truthfulness.  
Ms. Pachtinger earned her high school diploma from Cascade High School. This 
is the extent of her formal education. She testified she was an average student. Since 
high school, she has worked in manual labor and service sector type jobs, including 
working in kitchens, cleaning and warehouse work. She started working for Family 
Dollar in the warehouse on February 10, 2020. The job description is in evidence and 
includes some heavy to medium lifting. (Claimant’s Exhibit 4) In essence, the job 
involved placing product on a conveyer belt to fill orders. 
The parties stipulated that on February 20, 2020, Ms. Pachtinger sustained an 
injury which arose out of and in the course of her employment. She testified on that date 
she stumbled backward on some plastic while performing her normal job duties. She 
initially had pain in a number of her body parts, but her left foot and leg quickly became 
the primary focus. At hearing, her shoulder and rib conditions were reported to be 
resolved. The defendants accepted the claim and directed medical treatment. 
Ms. Pachtinger was initially seen at Jackson County Emergency Room on the 
date of the accident. The foot pain was documented as “throbbing and constant in 
nature and worse with attempted ambulation and movement.” (Joint Exhibit 1, page 1) 
X-rays were taken and she was provided an ortho shoe, crutches, and medications. She 
was instructed not to bear weight. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 6) 
The following day she followed up with Genesis Occupational Health. Swelling 
and bruising was documented, as well as the constant pain which was described as 
sharp and throbbing. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 1-4) Specific restrictions were set at this time, which 
essentially amounted to no weight bearing of any kind. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 4) She was 

PACHTINGER V. FAMILY DOLLAR SERVICES, LLC 
Page 3 
 
instructed to use crutches and the fracture shoe when walking. 
From February 28, 2020, through June 2020, Ms. Pachtinger returned to Genesis 
several times. Each time the same type of sharp, stabbing (or burning) pain was 
documented, made worse by pressure. She consistently reported swelling and bruising. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 7-34) Physical therapy and repeat x-rays were performed during this time 
as the medical providers attempted to ascertain a precise diagnosis. The working 
diagnosis at that time seems to be a sprain of the “tarsometatarsal ligament of the left 
foot.” (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 17) She was instructed to wear a shoe with a rigid sole. She 
apparently returned to work with restrictions during this time period and complained the 
activities were worsening her symptoms. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 31) 
Ms. Pachtinger finally saw a specialist, Elizabeth Jacobsen, DPM, on June 19, 
2020. Dr. Jacobsen reviewed the facts with Ms. Pachtinger and also reviewed and 
summarized her relevant treatment records. She also thoroughly examined both feet 
and legs. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 2-4) Dr. Jacobsen documented the following: 
I did have a conversation with the patient there is concern for development 
of Chronic Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS) and how this is becoming a 
concern, as the patient’s pain level is worsening over time and becoming 
somewhat out of proportion for the injury sustained. She is also now 
voicing concern over skin changes and temperature changes she has 
noted compared to the other leg.… 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 5)  
Ms. Pachtinger was placed in an immobilizer.  
Dr. Jacobsen continued to treat Ms. Pachtinger through October 2020, utilizing a 
working diagnosis of CRPS (amongst other diagnoses). (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 6-25) In 
September 2020, the following is documented: 
Today the patient states she has been walking more at work, up to 10 
miles/shift, and has been going up/down steps and ladders. She has been 
working her restricted hours with frequent breaks. With the increased 
physical activity at work, patient states she has had an increase in 
swelling to her foot, and pain that is generalized across the top of her foot, 
the outside of her foot, and her instep (arch) area. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 20) 
 In the period from June through October 2020, Dr. Jacobsen attempted several 
treatment modalities including restrictions, the immobilizer, a brace, inserts, 
medications, pain injections and physical therapy. 
On October 30, 2020, John Femino, M.D., evaluated Ms. Pachtinger. Dr. Femino 
reviewed records and performed a thorough examination. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 1-4) Dr. Femino 

PACHTINGER V. FAMILY DOLLAR SERVICES, LLC 
Page 4 
 
did not address the potential CRPS diagnosis and instead focused on the mechanics of 
the foot. “Ms. Pachtinger is most likely suffering from a cervical ligament rupture which 
is consistent with her known mechanism of injury.” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 5) He recommended 
advanced imaging studies and possibly surgery. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 5-6) He further 
recommended transferring care to him “of this relatively complex and rare injury.” (Jt. 
Ex. 4, p. 7) On December 22, 2020, she underwent an ultrasound-guided injection and 
MRI of the left ankle. “She was indicated today for cervical ligament reconstruction and 
left ankle arthroscopy for debridement and release of superficial peroneal nerve.” (Jt. 
Ex. 4, p. 11) She remained on light-duty and had the procedure on March 3, 3021. (Jt. 
Ex. 4, p. 21) 
The surgery was not successful. On March 25, 2021, she returned to Dr. Femino 
who documented that Ms. Pachtinger was having difficulty controlling her pain. (Jt. Ex. 
4, p. 27) He assigned work restrictions of seat work only and required her to elevate her 
foot for 15 minutes every two hours. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 28) Dr. Femino rechecked her in 
September 2021. She described her symptoms in pretty much the same way she did 
prior to the surgery, including constant and throbbing pain in the same area. (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 29) Dr. Femino included the diagnosis of chronic left foot pain and “fibromyalgia” at 
this visit. He attempted further treatments including adjusting her ankle brace, physical 
therapy and a different type of injection. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 31) Dr. Femino continued to treat 
Ms. Pachtinger thereafter, including adjusting medical restrictions and providing a 
handicap sticker. In March 2022, he recommended surgery to remove hardware in 
hopes this would relieve her symptoms. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 43) This surgery was performed in 
April 2022. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 46) This surgery was also not successful. She continued to 
report consistent symptoms thereafter and her chronic pain was not relieved. By 
August, Dr. Femino noted that she had been off work as the employer was unable to 
accommodate her restrictions. She was still in physical therapy at this time. Dr. Femino 
documented the following: 
We had a long discussion with Jeanna today regarding her foot and ankle. 
We discussed that her ankle is very stable on exam today. At this point, 
she just needs to progress strengthening to work towards full return to 
work and activities.  Advised that we would like her to discontinue use of 
her Aircast ankle brace. She may use this on uneven ground if she would 
like but otherwise should discontinue its use. We also would like her to 
discontinue use of her crutch and begin ambulating without assistive 
devices. We would like her to continue attending physical therapy. Would 
like them to begin work conditioning. We would also like her to continue 
working on exercises at home. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 58) 
Ms. Pachtinger followed this plan and attempted to return to work with the work 
restrictions provided. In September through October 2022, she began calling Dr. 
Femino’s office, repeatedly reporting increased pain in her ankle with work. (Jt. Ex. 4, 
pp. 60-61) Dr. Femino’s PA documented that he returned her call and noted: “She may 
have some neuralgia.” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 60) 

PACHTINGER V. FAMILY DOLLAR SERVICES, LLC 
Page 5 
 
At her attorney’s request, Ms. Pachtinger was evaluated by Sunil Bansal, M.D., 
on November 14, 2022. (Cl. Ex. 2) Dr. Bansal took history from Ms. Pachtinger, 
reviewed (and summarized) appropriate medical records and thoroughly examined her. 
At that time, she reported the following symptoms: 
Ms. Patchinger continues to have pain in her left foot, and has 
significant difficulty with stairs and with walking on uneven ground.  On a 
good day, the most she can stand or walk is about a half hour.  She 
reports stiffness and extreme weakness of her left foot with difficulty 
remaining steady. 
Over the last month she has developed numbness and tingling below 
her left ankle.  She also complains of a burning and numb sensation that 
radiates throughout her entire left foot and up her left leg.  Occasionally 
her left foot turns purple, and the longer she is on it, the warmer it gets.  
She has significant hypersensitivity of her left foot, and even her shoes 
and socks bother her. 
(Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 11-12)  
Dr. Bansal diagnosed the following: Chronic left foot pain, left cervical ligament 
rupture, ankle impingement, and superior peroneal nerve entrapment, painful hardware 
in the left foot and Chronic Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS). (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 13) He 
opined she should be placed at maximum medical improvement as of the date of her 
next appointment with Dr. Femino (December 2, 2022). (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 13) He assigned a 
10 percent whole person rating for CRPS using Table 13-15.  He recommended 
permanent restrictions including no standing or walking more than 30 minutes at a time, 
avoid uneven ground/incline and avoid stairs and climbing. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 15) 
Ms. Pachtinger followed up with Brandon Marshall, M.D., a physician-resident 
affiliated with Dr. Femino, on December 2, 2022. Dr. Marshall provided the following 
opinion: 
In the interim she reports that she has had progression of her pain to 
include constant burning/tingling/numbness in the sural nerve distribution 
over the lateral aspect of her left foot.  The pain radiates over the top of 
her foot into the tops of her toes.  It also radiates proximally from the heel 
up along the area of the sural nerve.  She states that with increased 
activity and weight she has increased pain and has had no relief with her 
gabapentin that she has restarted.  She also notes some color change 
and swelling. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 64)  
Dr. Marshall listed neuralgia and neuritis as part of her diagnosis. While he did 
not directly define the term neuritis, I understand this to mean inflammation of a 
peripheral nerve.  He confirmed the following restrictions. 

PACHTINGER V. FAMILY DOLLAR SERVICES, LLC 
Page 6 
 
  
Limited work to 40 hours/week. 
60 minutes of work followed by 5 minutes of break. 
50 and occasionally 55 pounds lifting restriction 
Ankle brace as needed 
Limited stairs. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 68)  
Dr. Femino examined Ms. Pachtinger for a final time on May 9, 2023. He also 
listed neuralgia and neuritis as part of the diagnoses. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 76) He placed her at 
MMI, assigned an 18 percent left lower extremity impairment rating and recommended 
an FCE. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 79) 
The employer terminated Ms. Pachtinger on May 16, 2023.  (Hearing Transcript, 
page 11)  
A valid FCE was conducted on May 31, 2023 by Athletico.  Dr. Femino 
recommended the final permanent restrictions as follows.  
12" to waist lift, 50 lb. consistently, up to 52 lb. occasionally.  
Waist to shoulder lift, 50 lb. consistently, up to 52 lb. occasionally. 
Overhead lifting, 45 lb. occasionally.  
Bending, squatting, climbing stairs, occasionally. 
 (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 82)  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The primary question submitted is the nature of the claimant’s disability. This is 
primarily an issue of the correct diagnosis of her condition. The parties have stipulated 
that the claimant has suffered an injury to her left foot and leg. The defendants contest 
the diagnosis, at least so far as permanency is concerned, of complex regional pain 
syndrome (CRPS).  
 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995). An 
injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the injury 
and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309. The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 

PACHTINGER V. FAMILY DOLLAR SERVICES, LLC 
Page 7 
 
N.W.2d 309. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testi+7mony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, 
therefore, is also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be 
given to an expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the 
accuracy of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. 
The expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
 
  
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma. The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes of 
nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body. Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence. Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable. Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however. St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 
440 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 
1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985). An 
occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically excluded from the definition 
of personal injury. Iowa Code section 85.61(4)(b); Iowa Code section 85A.8; Iowa Code 
section 85A.14. 
In Collins v. Dept. of Human Services, 529 N.W.2d 627 (Iowa Ct. App. 1995), the 
Iowa Court of Appeals held that an injury to the sympathetic nervous system is an injury 
to the body as a whole. The claimant “suffered an injury to a scheduled member, her 

PACHTINGER V. FAMILY DOLLAR SERVICES, LLC 
Page 8 
 
hands, and also to a part of the body not included in the schedule, her nervous 
system. Reflex sympathetic dystrophy is a dysfunction of the sympathetic nervous 
system.” Id. at 629. The condition of reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD) is also known 
as complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS). 
By a preponderance of evidence, I find that Ms. Pachtinger was properly 
diagnosed with CRPS, among other conditions in her left foot and leg. This is based 
upon the expert opinion of Dr. Bansal and confirmed by the opinions and treatment 
records of Dr. Femino, Dr. Marshall and Dr. Jacobsen, as well as Ms. Pachtinger’s 
highly credible sworn testimony regarding her symptoms. 
The defendants have raised highly technical defenses regarding the diagnosis 
issue which I do not find compelling. 
Having found that CRPS is an appropriate diagnosis, I further find that her 
disability should be evaluated to her body as a whole, rather than limited to her 
impairment rating. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) (2023). 
 
 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained. Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows: "It is therefore plain that the 
Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of 
the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." Functional impairment is an 
element to be considered in determining industrial disability which is the reduction of 
earning capacity, but consideration must also be given to the injured employee's age, 
education, qualifications, experience, motivation, loss of earnings, severity and situs of 
the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in employment for which the employee is 
fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure to so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal 
Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 
125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 
(1961). 
 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period. Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole. Section 85.34. 
 
The refusal of defendant-employer to return claimant to work in any capacity is, 
by itself, significant evidence of a lack of employability.  Pierson v. O’Bryan Brothers, 
File No. 951206  (App. January 20, 1995).  Meeks v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., File 
No. 876894, (App. January 22, 1993); See also, 10-84 Larson’s Workers’ 
Compensation Law, section 84.01; Sunbeam Corp. v. Bates, 271 Ark. 609 S.W.2d 102 
(1980); Army & Air Force Exchange Service v. Neuman, 278 F. Supp. 865 (W.D. La. 
1967); Leonardo v. Uncas Manufacturing Co., 77 R.I. 245, 75 A.2d 188 (1950).  An 
employer who chooses to preclude an injured worker’s re-entry into its workforce likely 
demonstrates by its own action that the worker has incurred a substantial loss of 

PACHTINGER V. FAMILY DOLLAR SERVICES, LLC 
Page 9 
 
earning capacity.  As has previously been explained in numerous decisions of this 
agency, if the employer in whose employ the disability occurred is unwilling to 
accommodate the disability, there is no reason to expect some other employer to have 
more incentive to do so.  Estes v. Exide Technologies, File No. 5013809 (App. 
December 12, 2006). 
Considering all of the relevant factors of industrial disability, I find that claimant 
has sustained a 75 percent loss of earning capacity as a result of her work injury.  Ms. 
Pachtinger was only 38 years old at the time of hearing.  She has a work history 
primarily in the service sector and warehouse type work.  She does not have significant 
demand skills in the competitive workforce.  She lives in a rural area. 
I find that she has significant and complex conditions affecting her foot and ankle, 
as well as her nervous system and whole body.  While she has CRPS, it is likely she 
has other conditions set forth by the treating physicians and Dr. Bansal as well.  She 
has a significant impairment from all of these conditions.  Her healing period was drawn 
out and extensive and she has been out of the workforce or on light-duty for an 
extended period as a result of her healing.  Her current symptoms, well-summarized by 
Dr. Bansal, make securing and maintaining gainful employment significantly 
challenging.  (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 11-12)  I find that the restrictions from both Dr. Femino and 
Dr. Bansal are appropriate for her condition.  She is certainly no longer well-suited to 
warehouse type work or any type of work which requires constant standing or walking. 
While Ms. Pachtinger does have a significant industrial disability, I find that she 
has failed to meet her burden of proof that she is permanently and totally disabled.  The 
FCE opined that she is “functionally employable at this time” in the light or medium 
category.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 1)  She is likely limited to light service sector level work which 
does not require constant standing unless she obtains further skills.  This is admittedly a 
significant industrial loss which is why I have found her loss of earning capacity is 75 
percent. 
I conclude that a 75 percent loss of earning capacity entitles the claimant to three 
hundred seventy-five (375) weeks of compensation at the stipulated rate, commencing 
on the date after the rating was issued by Dr. Femino. 
 
The final substantive issue is penalty. Ms. Pachtinger seeks an award of penalty 
benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 86.13.  
 
Iowa Code section 86.13(4) provides: 
 
a. If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs 
without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or 
insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits, the workers’ compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or chapter 85, 85A, 
or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, 
delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 

PACHTINGER V. FAMILY DOLLAR SERVICES, LLC 
Page 10 
 
b. The workers’ compensation commissioner shall award benefits under 
this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following facts: 
(1) The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in payment, or 
termination in benefits. 
(2) The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or probable cause or 
excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits. 
c. In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or excuse 
under paragraph “b,” an excuse shall satisfy all of the following criteria: 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable investigation and 
evaluation by the employer or insurance carrier into whether benefits were 
owed to the employee. 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and evaluation were the 
actual 
basis 
upon 
which 
the 
employer 
or 
insurance 
carrier 
contemporaneously relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate benefits. 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously conveyed the 
basis for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits to the 
employee at the time of the denial, delay, or termination of benefits. 
Dr. Femino placed Ms. Pachtinger at maximum medical improvement and 
assigned an impairment rating of 18 percent of the left lower extremity on May 9, 2023.  
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 79)  The defendants should have immediately commenced permanency 
benefits upon receipt of this rating.  The employer had this rating by at least the 
following day.  (Def. Ex. E, p. 40)  Instead of commencing payments or sending her an 
explanation regarding benefits, the employer sent her a letter offering her a job. 
Defendants argue at hearing that the reason they did not commence payments to 
Ms. Pachtinger is because she was receiving unemployment compensation at this time.  
(Def. Brief, p. 14)  Iowa Code section 85.34(3)(d) (2019) disallows receipt of permanent 
total disability benefits concurrently with unemployment compensation.  I conclude this 
provision has no impact on this case, as claimant is not permanently and totally 
disabled.  The employer clearly did not believe she was permanently and totally 
disabled.  In any event, even if this provision did apply, the defendants have failed to 
demonstrate the precise period of time that Ms. Pachtinger was receiving 
unemployment compensation.  It is at least unclear in this record the exact date benefits 
started or ended.  Most importantly though, for purposes of penalty, there is no 
evidence in this record that the defendants contemporaneously conveyed this or any 
basis for refusing to commence permanency benefits.  Based upon the record before 
me, it does not appear that they conveyed anything to her regarding benefits.  Instead, 
as soon as Ms. Pachtinger was placed at MMI, the employer immediately extended a 
job offer to her. 
I find that a full 50 percent penalty is warranted for unpaid permanency benefits 
from May 10, 2023, through the date of hearing, July 27, 2023. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 

PACHTINGER V. FAMILY DOLLAR SERVICES, LLC 
Page 11 
 
Defendants shall pay the claimant three hundred seventy-five (375) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits at the rate of three hundred eighty-five and 52/100 
dollars ($385.52) per week from May 9, 2023. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall be given credit for the weeks previously paid. 
Defendants are responsible for a fifty (50) percent penalty on PPD benefits from 
May 10, 2023, through the date of hearing. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants. 
 
           Signed and filed this __  17th ___ day of November, 2023. 
 
 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
 
Randall Schueller (via WCES) 
 
Dru Moses (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
