Case Number: 5065325
Case Title:  CALIGIURI V. BON TON STORES INC
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Caligiuri, Janette-5065325.District Court Decision.pdf
========================================================================

IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR POLK COUNTY 
 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
 
         Petitioner, 
 
v. 
 
JANETTE CALIGIURI, 
 
         Respondent-Claimant. 
 
 
      
Case No. CVCV059228 
 
  
 
RULING ON JUDICIAL REVIEW 
 
 
This judicial review action came on for hearing on April 3, 2020.  Amanda Rutherford 
represented petitioner Second Injury Fund of Iowa (the Fund).  Randall Schueller represented 
respondent Janette Caligiuri (referred to as “claimant”).   
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
A. 
Case summary. 
 
Claimant previously worked for The Bon Ton Stores d/b/a Younkers.  On July 27, 2016, 
while at work, she fell off a stepladder and injured her left knee.  There is no dispute that this 
was a workplace injury and that she qualified for workers’ compensation benefits.  The workers’ 
compensation commission determined that claimant incurred a two percent permanent 
impairment to the knee and awarded 4.4 weeks of compensation.  Neither party appealed that 
decision. 
 
The fighting issue in this case concerns whether claimant had a prior injury that would 
qualify her for benefits from the Fund.  The Fund is liable for the cumulative effect of an injury 
to an extremity (hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye) after a worker suffers a disability to a second 
extremity.  Claimant argued that she permanently injured her arm during an auto accident in 
2010.  The Fund argued that the 2010 injury was to the shoulder, which is not considered an 
extremity.  The agency found that the 2010 injury was a qualifying loss, entitling claimant to 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 11:34 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

2 
 
industrial disability.  The deputy workers’ compensation commissioner found ten percent 
industrial disability.  On review, the commissioner’s designee increased the award to twenty-five 
percent industrial disability.1  The Fund then filed this judicial review. 
 
B. 
Evidence regarding the 2010 injury. 
 
Claimant was in an auto crash on September 28, 2010.  She was stopped at a stop sign 
when she was hit by another car at highway speed.2  She testified that the crash hurt her neck, 
back, and her left shoulder, elbow and bicep.  Following an MRI of the shoulder, her doctors 
diagnosed a rotator cuff tear.  She was initially prescribed physical therapy to treat the rotator 
cuff tear.  No treating physician diagnosed her with an injury to the elbow or bicep, nor did they 
recommend treatment particularly aimed at the elbow or bicep.  Claimant alleged that she 
continued to suffer pain to the arm.  She also claimed that the physical therapy was designed to 
treat the shoulder and arm.  She maintained at the workers’ compensation hearing that she 
continued have problems with her bicep and elbow.  (Tr. 22-24, 63, 69-70, 75-76). 
 
The medical records from the treating physicians uniformly diagnose claimant with a 
rotator cuff tear and no specified injury to the arm.  Dr. Terry Falk made that diagnosis in his 
radiology report dated October 18, 2010.  Dr. Jonathan Suddarth noted the same diagnosis in his 
medical note dated October 22, 2010.  He stated that the tear did not appear amenable to repair 
and recommended physical therapy.  Dr. Suddarth referred claiman to Dr. Stephen Ash, who 
concurred with the same diagnosis of rotator cuff tear.  Dr. Ash opined that claimant might 
benefit from surgery, but he wanted her to see Dr. Igram regarding her neck before making a 
final decision.  Claimant ultimately decided not to do the surgery.  The only other treatment 
noted was through Dr. Michael Munhall, who recommended an injection to the shoulder and 
                                                          
1 The parties stipulated that the Fund was entitled to a credit of 11.9 weeks.   
2 The auto crash was not work-related. 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 11:34 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

3 
 
physical therapy.  The doctors placed claimant on a lift restriction, directed her not to lift her left 
arm away from the body or over the shoulder, and told her to keep left elbow at her side during 
lifting and carrying.  These restrictions were not specifically directed at the shoulder versus the 
elbow or arm.  (Joint exhibits 2-4, 3-1, 4-1, 4-2, 5-1, 5-2). 
 
The medical records show that claimant complained of arm pain to her doctors following 
the auto crash.  On December 1, 2010, she complained of increasing pain while doing physical 
therapy.  Dr. Suddarth noted that range of motion of the wrist and elbow were normal, and bicep 
and tricep bodies were normal to palpation.  On January 7, 2011, claimant reported a tingling 
sensation running down her left arm.  As of February 10, 2011, she was still reporting arm pain 
to Dr. Suddarth.  (Joint exhibits 3-3, 3-6, 5-1). 
 
Claimant was not diagnosed with an arm injury until after she filed her claim in this 
workers’ compensation case.  On July 3, 2018, she received an independent medical evaluation 
(IME) from Dr. Sunil Bansal.  Dr. Bansal reviewed the medical records and conducted a physical 
examination.  He found tenderness in the upper left arm and a strength deficit of twenty percent 
of the left versus the right arm.  Dr. Bansal associated his findings on the arm to the 2010 car 
crash, as per claimant’s report.  He assigned an impairment of three percent to the left upper arm 
for loss of elbow flexion strength.  He stated he would place a lift restriction on the left arm of no 
less than ten pounds.  (Joint exhibit 11). 
 
The Fund asked Dr. John Albright to review claimant’s medical records to determine any 
documentation of an arm injury.  He opined that claimant’s September 28, 2010, injury was to 
the left shoulder and not the arm or the elbow.  He also found that any impairment to the arm or 
elbow would not stem from the injury to her left shoulder rotator cuff tear.  Dr. Albright did 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 11:34 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

4 
 
personally examine claimant, so his opinions are solely based on the medical records.  (Fund 
exhibit AA). 
 
C. 
The workers’ compensation commission decisions. 
 
The deputy workers’ compensation commissioner found that the 2010 auto crash created 
a first qualifying loss for second injury fund purposes because claimant suffered a permanent 
impairment to her left arm.  The deputy based her decision on three primary pieces of evidence:  
1) Dr. Bansal’s opinion, 2) claimant’s testimony about her injuries, and 3) the medical record’s 
documentation of her complaints of pain in the left arm.  The deputy expressly found that 
claimant testified credibly at the hearing.  She noted that Dr. Albright, who is a professor of 
orthopaedic surgery for the Work Injury Recover Center at the University of Iowa, has “superior 
training” to Dr. Bansal, who is a doctor of occupational medicine for the Iowa Injury Institute.  
However, she found Dr. Bansal’s opinion to carry more weight because he personally examined 
claimant as part of his conclusion that she had a strength deficit in the left arm.  As a result, the 
deputy accepted Dr. Bansal’s finding that claimant had a three percent impairment to the left 
arm. 
 
Based on the finding of permanent impairment to two extremities, the deputy moved on 
to the question of claimant’s earning capacity as part of an award of industrial disability.  She 
noted that claimant was 64 years old at the time of the hearing, had limited education and 
computer skills, and had physical limits due to the injuries to her left arm and left knee.  
Claimant had a strong work history at several retail stores (among other jobs), but had recently 
taken a demotion at her current job (Lowe’s) because she could not handle walking throughout 
the store in a management position.  The deputy found that claimant had been accommodated at 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 11:34 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

5 
 
Lowe’s and was capable of additional job classes through retraining.  She found industrial 
disability of ten percent. 
 
The Fund appealed and claimant cross-appealed.  The commissioner designated another 
deputy to decide the appeal.  She affirmed the deputy’s findings as to the first and second 
injuries.  However, she applied the industrial disability factors differently for an increase to 
twenty-five percent industrial disability. 
STANDARD OF REVIEW 
Chapter 17A of the Iowa Code governs judicial review of administrative agency action. 
The district court acts in an appellate capacity to correct errors of law on the part of the agency. 
Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 219 (Iowa 2006).  The court “may grant relief if the agency 
action has prejudiced the substantial rights of the petitioner, and the agency action meets one of 
the enumerated criteria contained in section 17A.19(10)(a) through (n).” Burton v. Hilltop Care 
Cntr., 813 N.W.2d 250, 256 (Iowa 2012) (quoting Evercom Sys., Inc. v. Iowa Utilities Bd., 805 
N.W.2d 758, 762 (Iowa 2011)). Where an agency has been “clearly vested” with a fact-finding 
function, the appropriate “standard of review [on appeal] depends on the aspect of the agency's 
decision that forms the basis of the petition for judicial review”—that is, whether it involves an 
issue of 1) findings of fact, 2) interpretation of law, or 3) application of law to fact. Burton, 813 
N.W.2d at 256.  
Review of findings of fact:  The courts use a substantial evidence standard when 
considering challenges to findings of fact in agency decisions.  A reviewing court can only disturb 
factual findings if they are “not supported by substantial evidence in the record before the court 
when that record is reviewed as a whole.”  Burton, 813 N.W.2d at 256 (quoting Iowa Code § 
17A.19(10)(f)).  The Iowa Supreme Court has outlined the court’s guidelines when reviewing 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 11:34 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

6 
 
substantial evidence claims under the 17A.19 standard as follows: 
When reviewing a finding of fact for substantial evidence, we judge the finding in 
light of all the relevant evidence in the record cited by any party that detracts from 
that finding as well as all of the relevant evidence in the record cited by any party 
that supports it.  Our review of the record is fairly intensive, and we do not simply 
rubber stamp the agency finding of fact. 
 
Evidence is not insubstantial merely because different conclusions may be drawn 
from the evidence. To that end, evidence may be substantial even though we may 
have drawn a different conclusion as fact finder. Our task, therefore, is not to 
determine whether the evidence supports a different finding; rather, our task is to 
determine whether substantial evidence, viewing the record as a whole, supports 
the findings actually made. 
 
Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 845 (Iowa 2011) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). 
Review of interpretation of law:  The courts traditionally have discretion to substitute 
their interpretations of law for that of the agency when legal challenges are made on review.  
Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 219.  However, the courts are required to give deference to an agency 
interpretation of law when the agency has been “clearly vested” with authority to interpret a 
provision of law.  Burton, 813 N.W.2d at 256.  If the legislature has not given the agency clear 
authority to interpret a provision of law, the courts may reverse the interpretation if erroneous.  Id.   
 
In Burton, the Iowa Supreme Court held the level of deference to the workers’ 
compensation commissioner’s interpretations will be determined on a case-to-case basis 
depending on the “particular phrase under consideration.”  Id.  While this appears an arduous 
standard, the court provided the following guidance:   
When a term is not defined in a statute, but the agency must necessarily interpret 
the term in order to carry out its duties, we are more likely to conclude the power 
to interpret the term was clearly vested in the agency. This is especially true “when 
the statutory provision being interpreted is a substantive term within the special 
expertise of the agency.”  However, “[w]hen a term has an independent legal 
definition that is not uniquely within the subject matter expertise of the agency,” or 
when the language to be interpreted is “found in a statute other than the statute the 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 11:34 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

7 
 
agency has been tasked with enforcing,” we are less likely to conclude that the 
agency has been clearly vested with the authority to interpret that provision of the 
statute. 
 
Id. at 256–57 (cites omitted). 
 
Application of law to fact:  When a party challenges the ultimate conclusion reached by 
the agency, then the challenge is to the agency's application of the law to the facts.  In that event, 
the question on review is whether the agency abused its discretion by, for example, employing 
wholly irrational reasoning or ignoring important and relevant evidence.  Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 
219.  The court will only reverse the agency’s application of law to the facts if it is irrational, 
illogical, or wholly unjustifiable. Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 518 (Iowa 2012).  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
A. 
Whether the agency correctly applied the law when determining that 
claimant’s 2010 auto crash constituted a first qualifying injury for Fund 
benefits. 
 
The Second Injury Compensation Act was created to encourage employers to hire 
disabled persons.3  Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Bergeson, 526 N.W.2d 543, 547 (Iowa 1995) 
(referencing Iowa Code §§ 85.63 through 85.69).  The Act does so by limiting an employer’s 
workers’ compensation liability for employees who have previously lost the use of a hand, arm, 
foot, leg, or eye, if the employee suffers a workplace injury to another such body part.  Id. (citing 
Iowa Code § 85.64).  In that event, the employer is only liable for the second injury as if there 
had been no preexisting disability.  Id.  Any remaining liability is paid by the Fund.  Id. 
                                                          
3 The purpose of the Fund has been debated.  See Gregory v. Second Injury Fund, 777 N.W.2d 395, 342 (Iowa 2010) 
(Cady, J., dissenting).  Justice Cady stated that the Fund was created to resolve basic fairness issues to employees 
and subsequent employers when a second injury causes greater harm than it would to a person without the first 
injury.  The creation and implementation of the Fund resolved problems with inconsistent judgments when courts 
had to make a choice between either fully compensating the employee or limiting the liability of the employer.   
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 11:34 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

8 
 
Normally, an injury to an extremity such as an arm or a leg is paid as a scheduled injury.  
Bergeson, 526 N.W.2d at 547 (citing Iowa Code § 85.34).  The statute provides a limit on the 
recovery for each listed extremity.  Id.  If the injury is to a part of the body not listed on the 
schedule, it is considered an injury to the body as a whole.  Id.  Injuries to the body as a whole 
are determined through industrial disability, which takes into account factors impacting the 
employees earning capacity, such as age, education, experience, and others.  Id.  For that reason, 
an employee who has an unscheduled injury often receives more benefits than one with a 
scheduled injury.  Id. 
An employee may also be able to prove industrial disability if the cumulative effect of 
two scheduled injuries amounts to a disability of the body as a whole.  Bergeson, 526 N.W.2d at 
548.  For example, in Bergeson, the combination of two leg injuries barred the claimant from his 
prior occupation as a plumber.  Id.  While he was able to get other work, his earning capacity 
was impaired beyond the amount of the scheduled impairment.  Id.  The court held, in that event, 
the employer was only responsible to pay the scheduled amount of the second injury.  Id.  The 
Fund was responsible for the amount paid for industrial disability, after deducting the amounts 
for the two scheduled injuries.  Id. at 547-48.   
In the present case, the Fund argued that the first injury to claimant was not an injury to 
the arm, but rather, an injury to the shoulder.  The Fund pointed to Second Injury Fund v. Nelson, 
544 N.W.2d 258, 268-70 (Iowa 1995), which considered the same question.  In Nelson, the 
claimant’s first injury was to a knee and the second injury was to a shoulder.  Id.  The court held 
that an injury to a joint, such as a hip or shoulder, must be treated as an injury to the body as a 
whole rather than a scheduled injury.  Id. at 269 (cites omitted).  As a result, an injury to a 
shoulder could not be used to create liability against the Fund.  Id.  The court rejected the 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 11:34 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

9 
 
agency’s conclusion that a shoulder injury may qualify as a scheduled injury if it affects a 
scheduled member, such as an arm.  Id. at 269-70.  
Both parties relied on Gregory v. Second Injury Fund to support their respective 
positions.  777 N.W.2d 395 (Iowa 2010).  In Gregory, the claimant’s first injuries involved both 
hands and shoulders.  Id. at 396.  She was paid a lump sum settlement of $27,000 for these 
claims.  Id. at 400, n. 4.  The agency found the injuries in the first claim to be to the body as a 
whole because the impairment to the hands extended beyond the arm and into the body.  Id. at 
397.  The Iowa Supreme Court reversed, holding that the hand injuries were distinguishable from 
the shoulder injuries, and the claim for Fund liability should not be barred because the hand and 
shoulder injuries were jointly settled.  Id. at 400-01.  The record reflected that the claimant had a 
two percent permanent impairment to one hand and a six degree impairment to the other, so there 
was factual support to show an independent injury.  Id. at 396, 400, n. 4.  The Fund argued that 
this holding is consistent with Nelson, because a claimant still has to show an independent injury 
to a scheduled member, even when the person also suffered an injury to the body as a whole.  
Claimant argued that Gregory stands for the proposition that an injury to the body as a whole can 
qualify if it impacts a scheduled member. 
The dissent provides some clarification.  It characterized the issue as whether the 
legislature intended the Fund to cover workers “with an existing disability that extended to both 
a specified and unspecified portion of the body.”  Id. at 404 (Cady, J., dissenting).  This language 
shows that the dissent interpreted the majority decision to have found a disability to the hands 
and to the shoulders.  The dissent believed that the statute was not met, because the statute 
required the value of the first scheduled injury to be deducted from the Fund liability.  That could 
not be done in Gregory because the claimant’s hand and shoulder injuries were compensated 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 11:34 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

10 
 
jointly as a whole body injury.  Id. at 404-05.  The dissent believed this case fell outside the 
statutory intent underlying the Fund, which it found was intended to solely compensate workers 
for separate injuries to scheduled members and not injuries to the body as a whole.   
I agree with the Fund that Gregory did not change the rule from Nelson.  The claimant 
still has to show a permanent impairment to a scheduled member.  It is not sufficient to show that 
a scheduled member is impacted by an injury to an unscheduled member, such as a shoulder or a 
hip.  Shoulder injuries often impact the ability to use an arm.  As discussed in Nelson, a finding 
to the contrary would violate the legislative intent to limit Fund awards to impairments to 
scheduled members.  Gregory only applies when an employee has suffered injuries to a 
scheduled and unscheduled member.  In that event, the employee may be able to establish Fund 
liability if the person can establish an impairment to the scheduled member, even though the 
employee may have received a whole body workers’ compensation award.     
With that said, the agency applied the correct standard.  The deputy’s decision correctly 
focused on the fact question whether claimant suffered a prior injury to her arm.  While claimant 
clearly suffered an injury to her shoulder in the 2010 auto crash, that does not prevent her from 
also establishing an impairment to her arm.  The deputy evaluated the evidence concerning 
whether claimant injured her arm during the crash.  She ultimately found an impairment to the 
arm.  That is a factual finding subject to the substantial evidence standard, which will be 
discussed below.  The agency did not commit an error of law. 
B. 
Whether the agency’s finding that claimant suffered a permanent 
impairment to her arm in 2010 is supported by substantial evidence. 
 
Substantial evidence claims do not usually fare well in workers’ compensation cases.  
Cases that reach judicial review often involve a classic battle of experts.  The courts have been 
steadfast in ruling that the commissioner, as the finder of fact, is responsible for determining the 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 11:34 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

11 
 
weight to be given expert testimony.  See Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 
839, 850 (Iowa 2011) (cite omitted).  The commissioner is free to accept or reject an expert’s 
opinion in whole or in part.  Id.  On judicial review, the courts “are not at liberty to accept 
contradictory opinions of other experts in order to reject the finding of the commissioner.”  Id. 
(cites omitted).  In the typical case, this means that, as long as the commissioner’s decision is 
supported by a single expert opinion, the court is not at liberty to reverse regardless its view of 
the strengths and weaknesses of that opinion or the opposing opinions. 
This case is not typical for at least two reasons.  First, the injury or injuries resulting from 
the 2010 auto crash did not arise out of the workplace.  The first injury does not need to be a 
workplace injury to qualify for Fund liability.  However, if it had, and claimant had filed a 
workers’ compensation claim, we might have the benefit of an impairment finding that is more 
contemporaneous to the causing event.  Second, there is no treating physician who diagnosed 
claimant with an arm injury or any permanent impairment to the arm following her 2010 auto 
crash.  Claimant made complaints of pain to her treating physicians, but none made any 
diagnosis of an arm injury.  The only diagnosis of injury or permanent impairment to the arm 
came in 2018 after claimant was seen by Dr. Bansal for an IME after her knee injury in 2016.  
While it is not unusual for doctors conducting IMEs to disagree, there is usually some form of 
corroborating opinion from one of the treating physicians.  This is particularly concerning 
because Dr. Bansal’s opinion comes long-after claimant completed her course of treatment 
following the 2010 auto crash.   
This case is a test of the judicial review standard.  It is a weak case for Fund liability.  
The only medical opinion supporting a first injury comes from a claimant-retained IME eight 
years after the alleged causing event.  However, our legal standards place trust in agency 
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 11:34 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

12 
 
decision-making.  Deputy workers’ compensation commissioners make these types of decisions 
on a daily basis.  They are better able to evaluate a case in the context of other cases.  In this 
instance, the deputy did not solely rely on Dr. Bansal’s opinion.  She found his opinion to be 
supported by claimant’s testimony and by notes in her medical file.  The deputy made express 
credibility findings.  She explained why she ultimately followed Dr. Bansal’s opinion.  This is a 
close call, but it meets the substantial evidence standard.  
RULING 
 
The agency decision is affirmed.  The Second Injury Fund is responsible for any court 
costs.     
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 11:34 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

State of Iowa Courts
Type:
OTHER ORDER
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV059228
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA VS JANETTE CALIGIURI
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2020-04-09 11:34:53     page 13 of 13
E-FILED  2020 APR 09 11:34 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT
