Case Number: 5066673
Case Title:  TRIPP, MANDY V. SCOTT EMERGENCY COMMUNICATION CENTER
Doc Type:    Decision - Supreme Court
Source:      Tripp, Mandy-5066673.Supreme Court Amended Decision.pdf
========================================================================

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF IOWA 
 
No. 21–0841 
 
Submitted January 20, 2022—Filed June 3, 2022 
 
Amended July 8, 2022 
 
MANDY TRIPP, 
 
 
Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
SCOTT EMERGENCY COMMUNICATION CENTER and IOWA 
MUNICIPALITIES WORKERS’ COMPENSATION ASSOCIATION, 
 
 
Appellees. 
 
 
Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Scott County, Mark Cleve, Judge. 
 
 
An emergency dispatcher appeals the denial of her claim for workers’ 
compensation benefits based on post-traumatic stress disorder. REVERSED 
AND REMANDED.  
 
 
McDermott, J., delivered the opinion of the court in which Christensen, 
C.J., and Appel and Oxley, JJ., joined. Christensen, C.J., filed a concurring 
opinion. Waterman, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which Mansfield and 
McDonald, JJ., joined.  
 
 
Andrew W. Bribriesco (argued) and Gabriela Navarro of Bribriesco Law 
Firm, Bettendorf, for appellant. 
1 of 56
ELECTRONICALLY FILED            JUL 08, 2022            CLERK OF SUPREME COURT
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
2 
 
 
 
Chandler M. Surrency (argued) and Jane V. Lorentzen of Hopkins & 
Huebner, P.C., Des Moines, for appellees. 
 
2 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
3 
 
McDERMOTT, Justice. 
 
This case requires us to determine whether Iowa’s workers’ compensation 
statute places on emergency responders a different, higher bar to be eligible for 
benefits for trauma-induced mental injuries suffered on the job than workers in 
other roles with identical injuries. 
Mandy Tripp, a sixteen-year veteran of Scott County’s emergency dispatch 
system, answered a 911 call from a woman screaming over and over at a high 
pitch, “Help me, my baby is dead.” The woman’s screams continued for more 
than two minutes. Tripp eventually got the woman’s address and dispatched first 
responders. She soon heard a report from a police officer that arrived on the 
scene about finding a dead infant that appeared to have been attacked with a 
claw hammer. 
In the months that followed, Tripp couldn’t shake the mother’s screams 
from her mind or her ears. Loud noises, in particular, would trigger debilitating 
anxiety. Tripp sought medical help. A counselor and two doctors diagnosed her 
with PTSD resulting from the call. She was prescribed medication to address the 
PTSD and wore special headphones to drown out loud noises, sometimes even 
wearing special musicians’ earplugs under larger noise-canceling headphones. 
It helped, but not enough. Tripp found herself unable to perform her job duties 
as an emergency dispatcher as she had before. 
Iowa’s 
workers’ 
compensation 
law 
permits 
workers 
to 
receive 
compensation for injuries that they suffer arising from and in the course of their 
jobs. Injuries from mental trauma suffered on the job have long been recognized 
3 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
4 
 
as a basis to provide workers’ compensation. But when Tripp applied for workers’ 
compensation based on her PTSD, her request was denied. Tripp didn’t satisfy 
the test of legal causation, according to the workers’ compensation commissioner 
and district court, because 911 dispatchers routinely take calls involving death 
and traumatic injury, and the mother’s harrowing call thus wasn’t an 
“unexpected cause or unusual strain.” Tripp appeals. Because Tripp has 
established that her PTSD resulted from a manifest happening of a sudden 
traumatic nature from an unexpected cause or unusual strain, we hold she has 
established legal causation.  
I. 
Tripp began her career as an emergency dispatcher in 2002, first with the 
Davenport Police Department and then (when the police department’s emergency 
dispatch system later combined with the county’s system) with the Scott County 
Emergency Communications Center (SECC). Tripp soon was tabbed to train 
other emergency dispatchers. In a typical workday, Tripp estimated that she 
answered anywhere from 50 to 200 calls, including 911 emergency and 
nonemergency calls and administrative calls. An average call lasts thirty-five 
seconds. 
On September 30, 2018, Tripp answered a 911 call from a woman 
“screaming at a very high pitch, ‘Help me, my baby is dead. Help me, my baby is 
dead,’ over and over and over.” The screaming continued for two minutes and 
fifteen seconds. Tripp struggled to calm the women enough to get an address to 
dispatch an ambulance. She ultimately got an address and transferred the call 
4 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
5 
 
to a medical dispatcher who tried to instruct the mother on lifesaving measures 
until the ambulance arrived. 
Tripp continued to hear ongoing radio traffic about the incident after she 
transferred the call. She heard the medical dispatcher tell the mother how to 
perform CPR on an infant. She heard the emergency medics who arrived by 
ambulance at the scene say that “[r]igor was already set in.” And she heard police 
officers talking about “a potential crime scene” at the mother’s home. Injuries to 
the child’s face, according to one investigating officer speaking over the radio, 
suggested that the child had been beaten with a claw hammer. All the while, the 
child’s mother screamed in the background.  
Tripp’s supervisor asked Tripp if she needed a break. Tripp declined, 
responding that she “needed another call” to get the mother’s screams “out of 
my head.” Tripp texted her husband, Dennis, a Bettendorf Police Officer with 
twenty-three years’ experience in law enforcement. She told him that she’d taken 
“a really bad phone call” and needed to talk to him just to hear another voice. It 
was, according to Dennis, the first time that she’d ever requested such a thing. 
Tripp remained at work and continued taking calls until her shift ended. 
In the days that followed, Tripp was on the verge of tears, didn’t want to 
answer calls, and didn’t want to talk with anyone. Although she had taken 
emergency calls involving serious injuries to children in the past from people at 
the scene of fatal incidents, including three calls involving a dead infant, she had 
never before answered a call from a dead child’s own mother. Tripp described 
the mother’s screams as something beyond “normal” sounds: “guttural, awful.” 
5 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
6 
 
Tripp confided to her supervisor and several coworkers that she was struggling 
to deal with the call. She found herself constantly crying, unable to process her 
emotions, wanting to sleep, and becoming socially withdrawn.  
Tripp initially sought treatment with Lisa Beecher, a licensed mental 
health counselor, to help her address her mental health, which had been in a 
state of freefall since the call. Tripp’s employer approved the visit. Tripp saw 
Beecher at least five times over about a three-week period. Beecher diagnosed 
Tripp with post-traumatic stress disorder, a mental health condition commonly 
referred to by its acronym: “PTSD.” Tripp took two weeks off work at Beecher’s 
suggestion. When she returned to work, she did so with restricted hours.  
Beecher soon determined that Tripp’s condition wasn’t improving. Beecher 
referred her to a psychologist, Dr. Robert Gillespie, who had treated other 
Davenport first responders and police officers. Gillespie also diagnosed Tripp 
with PTSD. He instructed her to seek medication from her regular physician to 
treat it. Tripp’s physician prescribed her an antidepressant. Tripp took the 
prescribed antidepressants and continued to see Beecher for counseling and 
Gillespie for psychotherapy to treat her PTSD. 
Gillespie’s notes of his meeting with Tripp in April 2019 (more than six 
months after the call) recount that Tripp had been having suicidal feelings at 
work but had been able to work through them. She continued to struggle with 
“heightened levels of emotional responsivity” brought on by certain sounds, 
particularly high-pitched voices. And she continued to experience episodic 
6 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
7 
 
recurrence of traumatic stress, but with some improvement in the frequency and 
intensity of the episodes. 
In September 2019, another psychiatrist, Martin Carpenter, M.D., 
performed an independent psychiatric evaluation of Tripp for this litigation. He 
also diagnosed Tripp’s condition as PTSD. Carpenter consulted the Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (the DSM-5), the fifth edition of a 
diagnosis manual for psychological disorders, in making his diagnosis. The 
DSM-5 states that PTSD can result from exposure “to actual or threatened 
death,” either through directly experiencing a traumatic event or experiencing 
“repeated or extreme exposure to aversive details of” a traumatic event. Am. 
Psychiatric Ass’n, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 271 (5th. 
ed. 2013). Carpenter recommended that Tripp, on top of her ongoing prescription 
drug treatment, use physical interventions to address her PTSD symptoms. 
Among other things, Carpenter recommended that she wear special earplugs to 
limit hearing loud noises, which were a significant trigger of anxiety since the 
incident. 
Tripp filed an application for workers’ compensation benefits based on her 
PTSD. At the evidentiary hearing, both Beecher and Gillespie’s reports found that 
Tripp’s PTSD resulted directly from her involvement in the traumatic events of 
the mother’s 911 call. Gillespie noted that the fourth edition of the DSM 
“explicitly contemplates the exposure risk for first responders, such as 911 
operators.” Gillespie testified to his opinion that, by May 2019, Tripp had reached 
“maximum medical improvement”—in other words, had achieved all the 
7 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
8 
 
improvement that she reasonably would ever be expected to achieve—as to her 
PTSD. Tripp’s PTSD thus, according to Gillespie, constituted a “chronic episodic 
condition” resulting in a permanent disability.  
Carpenter similarly found that Tripp’s diagnosis resulted directly from the 
events of the mother’s 911 call. He concluded that Tripp’s condition satisfied the 
PTSD criteria in the DSM-5 as a “traumatic exposure” in which she experienced 
a mother’s discovery of a dead child in vivid and disturbing fashion. Carpenter 
also agreed that Tripp had reached maximum medical improvement and that 
she’d need both ongoing pharmacological management and psychotherapy to 
treat her PTSD. 
Tripp’s employer, the SECC, contested her petition for workers’ 
compensation and called three of Tripp’s coworkers to testify at the evidentiary 
hearing: a medical dispatcher with twenty-four years’ experience (in fact, the 
same medical dispatcher who instructed the mother on CPR), the SECC’s 
director (who previously worked as a dispatcher), and the SECC’s deputy director 
(who also previously worked as a dispatcher). Each testified to their belief that 
calls such as the one that brought on Tripp’s PTSD weren’t unusual or 
unexpected. They provided various estimates of similar calls based on their 
experience. One acknowledged that she’d fielded around 141,000 calls in her 
career and about a dozen involved an infant’s death; another estimated she’d 
taken about 572,000 calls of which fifteen involved a child’s death. Tripp’s 
current supervisor testified that the SECC provided Tripp with accommodations 
for her PTSD, including light-duty work, changing her seating arrangement when 
8 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
9 
 
possible, and allowing her to leave if she experiences an anxiety-triggering call. 
No witness disputed any testimony from Tripp’s medical professionals. 
Tripp agreed that fielding a 911 call from a distraught person was neither 
unexpected nor unusual in an emergency dispatcher’s work and that speaking 
with crying or even incoherent callers was a normal part of the job. Tripp also 
acknowledged that she’d fielded traumatic calls since the incident, including a 
call involving the suicide of a teenager (which, as reported in Gillespie’s notes, 
caused Tripp to hear the mother’s screams in her head from the earlier call and 
to start crying). And despite her sensitivity to loud sounds since the call, Tripp 
had personally attended a large business convention, although she wore noise-
canceling headphones on top of musician’s earplugs during the convention. 
Tripp applied for a job as a librarian because of her sensitivity to sound. Tripp 
still tries, in her words, to “participate in life” despite her PTSD and wants to 
continue to work as an emergency dispatcher to the extent she’s able to because 
she “love[s] the job.” 
Her husband Dennis testified that after the call, his wife had become 
withdrawn and unable to engage in many normal social activities, primarily 
because of her new sensitivity to loud sounds. Dennis saw some improvement in 
her condition from the psychotherapy and prescription drug treatments. He 
agreed that 911 operators anticipate taking emergency calls by nature of their 
jobs and agreed that a parent whose infant was dying would call 911 and be 
distraught. Dennis, for his part, has never in his career been called to respond 
9 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
10 
 
to a matter involving a dead infant and would characterize such an event as 
unusual. 
After 
hearing 
the 
evidence, 
the 
deputy 
workers’ 
compensation 
commissioner denied Tripp’s petition for benefits. Although acknowledging it was 
“a difficult case,” the deputy commissioner held that because 911 dispatchers 
“routinely” take calls involving death and traumatic injuries, Tripp failed to prove 
that the PTSD-inducing call was “unusual” or “unexpected” as required under 
our court’s prior mental injury cases. Tripp moved for rehearing, which the 
deputy denied. Tripp appealed to the workers’ compensation commissioner, who 
affirmed the deputy’s decision. Tripp then sought judicial review in the district 
court, which likewise affirmed the prior ruling. She appeals that ruling. 
II. 
The parties disagree on our standard of review. Tripp argues that we review 
for legal error because the standard for establishing a purely mental injury is an 
issue of law. The SECC argues that we must defer to the commission because 
legal causation is based on findings of fact, which should be upheld as long as 
substantial evidence in the record supports those findings.  
The commission’s decision involves an application of law to the facts and 
thus presents a mixed question of law and fact. Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 
213, 219 (Iowa 2006). If the claimed error pertains to the agency’s findings 
of fact, then “the proper question on review is whether substantial evidence 
supported those” factual findings. Id. But if the claimed error pertains to the 
agency’s interpretation of the law, then the question on review is whether the 
10 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
11 
 
agency’s interpretation was wrong. Id. We don’t defer to the commission’s 
interpretation of the legal standard to prove a purely mental injury under Iowa 
law. Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire & Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 849 (Iowa 1995); see 
also Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(c) (2019). That legal standard presents a legal 
question, and we’re thus not bound by the agency’s conclusions and instead 
substitute our own judgment. Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 169, 173 
(Iowa 2007). 
III. 
 
Iowa’s workers’ compensation system is a creature of statute, being both 
conceived and constructed by legislative action. See Hansen v. State, 91 N.W.2d 
555, 556–57 (Iowa 1958). The system provides mutual benefits and tradeoffs for 
workers and employers. Harned v. Farmland Foods, Inc., 331 N.W.2d 98, 100 
(Iowa 1983) (en banc). Workers relinquish their right to sue the employer for 
damages on the condition that the employer promptly compensates workers for 
injuries that arise out of and in the course of employment regardless of fault. 
Baker v. Bridgestone/Firestone, 872 N.W.2d 672, 676–77 (Iowa 2015). 
 
Our analysis centers on Iowa Code section 85.3(1), which establishes a 
worker’s eligibility to receive, and an employer’s duty to pay, workers’ 
compensation. It states:  
Every employer . . . shall provide, secure, and pay compensation 
according to the provisions of this chapter for any and all personal 
injuries sustained by an employee arising out of and in the course 
of the employment, and in such cases, the employer shall be relieved 
from other liability for recovery of damages or other compensation 
for such personal injury. 
11 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
12 
 
Iowa Code § 85.3(1). Interpreting the plain language of the statute, the question 
presented in this appeal has two parts: (1) whether Tripp’s PTSD is a “personal 
injury,” and (2) whether she sustained it “arising out of and in the course of” her 
job as an emergency dispatcher. If the answer to both parts is yes, she’s entitled 
to compensation; if not, then not. 
 
Does Tripp’s PTSD constitute a “personal injury” under the statute? The 
terms “injury” and “personal injury” are elaborated on, although not necessarily 
defined, in section 85.61(4). That section states that these terms “shall be 
construed as follows” and then states that “they shall include death resulting 
from personal injury” and “shall not include a disease unless it shall result from 
the injury and they shall not include an occupational disease.” Id. § 85.61(4)(a), 
(b). Neither elaboration provides any help in this case since Tripp didn’t die and 
her PTSD isn’t a disease. 
 
In Dunlavey v. Economy Fire & Casualty Co., we analyzed whether an 
employee’s “nontraumatic mental injury”—in that case, major depressive 
disorder—amounted to a “personal injury” under section 85.3(1). 526 N.W.2d at 
849–53. The employer argued that, as a matter of public policy, we should refuse 
to recognize psychological injuries without an associated physical injury 
(referred to as a “mental-mental injury”) because it would breed fraudulent and 
unverifiable workers’ compensation claims by employees. Id. at 856. But after 
surveying cases from states around the country with similarly-worded workers’ 
compensation statutes, finding no expression by the legislature in our statute to 
carve out a restriction for purely psychological injuries, and further finding “no 
12 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
13 
 
really valid distinction between physical and ‘nervous’ injury,” we held that 
psychological injuries met the definition of “personal injuries” under the statute. 
Id. at 851, 853 (quoting 1B Arthur Larson, The Law of Workmen’s Compensation 
§ 42.23(a), at § 7-906 (1993)). As to whether PTSD in particular qualifies, in 
Brown v. Quik Trip Corp., we held that a convenience store clerk’s PTSD diagnosis 
met the definition. 641 N.W.2d 725, 727–29 (Iowa 2002). Tripp’s PTSD diagnosis 
thus likewise qualifies as a “personal injury” under the statute. 
 
Turning to the second part of the statutory inquiry: Does Tripp’s PTSD 
arise “out of and in the course of the employment”? In Dunlavey, we said that an 
employee seeking compensation for a mental injury required proof of both 
“medical causation” and “legal causation.” 526 N.W.2d at 853. Medical causation 
requires the employee to show “that the alleged mental condition was in fact 
caused by employment-related activities.” Asmus v. Waterloo Cmty. Sch. Dist., 
722 N.W.2d 653, 657 (Iowa 2006). Legal causation, on the other hand, requires 
the employee to show that the mental injury resulted from “workplace stress of 
greater magnitude than the day-to-day mental stresses experienced by other 
workers employed in the same or similar jobs, regardless of their employer.” 
Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 858. 
 
But in Brown, we walked back part of the causation burden we’d 
previously imposed on employees in Dunlavey. 641 N.W.2d at 728–29. In Brown, 
we overturned the commissioner’s denial of benefits for a convenience store clerk 
who developed PTSD after seeing a customer get shot and, about a week later, 
had been held up at work by an apparently armed robber. Id. at 726–27. We 
13 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
14 
 
formulated a different standard of causation when an employee establishes that 
the mental injury at issue is “based on a manifest happening of a sudden 
traumatic nature from an unexpected cause or unusual strain.” Id. at 729. Such 
a situation meets the legal-causation test “irrespective of the absence of similar 
stress on other employees.” Id. We could dispense with the legal-causation 
requirement in such a circumstance, we reasoned, because a mental injury that 
occurred rapidly and could be traced to a specific, sudden event had a 
sufficiently strong “badge of reliability” (in contrast to a mental injury alleged to 
have developed gradually over time). Id. at 728 (quoting Graves v. Utah Power & 
Light Co., 713 P.2d 187, 192 (Wyo. 1986), superseded by statute as stated in 
Brown, 641 N.W.2d at 728 n.1). 
Neither Brown nor any of our cases since have explored the contours of 
what “manifest happening of a sudden traumatic nature from an unexpected 
cause or unusual strain” means. Id. at 729. The SECC argues that Brown 
requires the factfinder to focus on that employee’s particular job duties to 
determine whether the injury-causing incident was an “unexpected cause or 
unusual strain” under Iowa Code section 85.3(1). Tripp, conversely, in effect 
argues that Brown requires the factfinder to focus on whether the sudden event 
constitutes an “unexpected cause or unusual strain” in employment life 
generally, without regard to the regular duties of the particular employee or 
employees in similar positions. The deputy commissioner adopted the SECC’s 
proposed interpretation. The commissioner and district court agreed, with the 
district court noting that the “baseline seems to be most appropriately drawn by 
14 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
15 
 
looking to the unique features of each particular claimant’s experiences—
including their ordinary workplace activities.” 
In Brown, we adopted the phrase “manifest happening of a sudden 
traumatic nature from an unexpected cause or unusual strain” from the test we 
found in a Montana case, Tocco v. City of Great Falls, to determine whether an 
injury met the legal standard for workers’ compensation. Brown, 641 N.W.2d at 
729 (citing Tocco v. City of Great Falls, 714 P.2d 160, 163–64 (Mont. 1986)). But 
the Montana Supreme Court in Tocco was quoting a phrase from Montana’s own 
workers’ compensation statute, Montana Code section 39-71-119, defining an 
“eligible injury.” Tocco, 714 P.2d at 163–64. The Montana statute defined an 
“eligible injury,” in part, as “a tangible happening of a traumatic nature from an 
unexpected cause or unusual strain resulting in” certain types of harm. Id. 
(quoting Mont. Code § 39-71-119).  
Iowa workers’ compensation statute, by comparison, doesn’t contain any 
language stating that injuries must result from an “unexpected cause or unusual 
strain.” Iowa Code § 85.3(1). The relevant part of Iowa’s statute to which we 
applied the “unusual strain” test in Brown simply asks whether Tripp’s injury 
“ar[ose] out of and in the course of employment.” Id. On that inquiry, the evidence 
was unrebutted (from the testifying doctors, Tripp’s husband, and Tripp herself) 
that her PTSD arose directly from her handling of the screaming 911 call and 
the reports about the infant’s maiming that immediately followed it and that 
Tripp answered the call in the course of her work as an emergency dispatcher 
for the SECC.  
15 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
16 
 
Focusing on the employee’s own job in determining an “unexpected strain” 
places workers routinely tasked with addressing traumatic incidents, such as 
emergency dispatchers, paramedics, police officers, and firefighters, in a 
disfavored position as compared with other workers. They would bear a burden 
to 
prove 
hyper-unexpected 
causes 
and 
hyper-unusual 
strains—some 
extraordinary species of traumatic event, above and beyond the perilous events 
that they regularly confront—to qualify for benefits that those in less hazardous 
professions receive by meeting a far lower bar. Yet nothing in the language of 
Brown—nor, more importantly, in the text of section 85.3(1)—makes the 
“unexpectedness” or “unusualness” of the traumatic event dependent on the 
employee’s own job duties. We thus hold that the district court erred in its 
interpretation of the statute in ruling otherwise. 
This holding aligns with our existing workers’ compensation law. If a police 
officer, for instance, is physically injured in a crash while pursuing a suspect in 
a high-speed chase, her injury ordinarily would be compensable despite the fact 
that police officers often pursue dangerous, fleeing suspects. But if an officer 
with a pre-existing heart condition has a heart attack on the job, the officer must 
still prove “that the injury arose out of the employment.” P.D.S.I. v. Peterson, 685 
N.W.2d 627, 630 (Iowa 2004). Applying our mental injury cases as we do today 
treats mental injuries in a similar fashion. For mental injuries “based on a 
manifest happening of a sudden traumatic nature from an unexpected cause or 
unusual strain” legal causation is established without regard to the regular 
duties of the particular employee or other employees in similar positions. See 
16 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
17 
 
Brown, 641 N.W.2d at 728–29. But for mental injuries that might result from a 
combination of work- and non-work-related factors, the claimant must prove 
both legal and medical causation. See Peterson, 685 N.W.2d at 630; Dunlavey, 
526 N.W.2d at 856–57. 
The dissent never cites to, let alone analyzes, the actual text of the statute 
on which this case turns. The dissent’s preferred application of the statute is 
premised on a fear that, unless courts require emergency responders to prove 
hyper-unusual work events caused their PTSD, emergency responders will make 
(and reap the benefits of) fraudulent PTSD claims. The dissent recites, for 
instance, that our causation test in Dunlavey for mental-mental injuries sought 
to address “difficulties in the evaluation of psychological injuries, such as the 
ease with which such claims may be feigned and the difficulty with which 
fraudulent claims can be detected.” (Quoting Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 855.) The 
dissent refers to our choice of the causation test in Dunlavey as “mindful” of an 
argument “that once ‘mental/mental’ claims are deemed compensable, 
employees will increasingly make fraudulent claims which the courts will not be 
able to detect and which will ultimately force employers out of business.” 
(Quoting id. at 856.) Stated in its purest form, the dissent believes that its 
approach to proving the unusualness of the PTSD-causing event will prevent 
“fraudulent claims that are difficult to disprove.”  
On this subject, the dissent fights a battle that the SECC doesn’t. The 
SECC contested medical causation at the agency but doesn’t claim on appeal 
that Tripp’s PTSD diagnosis is “fraudulent.” There is no claim of fraud. The 
17 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
18 
 
dissent instead presents a legislative policy rationale that it then superimposes 
on the text of the statute to support its interpretation. “Presumably,” the dissent 
writes, “the legislature was unwilling to open the floodgates to mental injury 
claims as they are difficult to disprove and increase insurance costs while 
inhibiting job creation.” Yet no hint of any of the things that the dissent 
“presumes” here are found anywhere in the statute or in this record. 
Lest we lose sight of the polestar for our legal analysis in this case, we 
must interpret our own causation test in harmony with the words of the workers’ 
compensation statute. The role of this court is to apply the words “of a statute 
as written.” In re Marshall, 805 N.W.2d 145, 160 (Iowa 2011). “[W]e may not—
under the guise of statutory construction—enlarge or otherwise change the 
terms of a statute as the legislature adopted it.” State v. Miller, 590 N.W.2d 45, 
47 (Iowa 1999). For us to interpret the statute to achieve some policy objective 
found nowhere in the statute’s language—to presume the statute requires a 
higher standard of proof for PTSD based on fears of fraud—invades a sphere 
reserved for the legislature. See In re Est. of Gist, 763 N.W.2d 561, 567–68 (Iowa 
2009).  
The existence of any system of insurance, including workers’ 
compensation, brings with it the potential for abuse. But the solution to this 
problem resides in the truth-seeking function of the adversary process, in which 
the trier of fact “considers expert testimony with an eye toward the concern that 
the claimant may be malingering, exaggerating his or her injuries, or attempting 
to claim an injury unrelated to employment.” Travis J. Foels, Rescuing the 
18 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
19 
 
Rescuer: Reforming How Florida’s Workers’ Compensation Law Treats Mental 
Injury of First Responders, 69 Fla. L. Rev. 1439, 1463 (2017). The workers’ 
compensation system “already depend[s] on triers of fact to detect and weed out 
fraudulent or illegitimate claims.” Id. Our court thus shouldn’t presume it needs 
to cure some perceived legislative inattention by foreclosing recovery for a class 
of injuries that might otherwise qualify under the statute. “Our task is to 
interpret the statute, not improve it.” Brakke v. Iowa Dep’t of Nat. Res., 897 
N.W.2d 522, 541 (Iowa 2017).  
The dissent relies heavily on Moon v. Board of Trustees of Municipal Fire & 
Police Retirement System of Iowa, in which we applied Dunlavey’s causation test 
to a disability claim by a police officer seeking benefits under Iowa Code chapter 
411. 548 N.W.2d 565, 568 (Iowa 1996). In that case, an officer became 
permanently disabled after developing a panic disorder and agoraphobia after a 
confrontation with an armed robbery suspect and the suicide of a fellow officer. 
Id. at 567. We denied benefits under the Dunlavey test because the disabled 
officer failed to establish that these incidents were “more than the day-to-day 
stresses commonly associated with police departments,” citing to testimony from 
another officer that “[t]here’s a lot of stress associated with the job” and similar 
testimony from other officers. Id. at 569–70. But Moon, and another case the 
dissent recites, City of Cedar Rapids v. Board of Trustees of Municipal Fire & Police 
Retirement System of Iowa, 572 N.W.2d 919 (Iowa 1998), offer little of substance 
to our analysis in light of Brown’s later reconstruction of the causation standard 
for “readily identifiable” events causing mental injury, as in this case. 
19 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
20 
 
Workers’ compensation statutes are generally unique to each state, but 
several courts in other jurisdictions, interpreting statutes similar to Iowa’s, have 
likewise held that purely mental injuries are compensable under an objective 
standard when the injury is caused by a readily-identifiable or directly-traceable 
event. For instance, the Oregon Supreme Court held a claimant’s mental injury 
was compensable because his injury resulted from “actual stress conditions at 
work when viewed objectively.” McGarrah v. State Accident Ins. Fund Corp., 675 
P.2d 159, 172 (Or. 1983). Oregon’s statute defined a compensable “occupational 
disease” as “[a]ny disease or infection which arises out of and in the scope of the 
employment, and to which an employee is not ordinarily subjected or exposed 
other than during a period of regular actual employment therein.” Id. at 169 
(quoting Or. Rev. Stat. § 656.802).  
The Arizona Supreme Court permitted recovery for an officer who 
developed PTSD after a shootout with a gunman during a welfare check. France 
v. Indus. Comm’n of Ariz., 481 P.3d 1162, 1163, 1167 (Ariz. 2021). The court 
rejected the employer’s claim that the officer needed to “prove that the injury-
causing event was outside the scope of his assigned job duties” because under 
that standard “a deputy who suffers mental injuries caused by a gunfight, 
regardless of the circumstances, could never receive compensation because such 
an incident might possibly occur in the line of duty.” Id. The court emphasized 
that its holding was “limited to mental injuries arising from a specific work-
related incident” and distinguished cases involving “gradual injuries resulting 
from ordinary stresses and strains of the work regimen.” Id. 
20 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
21 
 
The Appellate Court of Illinois approved benefits for a police officer after 
he developed PTSD following a standoff with someone he believed to be wielding 
a gun. Diaz v. Ill. Workers’ Comp. Comm’n, 989 N.E.2d 233, 235–36 (Ill. App. Ct. 
2013). The court rejected the commission’s conclusion that the officer couldn’t 
“recover because the traumatic incident was not an uncommon event of 
significantly greater proportion than what he would otherwise have been 
subjected to in the normal course of his employment as a police officer.” Id. at 
241–42. Such a standard, the court noted, would make it “virtually impossible 
for police officers or others involved in dangerous occupations to qualify for a 
mental-mental claim.” Id. at 242. The court distinguished the incident from “a 
gradually developing mental disability” and found the appropriate standard for 
“whether a worker has suffered the type of emotional shock sufficient to warrant 
recovery should be determined by an objective, reasonable-person standard, 
rather than a subjective standard that takes into account the claimant’s 
occupation and training.” Id. at 241–42. 
The Supreme Court of Louisiana likewise found that for “cases involving 
such readily identifiable, unusual and dramatic events,” the claimant must be 
compensated “when there is sufficient evidence that the sudden event caused 
the disabling mental condition.” Sparks v. Tulane Med. Ctr. Hosp. & Clinic, 546 
So. 2d 138, 147 (La. 1989) (emphasis added). But “an employee’s general 
allegation that he is unable to work due to stress or tension caused by working 
conditions,” according to the court, “would not give rise to a compensable claim.” 
Id. 
21 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
22 
 
The national landscape shows increasing support for laws that ensure 
emergency responders have an opportunity to receive workers’ compensation 
benefits for PTSD. “A vigorous trend is for states to make exceptions, within 
exclusionary laws, for first responders via the legislative ‘presumption of 
causation’ device.” David B. Torrey & Donald T. DeCarlo, Mental Stress Causing 
Mental Disability Under Workers’ Compensation Laws: A Short History, the 
Competing Arguments, and A 2021 Inventory, 56 Tort Trial & Ins. Prac. L.J. 91, 
134 (2021). The National Council on Compensation Insurance, “which carefully 
monitors proposed bills and enactments on this topic,” identified PTSD bills 
ensuring eligibility for emergency responders as “the top trending issue for 
2019.” Id. at 134–35, 173 (showing seventeen states with enacted legislation at 
the time of the article’s publication and another seventeen states with some kind 
of proposed legislation). 
What’s more, making it harder for emergency responders to receive 
workers’ compensation for mental injuries would rest on a dubious assumption: 
that emergency responders have, or should have, some natural or acquired 
immunity to psychological injuries that might result from participating in 
traumatic human experiences. Few people, if any, could know if they possess 
such an immunity going in. And none would know for certain that they’d be able 
to maintain it. Tripp’s PTSD diagnosis, by all accounts, is a case in point: she 
was always able to deal with the trauma of the job for sixteen years until, one 
horrific day, she wasn’t. 
22 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
23 
 
Setting different baselines for proving workers’ compensation eligibility—
one for emergency responders and one for everyone else—further presupposes 
that emergency responders agreed to assume the risk of suffering psychological 
injuries simply by accepting the job. The legal basis for this “assumption of risk” 
notion is unclear; it’s certainly found nowhere in this record. In any event, our 
workers’ compensation statute embodies a “no fault” system: employers are not 
liable for their negligence in causing a workplace injury and workers are not 
subject to a setoff in benefits for their own conduct that might have contributed 
to their injury. See Peterson, 685 N.W.2d at 635. Workers thus can’t be denied 
benefits based on a common law “assumption of risk” defense to an injury claim. 
Hawk v. Jim Hawk Chevrolet-Buick, Inc., 282 N.W.2d 84, 91 (Iowa 1979) (en 
banc). 
Our workers’ compensation statute doesn’t impose a higher burden on 
workers with jobs that involve frequent brushes with traumatic events than 
workers in other occupations. Workers’ compensation, it bears repeating, is a 
statutory creation, with eligibility for benefits determined by what the statute 
provides. See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 188 (Iowa 1980). 
We find it—as we must—not for us to create favored and disfavored 
classifications among occupations or injuries when the legislature has made no 
such classifications in its statute. Allowing emergency responders to receive 
workers’ compensation for their proven mental injuries, without imposing some 
heightened evidentiary hurdle absent in our statute, merely provides them with 
the compensation to which they’re legally entitled. 
23 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
24 
 
IV. 
When a purely mental injury is traceable to a readily identifiable work 
event, the claimant proves legal causation by meeting the test that we set forth 
in Brown by analyzing the unexpected or unusual nature of the injury-inducing 
event without regard to the claimant’s own particular duties. Tripp satisfied the 
requirements for legal causation. We thus reverse the decision of the district 
court and remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
REVERSED AND REMANDED. 
Christensen, C.J., and Appel and Oxley, JJ., join this opinion. 
Christensen, C.J., files a concurring opinion. Waterman, J., files a dissenting 
opinion, in which Mansfield and McDonald, JJ., join.  
 
 
24 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
25 
 
#21–0841, Tripp v. Scott Emergency Commc’n Ctr. 
CHRISTENSEN, Chief Justice (concurring specially). 
 
I agree with the majority that our court in Brown v. Quick Trip Corp., 641 
N.W.2d 725, 728–29 (Iowa 2002), walked back the causation burden we 
previously imposed on employees in Dunlavey v. Economy Fire & Casualty Co., 
526 N.W.2d 845, 854–59 (Iowa 1995), for cases of a manifest happening of a 
sudden traumatic nature from an unexpected cause or unusual strain. See 
Asmus v. Waterloo Cmty. Sch. Distr., 722 N.W.2d 653, 657 n.1 (Iowa 2006) (“In 
the later case of Brown v. Quik Trip Corp., we formulated a different standard 
[than Dunlavey] for those situations in which the mental injury can be readily 
traced to a specific event.” (citation omitted)). Nevertheless, I write separately to 
discuss the statistics of this particular event and the higher rates of PTSD among 
first responders. I also write to propose that our state legislature adopt a statute 
similar to Minnesota’s that provides a rebuttable presumption that a PTSD 
diagnosis was caused by the first responder’s job.  
 
I. Statistical Data Puts the Claim that the Call was not an Unexpected 
Cause or Unusual Strain in Tripp’s Profession into Doubt.  
The deputy commissioner held that “[g]iven the nature of the job of a 9-1-1 
dispatcher, taking a call regarding a dying or dead infant cannot be said to be 
an unexpected cause or an unusual strain.” It drew this conclusion from the 
testimony of Tripp, former Scott Emergency Communication Center 911 
dispatchers turned supervisors Denise Pavlik and Tracey Sanders, and the 
MEDIC EMS Jill Cawiezell. These witnesses each indicated that it was not 
uncommon for a 911 dispatcher to handle calls that involve distraught callers 
25 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
26 
 
and life-or-death situations. There was also testimony from dispatchers Tripp, 
Pavlik, and Cawiezell indicating that they each fielded multiple infant death calls 
throughout their careers. The commissioner effectively adopted the deputy 
commissioner’s analysis, and the district court determined substantial evidence 
supported their conclusions.   
 
Evidence undoubtedly establishes that a 911 dispatcher normally handles 
calls involving distraught callers and life-or-death situations. But the relatively 
routine nature of these calls does not prevent such a call from being classified 
as a sudden, traumatic, and unexpected event. For example, a convenience store 
clerk normally interacts with store visitors and cleans up the store. Those general 
responsibilities do not prevent the possibility that some interactions or cleaning 
tasks, such as being a victim in a robbery or cleaning up blood from a shoot-out, 
can be sudden, traumatic, or unexpected events. Cf. Brown, 641 N.W.2d at 726–
27.    
 
To an extent, statistics can be helpful in analyzing whether a sudden, 
traumatic, or unexpected event has occurred. See, e.g., Brown v. Quik Trip Corp., 
No. 00–0868, 2001 WL 1132735, at *3 (Iowa Ct. App. Sept. 26, 2001) (en banc), 
vacated, 641 N.W.2d 725. For example, in Brown, “[t]o rebut the claimed legal 
causation, appellee Quik Trip offered an exhibit showing statistics as to 
occupational incidents in 1995,” which indicated that in the United States in 
1995, thirty-six convenience store clerk fatalities occurred and 0.027% of 
convenience store clerks had suffered nonfatal injuries from violence. Id. at *3 & 
n.2. The commissioner in Brown concluded that these statistics “reflect[] that 
26 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
27 
 
these experiences are quite common for the industry in which he is employed.” 
Id. at *2. Those statistics were unimpressive to the court of appeals, as both 
opinion writers suggested that the statistics did not provide substantial evidence 
that violent acts committed on convenience store clerks were “quite common.” 
Id. at *3 (“Given the available statistics regarding the low incidence of death or 
injury of gas station attendants due to violence on the job, we would question 
whether the commissioner’s conclusion that violent acts are ‘quite common’ in 
the gas station business is supported by substantial evidence.”); id. at *5 (Hecht, 
J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (“After a careful review of the data, 
I conclude the data proves beyond dispute the rarity of the incidence of assaults 
and violent acts in occupations similar to Brown’s.”) (footnote omitted)).1 
 
Similarly, the majority’s case of France v. Industrial Commission of Arizona, 
481 P.3d 1162 (Ariz. 2021), used statistics to determine whether an attack on a 
law enforcement officer, who then shot and killed his attacker, during a welfare 
check, qualified as an unexpected, unusual, or extraordinary event. Id. at 1166–
67. In that case, “several law enforcement officers with many years of service 
testified that, while they are trained and prepared to use lethal force in the line 
of duty, they had never been involved in a gunfight.” Id. at 1167. Furthermore, 
“evidence showed that officer-involved shootings in Gila County were extremely 
rare, with fewer than ten such incidents occurring over the past forty years.” Id. 
 
 
1On further review to the Iowa Supreme Court, Quik Trip appeared to abandon this 
statistical argument and solely argued that Brown failed to prove legal causation by not 
“produc[ing] testimony of similarly situated employees to establish his claim of legal causation.” 
Brown, 641 N.W.2d at 729.  
27 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
28 
 
Based on the testimony and statistics, the court granted the officer’s claim. Id. 
(“In short, the Shooting Incident is not the type of incident that is part of a law 
enforcement officer’s daily routine, nor is it expected that a deputy will face such 
a dramatic brush with death in responding to a welfare check.”).  
 
I turn to some relevant statistics as applied to this case. In 2018, 188 
infants died in Iowa. Nat’l Ctr. for Health Stat., U.S. Dep’t of Health & Hum. 
Servs., 
Infant 
Mortality 
Rates 
by 
State 
(Mar. 
3, 
2022), 
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/pressroom/sosmap/infant_mortality_rates/infant_
mortality.htm [https://perma.cc/9MRX-R5ZU] (click 2018 under the “Year” 
filter) (classifying an infant as under one year old). In 2018, 990 emergency 
dispatchers worked in Iowa. U.S. Bureau of Lab. Stat., U.S. Dep’t of Lab., 
Occupational 
Employment 
and 
Wage 
Statistics 
(Apr. 
4, 
2022), 
https://www.bls.gov/oes/tables.htm (click on State XLS spreadsheet for May 
2018). A rough estimate indicates that an Iowa emergency dispatcher could 
expect to receive a call involving a dead infant once every five years (990 divided 
by 188 equals 5.27). This estimate, of course, assumes several variables, such 
as all infant deaths involved a 911 call, no repeats occurred among Iowa 
emergency dispatchers, and the amount of Iowa emergency dispatchers and 
infant deaths remain static over several years. That being said, this rough 
percentage is relatively consistent with Tripp’s experience (four calls over 
seventeen years) and Pavlik’s experience (three calls over twenty-two years).2  
 
 
2Pavlik indicated that she had heard fifteen child-death-related calls. On cross-
examination, Pavlik was asked how many involved the caller stating, “my baby is dead.” Those 
calls amounted to three.  
28 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
29 
 
 
But diving further, the specific nature of this 911 call does stand out. 
There was evidence to suggest that the cause of death was a homicide: a report 
that the infant’s head had been maimed with an object consistent with a claw 
hammer. Tripp’s testimony indicated that the dispatchers in the room gasped 
after hearing that the cause of death may have been a murder. If seasoned 
dispatchers had a visceral reaction such as this, it could be a strong indicator 
that the event was traumatic, sudden, or unexpected.  
 
Moreover, the homicide of infants is extremely rare statistically. In Iowa, 
between 2016 and 2019, approximately less than ten infants died from homicide. 
See Ctrs. for Disease Control & Prevention, 2019, 2018, 2017, 2016, NVDRS: IA 
All Victims Death Counts and Rates per 100,000 Homicide, All Mechanisms, All 
Races, Both Sexes, Age 0,  https://wisqars.cdc.gov/nvdrs/ (last visited June 6, 
2022) (in section 1, select “Crude Rates and Death Counts” under “Death and 
Rates”; in section 2, uncheck “All Intents” and select “Homicide”; in section 5, 
select 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019 under “Year(s) of Report” and Iowa under 
“Individual State(s)”; under “Advanced Options,” select “Single Age Range of <1 
to <1”; and click “Submit Request”) (noting that “[t]he number of deaths fewer 
than 10; the number has been suppressed to retain confidentiality”). By applying 
an average that two Iowa infants died from homicide in 2018, the rough 
probability, assuming several variables, that any Iowa 911 dispatcher would field 
a call about a murdered infant is around once every five hundred years. These 
statistics indicate that the situation described by Tripp is something that rarely 
happens, even in her line of work. With these statistics, I am skeptical that this 
29 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
30 
 
specific event could not be classified as an unexpected cause or an unusual 
strain.  
II. Further Legislative Action for First Responders.  
This case involves the broader issue of higher rates of PTSD among first 
responders. “First responders are exposed to potentially traumatic events 
repeatedly while on the job.” Nina F Lewis-Schroeder et al., Conceptualization, 
Assessment, and Treatment of Traumatic Stress in First Responders: A Review of 
Critical Issues, 26 Harv. Rev. Psychiatry 216, 217 (2018) [hereinafter Lewis-
Schroeder]; see Kubajak v. Lexington-Fayette Urban Cty. Gov’t, 180 S.W.3d 454, 
463 (Ky. 2005) (Scott, J., dissenting) (“It is notable that included among those 
who are particularly susceptible to PTSD, due to the frequency of their exposure 
to such events, are ‘first responders,’ . . . . ”). “Given the high frequency and 
severity of traumatic exposures, it is not surprising that first responders are at 
an elevated risk for developing PTSD.” Lewis-Schroeder, 26 Harv. Rev. Psychiatry 
at 217.  
Several studies suggest that first responders develop PTSD at a range of 
10% to 30% higher than members of the general public. Id.; Miriam Heyman, 
Jeff Dill, & Robert Douglas, The Ruderman White Paper on Mental Health and 
Suicide 
of 
First 
Responders 
12 
(2018), 
https://dir.nv.gov/uploadedFiles/dirnvgov/content/WCS/TrainingDocs/First
%20Responder%20White%20Paper_Final%20(2).pdf [https://perma.cc/7VYN-
A9X9] (describing firefighters develop PTSD at 7% to 15% and police officers 
develop PTSD at 28% higher than the general population); Substance Abuse & 
30 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
31 
 
Mental Health Servs. Admin., First Responders: Behavioral Health Concerns, 
Emergency 
Response, 
and 
Trauma 
3 
(2018), 
https://www.samhsa.gov/sites/default/files/dtac/supplementalresearchbullet
in-firstresponders-may2018.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/B8NZ-75D4] 
(“It 
is 
estimated that 30 percent of first responders develop behavioral health 
conditions including, but not limited to, depression and posttraumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD), as compared with 20 percent in the general population.” 
(citation omitted)). Some studies believe the disparity between PTSD diagnoses 
with first responders as compared to PTSD diagnoses in the general population 
is much higher due to underreporting. Lewis-Schroeder, 26 Harv. Rev. 
Psychiatry at 217. 
 
911 dispatchers, like Tripp, have an especially important duty in the 
“rescue chain.”   
[911 dispatchers] play a key role in allocating the right resource to 
patients in emergencies and they must communicate vital 
information during critical phases of operations. Errors in 
communications, for example, a wrong treatment priority, will 
compromise safe and effective patient care. Dispatchers’ failures 
may lead to a delay in care and may contribute to the patient’s 
death. Therefore, although the dispatchers are not at the forefront 
of the “hands on” rescue, they bear high work-related responsibility.  
Marcus Oldenburg et al., Job-related Stress and Work Ability of Dispatchers in a 
Metropolitan Fire Department, 9 J. Occupational Med. & Toxicology 31, 31 (2014) 
(endnote omitted). In recognition of the work performed by 911 dispatchers, the 
Iowa Legislature recently classified 911 dispatchers as “first responders.” 2020 
Iowa Acts ch. 1077, § 2 (codified at Iowa Code § 80B.11C (2021)). Additionally, 
911 dispatchers are also subject to higher rates of PTSD than the general public. 
31 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
32 
 
Anna Raskin, PTSD and Emergency Telecommunicators, J. of Emergency 
Dispatch 
(July 
6, 
2016) 
https://www.iaedjournal.org/ptsd-in-911-
communications-qa [https://perma.cc/D8M8-2999] (detailing the rate of PTSD 
among 911 dispatchers at between 18% and 24%).  
 
As the majority mentions, several states have enacted a wide variety of 
legislation to address the higher rates of PTSD among first responders. See 
Caitlin Dryden, Putting Mental Health on the Frontline: Why Mental Injuries in 
First Responders Should be Covered through Workers Compensation, Drexel L. 
Rev. 
Blog 
(Sept. 
11, 
2020), 
https://drexel.edu/law/lawreview/blog/overview/2020/September/putting-
mental-health-on-the-front-line/ [https://perma.cc/46R2-GRKK]. For example, 
Minnesota has a presumption that PTSD is a personal injury that was caused 
by the first responder’s job. Minn. Stat. § 176.011, subd. 15(e) (“If, preceding the 
date of disablement or death, an employee who was employed on active duty as: 
[a first responder] . . . is diagnosed with [PTSD] . . . , and had not been diagnosed 
with the mental impairment previously, then the mental impairment is 
presumptively an occupational disease and shall be presumed to have been due 
to the nature of employment.”); id. at § 176.66, subd. 1 (“The disablement of an 
employee resulting from an occupational disease shall be regarded as a personal 
injury within the meaning of the workers’ compensation law.”). However, that 
presumption can be rebutted by “substantial factors brought by the employer or 
insurer.” Id. at § 176.011, subd. 15(e). 
32 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
33 
 
 
Some states do not have a presumption that PTSD was caused by the first 
responder’s job. Texas allows first responders to recover for PTSD as a 
compensable injury if it is “caused by one or more events occurring in the course 
and scope of the first responder’s employment” and “the preponderance of the 
evidence indicates that the event or events were a producing cause of the 
disorder.” Tex. Lab. Code Ann. § 504.019(b). In Washington, “claims [that are] 
based on mental conditions or mental disabilities caused by stress” are not an 
occupational disease. Wash. Rev. Code § 51.08.142(1). However, a specific 
exclusion is 
set 
aside for 
first 
responders, 
including 
public safety 
telecommunicators, who may bring occupational disease claims resulting from 
PTSD. Id. § 51.08.142(2)(a), (d). Florida’s and Nevada’s statutes specifically 
delineate certain triggering events that allow for compensation for a PTSD 
diagnosis among first responders. Fla. Stat. § 112.1815(5)(a)(2)(a–k) (providing a 
list of triggering incidents); Nev. Rev. Stat. § 616C.180(4)(a–b) (allowing a first 
responder to recover for stress if the employee witnessed “the death, or the 
aftermath of the death, of a person as a result of a violent event” or “an injury, 
or the aftermath of an injury, that involves grievous bodily harm of a nature that 
shocks the conscience” if it was during the scope of employment”). Notably, 
Florida’s statute contains several triggering incidents related to the death of 
minors. Fla. Stat. § 112.1815(5)(a)(2)(a–e).  
 
Ohio has gone even further by creating a state post-traumatic trust fund 
for its first responders outside of the worker’s compensation scheme. See Ohio 
Rev. Code Ann. § 126.65. This fund allows first responders diagnosed with PTSD 
33 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
34 
 
to receive lost wages and medical bills if PTSD was during the “course of, and 
arising out of, employment as a public safety officer but without an 
accompanying physical injury.” Id. § 126.65(B).  
 
To me, Minnesota’s rebuttable-presumption framework provides more 
comprehensive protection to our first responders who are more likely to face 
traumatic events while exhaustively serving our communities and enforcing our 
laws. Alternatively, the legislature can look at the other mentioned legislative 
statutes, and unmentioned ones, to further address the problem of PTSD among 
first responders.  
 
 
 
34 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
35 
 
 
#21–0841, Tripp v. Scott Emergency Commc’n Ctr. 
WATERMAN, Justice (dissenting). 
I respectfully dissent. I would apply our longstanding precedent to affirm 
the district court judgment that upheld the workers’ compensation 
commissioner’s fact-bound determination denying Mandy Tripp’s mental injury 
claim. The majority overrules our caselaw that required employees claiming 
purely mental injuries to show that the triggering event was sudden, traumatic, 
and unexpected in their occupation. Substantial evidence supported the 
commissioner’s factual determination that Tripp’s phone call with the hysterical 
mother was not an unexpected event for an emergency dispatcher, as other 
witnesses testified. We are required to affirm the agency’s determination under 
our deferential standard of review. The majority’s ill-advised change to the legal 
causation element in mental injury claims opens the floodgates to fraudulent 
claims that are difficult to disprove and will drive up the cost of doing business 
in Iowa.  
I. The Commissioner’s Decision Should Be Affirmed Under Controlling 
Law. 
In Dunlavey v. Economy Fire & Casualty Co.,  
we adopt[ed] an objective standard of legal causation for purely 
mental injury claims and place[d] the burden on the employee to 
establish that the mental injury was caused by workplace stress of 
greater magnitude than the day-to-day mental stresses experienced 
by other workers employed in the same or similar jobs, regardless of 
their employer. 
526 N.W.2d 845, 858 (Iowa 1995) (emphasis added). The majority misreads 
Brown v. Quik Trip Co. as abandoning that “same or similar job” requirement; 
35 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
36 
 
Brown did no such thing. See 641 N.W.2d 725, 728 (Iowa 2002). To the contrary, 
Brown described its single-trauma test as “consistent with Dunlavey.” Id. 
Normally, when we abandon a proof requirement, we say so explicitly. 
Shortly after we decided Dunlavey, we extended it to cover accidental 
disability claims by police officers claiming purely mental injuries from specific 
traumatic incidents in Moon v. Board of Trustees of the Municipal Fire & Police 
Retirement System of Iowa, 548 N.W.2d 565, 568 (Iowa 1996). There, a police 
officer suffered from a panic disorder with agoraphobia and sought “accidental 
disability benefits from the Municipal Fire and Police Retirement System of Iowa” 
codified in Chapter 411. Id. at 567.  
Moon allege[d] that his disability was caused by two incidents 
that took place while on duty. In 1980, as a member of an 
intelligence unit, Moon confronted a man suspected of armed 
robbery. The suspect attempted to escape, but Moon did not shoot 
at him because he was afraid his partner would be caught in the 
crossfire. He soon began having nightmares about the incident. In 
1985 a young officer who served under Moon committed suicide, 
and Moon was called to the scene. Shortly before the suicide, Moon 
had disciplined the officer, and Moon stated that he felt guilty for 
not having identified the officer’s problems. 
Id. Moon had testified that the incidents were not typical for police officers but 
admitted that police work “can become very dangerous, in a split second” and 
“[t]here’s a lot of stress associated with the job.” Id. at 569. Another officer 
testified that “police work is more stressful on a day-to-day basis than the 
average occupation,” and the chief of police testified that he did not consider the 
two incidents “exceptionally stressful” for police officers. Id. at 569–70. On our 
review, we reiterated that the Dunlavey standard is occupation-focused and, in 
this context, required “the stress be ‘of greater magnitude than the day-to-day 
36 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
37 
 
mental stress experienced by other [police] officers.’ ” Id. at 569 (alteration in 
original) (quoting Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 857). We concluded that “[t]here [wa]s 
substantial evidence in the record to support the board’s conclusion that the two 
incidents that allegedly caused Moon’s disability were no more than the 
day-to-day stresses commonly associated with police departments.” Id. at 569.  
Whether the occupation-specific legal causation standard is met in a 
particular case is a question of fact that must be affirmed on appeal when that 
determination is supported by substantial evidence—notwithstanding whether 
benefits were denied or awarded. Two years after Moon, we affirmed the board’s 
award of mental disability benefits to a police officer who “witness[ed] a person 
burning to death” and “confront[ed] an armed person alone.” City of Cedar 
Rapids v. Bd. of Trs. of the Mun. Fire & Police Ret. Sys. of Iowa, 572 N.W.2d 919, 
925–26 (Iowa 1998). Applying our deferential standard of review, we affirmed, 
stating, “Based on testimony from [the police captain and the operations chief], 
the board could have found against [officer] Cornish on the legal causation issue. 
That fact, however, does not mean there was insubstantial evidence to support 
the ruling the board made.” Id. As this case shows, benefits for purely mental 
injuries triggered by specific traumatic incidents have been available to first 
responders under Dunlavey’s occupation-specific standard in Iowa for several 
decades.  
Indeed, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has repeatedly 
awarded first responders and corrections personnel workers’ compensation 
benefits for purely mental injuries, applying the occupation-focused standard. 
37 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
38 
 
See Christensen v. Pottawattamie County, Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’n 
No. 5051440, 2017 WL 1161144, at *7 (Dec. Mar. 23, 2017) (Grell, Arb.) (finding 
legal causation based on unexpected, gruesome nature of inmate’s suicide 
attempt); Schuchmann v. Dep’t of Transp., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’n 
No. 5035676, 2012 WL 2371481, at *7 (Dec. June 20, 2012) (Hedberg, Arb.) 
(finding legal causation when a department of transportation vehicle 
enforcement officer viewed charred human remains at highway accident scene); 
Everhart v. Clarinda Corr. Facility, Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’n No. 5007651, 
2005 WL 2465835, at *3 (Dec. Sept. 30, 2005) (Trier, App.) (finding legal 
causation when a prison guard was hit with bodily fluids and feared he 
contracted HIV).  
These determinations on purely mental injury claims are made by the 
agency case by case, subject to our deferential standard of review. We are bound 
by the commissioner’s findings of fact that are supported by substantial 
evidence. Asmus v. Waterloo Cmty. Sch. Dist., 722 N.W.2d 653, 657 (Iowa 2006). 
And we are bound by the commissioner’s application of law to the facts unless it 
is “irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.” Brewer-Strong v. HNI Corp., 
913 N.W.2d 235, 242 (Iowa 2018) (quoting Westling v. Hormel Foods Corp., 
810 N.W.2d 247, 251 (Iowa 2012)); Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(m) (2019). Applying 
these standards, I find no reversible error in the agency’s determinations. 
Tripp had the burden “to show by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury arose out of and in the course of [her] employment.” Dunlavey, 
526 N.W.2d at 849. To do so, she had to prove both medical and legal causation. 
38 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
39 
 
Asmus, 722 N.W.2d at 657; Brown, 641 N.W.2d at 727; Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d 
at 853. For medical causation, “[w]hether an injury has a direct causal 
connection with the employment or arose independently thereof is essentially 
within the domain of expert testimony.” Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 853. “Legal 
causation, on the other hand, presents a question of whether the policy of the 
law will extend responsibility to those consequences that have in fact been 
produced by the employment.” Asmus, 722 N.W.2d at 657. The fighting issue on 
appeal is legal causation. 
The majority’s discussion of the record is incomplete. Tripp testified she 
had taken three infant death calls before the September 30, 2018 phone call at 
issue. She admitted that she “never know[s] what’s on the other end of the 
phone.” Specifically, she testified: 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL:] Now, throughout your training, 
throughout your experience it is typical to deal with people who are 
distraught; is that fair to say?  
[TRIPP:] That’s fair.  
[DEFENSE COUNSEL:] Yeah.  
Because in cases of emergency, who are people to call? 
[TRIPP:] Me.  
[DEFENSE COUNSEL:] That’s right.  
That’s your job, correct?  
[TRIPP:] Correct.  
[DEFENSE COUNSEL:] And you never know what’s coming 
your way, do you?  
[TRIPP:] I do not. 
39 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
40 
 
Tripp admitted that handling 911 calls where the caller is crying, almost 
incoherently, is potentially an everyday occurrence for a 911 operator.  
A 911 dispatcher for MEDIC Ambulance, Jill Cawiezell, who took over the 
September 30 phone call after Tripp transferred it, testified that she handles 
distraught callers daily. She has over twenty-four years of experience and has 
personally handled twelve infant death calls. She testified that infant death calls 
are not unusual or sudden and that death, distraught callers, and trauma are 
common in her job. Denise Pavlik, the former director of the SECC, testified that 
she heard the September 30 phone call and did not consider that call to be 
unusual, sudden, or unexpected. She explained that over ten people were 
involved with that call. Pavlik has answered fifteen calls throughout her career 
where children had died, including three calls where the caller has said “my baby 
is dead.” She testified that life-and-death calls are an everyday occurrence for 
911 operators. Tracey Sanders, the current deputy director of the SECC, with 
over twelve years of experience as a dispatcher, also testified. She, too, reviewed 
the September 30 phone call and opined that it was not unusual, unexpected, 
or sudden for their occupation. She testified that the average 911 dispatcher 
takes twenty calls a day and Tripp was no exception. 
The deputy commissioner entered an Arbitration Decision that determined 
Tripp was unable to meet the legal causation requirement: 
Legal causation involves a determination of whether the work 
stresses and tensions the employee experienced, when viewed 
objectively and not as the employee perceived them, were of greater 
magnitude than the day to day mental stresses workers employed 
in the same or similar jobs experience routinely regardless of their 
employer. 
40 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
41 
 
The deputy commissioner found that “there [was] considerable evidence in the 
record that [911] dispatchers, like [Tripp], routinely take calls involving death 
and traumatic injury” and that “taking a call regarding a dying or dead infant 
cannot be said to be an unexpected cause or an unusual strain.”  
Tripp filed a motion for rehearing urging the deputy commissioner to 
expressly find that Tripp “suffers from PTSD and that she proved medical 
causation” and to reverse the decision on legal causation because Tripp satisfied 
the requirements of Brown. Alternatively, Tripp requested Brown be overruled. 
The SECC and its insurer resisted. The deputy commissioner denied Tripp’s 
motion, confirming his finding that Tripp had not demonstrated legal causation 
because the September 30 phone call was not unexpected “given the nature of 
the [911] dispatcher’s job.” Tripp filed an intra-agency appeal.  
After additional briefing by the parties, the workers’ compensation 
commissioner entered an appeal decision. On de novo review, the commissioner 
affirmed and adopted the deputy’s decision on Tripp’s rehearing request as the 
agency’s final decision. The commissioner elaborated:  
[T]he question of what qualifies as an unexpected cause or an 
unusual strain is specific to the individual and must be addressed 
on a case-by-case basis. What can be expected by an individual in 
the workplace, is, in part, dependent upon their occupation. It 
stands to reason that an individual’s occupation would be a factor 
to consider. 
Tripp filed a petition for judicial review. On June 11, 2021, after further 
briefing and oral argument, the district court affirmed the commissioner’s 
decision. The court declined to defer to medical experts offering nonmedical 
conclusions about working conditions. The district court ruled the commissioner 
41 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
42 
 
properly considered the job responsibilities of emergency dispatchers in applying 
the Brown test: 
In determining whether a particular event is unexpected or unusual, 
the Commissioner must first establish a baseline of what is expected 
or usual. As every individual’s day-to-day life is unique, this baseline 
seems to be most appropriately drawn by looking to the unique 
features of each particular claimant’s experiences—including their 
ordinary workplace activities. Accordingly, the Court finds that it 
was not error for the Commissioner to consider the regular job 
responsibilities of [Tripp] in evaluating whether her harm was the 
result of an unexpected cause or unusual strain. 
The district court determined the agency decision was supported by substantial 
evidence because life-and-death emergency calls are relatively common for 911 
operators. On this record, the district court correctly affirmed the 
commissioner’s denial of mental disability benefits to Tripp. We should affirm. 
II. The Majority’s Decision to Overrule Longstanding Caselaw is 
Contrary to Principles of Stare Decisis and Not Well Reasoned. 
I respectfully dissent from the majority’s decision to overrule our 
longstanding precedents. Stare decisis considerations counsel against the 
majority’s radical break with existing law. Further, our prior decisions were well 
reasoned and correctly decided, and the majority’s justification for overruling 
these precedents is wanting. 
“Stare decisis alone dictates continued adherence to our precedent absent 
a compelling reason to change the law.” Book v. Doublestar Dongfeng Tyre Co., 
860 N.W.2d 576, 594 (Iowa 2015). Ever since we decided Dunlavey, Moon, and 
Brown 
decades 
ago, 
the 
commissioner 
has 
consistently 
applied 
an 
occupation-specific test to determine whether the triggering event is sudden, 
traumatic, and unexpected for workers in the same or similar jobs. The 
42 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
43 
 
legislature, which has quickly amended chapter 85 when it disagrees with our 
interpretation,3 has left Moon, Brown, and Dunlavey intact and declined to relax 
the proof required for purely mental injuries under Iowa Code chapters 85 and 
411. “The rule of stare decisis ‘is especially applicable where the construction 
placed on a statute by previous decisions has been long acquiesced in by the 
legislature, by its continued use or failure to change the language of the statute 
so construed . . . .’ ” Brewer-Strong, 913 N.W.2d at 249 (omission in original) 
(quoting In re Est. of Vajgrt, 801 N.W.2d 570, 574 (Iowa 2011)). Presumably, the 
legislature was unwilling to open the floodgates to mental injury claims as they 
are difficult to disprove and increase insurance costs while inhibiting job 
creation.  
The majority’s rationale for breaking with our longstanding law is not 
well-supported. First, the majority’s new holding today begs the question: 
“unexpected” compared to what? As the district court noted, “the Commissioner 
must first establish a baseline of what is expected or usual” by looking to the 
claimant’s occupation. What is expected or unexpected necessarily varies by 
occupation. Witnessing a death on the job would be unexpected for most 
occupations; not so for a hospice nurse. A threatening tiger is routine for 
Siegfried and Roy; not so for the Las Vegas ticket taker outside the cage. Police, 
firefighters, and medics routinely face life-threatening emergencies as part of the 
 
3See, e.g., Bluml v. Dee Jay’s, Inc., 920 N.W.2d 82, 90–92 (Iowa 2018) (allowing recovery 
for idiopathic fall on level floor), abrogated by 2019 Iowa Acts 38, § 1 (codified at Iowa Code 
§ 85.61(7)(c) (2020)) (modifying definition of “personal injury arising out of employment” to 
exclude “[p]ersonal injuries due to idiopathic or unexplained falls from a level surface onto the 
same level surface”). 
43 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
44 
 
job; other occupations, such as the convenience store clerk in Brown, do not. 
Telemarketers and 911 operators should not be equated when determining 
whether a particular phone call is traumatic or unexpected. 
Second, the majority and special concurrence rely on a flawed premise: 
that first responders can’t recover for their purely mental injuries under 
Dunlavey because stressful emergencies are part of the job. The majority wants 
an easier path for mental disability benefits for emergency workers, including 
911 operators who are not physically present at the crime or accident scene. To 
me, that is a policy determination for the legislature, which for decades has left 
the Dunlavey same-or-similar-job proof requirement intact. And as noted above, 
agency fact finders applying Dunlavey have repeatedly allowed first responders 
to recover for purely mental injuries triggered by specific events. The bar is not 
set too high. 
Third, the majority reads Brown in a vacuum in a manner inconsistent 
with the larger body of law in this area. When Brown is read together with 
Dunlavey and Moon, it is clear we did not abandon the same-or-similar-job 
requirement for traumatic events. In Dunlavey, we “establish[ed] a standard for 
legal causation” for “a worker’s pure nontraumatic mental injury.” 526 N.W.2d 
at 854. We reviewed three options: a “subjective causal nexus” test, a “broad 
causation” test, and an “unusual stress” test. Id. at 855. The “subjective test 
focuses on the employee’s own perception of reality in that if the claimant 
honestly perceives that there is some work related stimuli causing a mental 
disability the employee is entitled to recover.” Id. This test was adopted by 
44 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
45 
 
Michigan and later repudiated by statute. Id.; see also Mich. Comp. Laws 
§ 418.301(2) (1985). “The ‘broad causation’ test allows a worker to be 
compensated for normal work related stress as long as the worker’s mental injury 
is causally connected to the employment.” Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 855. “This 
approach is premised on the view that the basic purpose of a workers’ 
compensation system mandates that a worker disabled as a result of work 
related stress receive treatment identical to a worker disabled by a work related 
physical injury.” Id. (quoting Candelaria v. Gen. Elec. Co., 730 P.2d 470, 477 
(N.M. Ct. App. 1986), superseded by statute as stated in Jensen v. N.M. State 
Police, 788 P.2d 382, 384 (N.M. Ct. App. 1990)). We declined to adopt either the 
subjective-causal-nexus 
test 
or 
broad-causation 
test 
because 
neither 
“correspond[s] to our statutory goal of making sure the mental injuries are 
causally connected to the worker’s employment.” Id. at 856.  
We instead adopted an occupation-specific unusual-stress test for 
nontraumatic mental injuries. Id. at 858. The test “requires the employee to show 
that the work stress which led to the [mental] injury was unusual.” Id. at 855. 
The unusual-stress test was “developed . . . as a response to the difficulties in 
the evaluation of psychological injuries, such as the ease with which such claims 
may be feigned and the difficulty with which fraudulent claims can be detected.” 
Id. The unusual-stress requirement helps ensure that “mental injuries are 
causally connected to the worker’s employment” and “furthers the intent of the 
legislature to compensate those workers who suffer bona fide ‘personal injuries’ 
caused by their employment.” Id. at 856.  
45 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
46 
 
The unusual-stress test reflects that the workers’ compensation system 
provides a remedy for industrial accidents and is not a general mental health 
insurance system. See id. at 856. We chose the unusual-stress test mindful of 
the “ ‘slippery slope’ argument that once ‘mental[-]mental’ claims are deemed 
compensable, employees will increasingly make fraudulent claims which the 
courts will not be able to detect and which will ultimately force employers out of 
business.” Id. Because the test “places the burden on the employee to prove that 
the work stress suffered is unusual, [it] is an effective means of evaluating 
employees’ claims.” Id.  
We deliberately chose to adopt Wyoming’s occupation-specific standard for 
our unusual-stress test in Dunlavey instead of Wisconsin’s broader standard 
that merely required proof of stress “greater than that endured by all other 
workers” in any field. Id. at 855–57. We concluded that the Wyoming standard 
is preferable because it “provides the employees with compensation for legitimate 
work related injuries while at the same time limits the employers’ liability to 
injuries caused by its industry”4 and avoids the confusion of what is meant by 
“all workers.”5 Id. at 857. We approvingly quoted the Wyoming Supreme Court’s 
explanation of the benefits of the occupation-specific-unusual-stress test: 
 
4It might be considered modern and forward looking for worker’s compensation to 
be expanded to provide full coverage health insurance. But that was not its 
intended purpose, and it would be unfair to the employer who pays premiums on 
the assumption that they cover only injuries caused by [its] industry.  
Graves v. Utah Power & Light Co., 713 P.2d 187, 190 (Wyo. 1986), superseded by statute as 
stated in Sechrist v. State ex rel. Wyo. Workers’ Safety & Comp. Div., 23 P.3d 1138 (Wyo. 2001). 
5The objective “all employees” standard could be based upon three different 
groups. First, “all employees” could consist of a worker’s “fellow employees” 
employed in the same or similar jobs by the same employer. Second, it could 
46 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
47 
 
Unlike the “fellow employees” test, this test could be used in 
cases where the worker has no fellow employee holding the same job 
in his company. Moreover, under the same or similar job standard, 
an employer who puts excessive stress on several employees could 
not avoid the payment of benefits by simply making that excessive 
stress equal for all employees. The stress on [its] workers would be 
compared to the stress suffered by those holding similar jobs in 
other companies. 
. . . . 
The objective test based on workers with the same or similar 
jobs is also superior to a test based on the working world at large. It 
is impossible to determine, except in the broadest fashion, the stress 
to which the working world at large is exposed. In every worker’s 
compensation case heard under this test, the parties could call 
witnesses whose job related stress is either significantly greater or 
significantly smaller than the stress suffered by the worker seeking 
compensation. The standard would be too amorphous to be 
practical. 
Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 857–58 (alteration and omission in original) (quoting 
Graves v. Utah Power & Light Co., 713 P.2d 187, 193 (Wyo. 1986), superseded 
by statute as stated in Sechrist v. State ex rel. Wyo. Workers’ Safety & Comp. Div., 
23 P.3d 1138 (Wyo. 2001)). We found these justifications persuasive. Id. at 858. 
We also noted states were increasingly enacting statutes requiring proof 
comparing the claimant’s stress to those in similar jobs rather than workers 
generally: 
[T]hose states which have had experience with “mental[-]mental” 
claims are increasingly enacting statutes which require proof that 
the employee’s stress is greater than that of similarly situated 
employees. See, e.g., Alaska Stat. § 23.30.265(17)(A) (1990) (work 
stress must be “extraordinary and unusual in comparison to 
pressures and tensions experienced by individuals in a comparable 
work environment”); Colo. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 8–41–301(2)(a)–(d) (West 
 
consist of workers in the same or similar jobs, including those who work for other 
employers. Finally, it could consist of the “working world at large.” 
Graves, 713 P.2d at 192. 
47 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
48 
 
Supp. 1994) (the psychologically traumatic event must be “generally 
outside of a worker’s usual experience and would evoke significant 
symptoms of distress in a worker in similar circumstances”); N.M. 
Stat. Ann. § 52–1–24(A) (Michie 1978 & Supp.1994) (same). 
Id.  
In Brown, we addressed mental injuries attributed to a store clerk’s 
specific on-the-job traumatic events. 641 N.W.2d at 727–28. Brown was far from 
a professional first responder. He was working alone at night in his employer’s 
convenience store and witnessed a customer inside get shot in the leg. Id. at 726. 
Brown was not physically injured, but he had to clean up the blood from the 
shooting. Id. Six days later, he was working alone again and was the victim of a 
robbery. Id.  
The robber grabbed Brown by the arm, swung him around, stuck an 
object that Brown thought to be a gun in Brown’s back, and 
demanded all of the money, which Brown gave to him. Brown was 
told to get down, and he did. The robber left but returned and said, 
“I told you to get the . . . down or I’m going to blow your . . . head 
off.” Brown laid spread-eagle on the floor until the phone rang; it 
was the security organization calling in response to a silent alarm 
that Brown had triggered. 
Id. (omissions in original). Brown was diagnosed with delayed PTSD and his 
doctor opined that “the additional trauma of the robbery aggravated the effect of 
the shooting, so the cumulative effect was more traumatic than the sum of the 
two events.” Id. at 726–27. The deputy commissioner found Brown had 
established both medical and legal causation, but the commissioner reversed, 
finding Brown failed to establish legal causation because “he had not shown his 
stress was greater than that of other workers employed in the same or similar 
48 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
49 
 
jobs.” Id. at 727–28. “Quik Trip contended this was fatal to his claim, and the 
industrial commissioner and district court agreed.” Id. at 728.  
We reversed, concluding that “[w]hen a claim is based on a manifest 
happening of a sudden traumatic nature from an unexpected cause or unusual 
strain, the legal-causation test is met irrespective of the absence of similar stress 
on other employees.” Id. at 729. Our colleagues in the majority misread this 
statement as eliminating Dunlavey’s requirement to compare the claimant’s 
stress to others in the same or similar jobs. To the contrary, we stated that “[t]his 
conclusion is consistent with Dunlavey, which did not involve a readily 
identifiable stress factor such as in this case.” Id. at 728. We were addressing a 
failure of proof claim and concluded, from the very nature of the two incidents, 
that the evidence was sufficient to establish the store clerk’s mental injury claim, 
without testimony of other witnesses, to prove that an Iowa convenience store 
employee in Iowa did not routinely experience shootings and armed robberies.  
The majority effectively overrules Moon, where we had confirmed that the 
compensability of a first responder’s mental injury triggered by one or two 
specific incidents is determined under Dunlavey by reference to the claimant’s 
occupation as a police officer. Moon, 548 N.W.2d at 569–70. In my view, Moon 
and Dunlavey remained good law for first responders. This is confirmed by a 
careful reading of Brown and the authorities cited in that opinion. 
In Brown, we again relied on Wyoming precedent and agreed that: 
Where a mental injury occurs rapidly and can be readily 
traced to a specific event, . . . there is a sufficient badge of reliability 
to assuage the Court’s apprehension. Where, however, a mental 
49 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
50 
 
injury develops gradually and is linked to no particular incident, the 
risk of groundless claims looms large indeed. 
Id. at 728 (omission in original) (quoting Graves, 713 P.2d at 192). Noting both 
Graves and Dunlavey involved nontraumatic-gradual-onset mental injuries, we 
went on to discuss another Wyoming case more directly on point as involving a 
mental injury from an on-the-job accident. Id. at 728–29 (citing Johnson v. State 
ex rel. Wyo. Worker’s Comp. Div., 798 P.2d 323, 326 (Wyo. 1990)). 
In Johnson v. State ex rel. Wyoming Worker’s Compensation Division, the 
employee was an over-the-road truck driver involved in two accidents. 798 P.2d 
at 324. In the first accident, “Johnson had bruised his back but did not seek 
medical treatment.” Id. In the second, “As [Johnson] rounded a curve, the wind 
hit the truck and spun it around 180 degrees. The truck came close to colliding 
with another vehicle but missed. The highway patrol stated the road should have 
been closed at the time the accident occurred.” Id. “The psychiatrist determined 
that Johnson was suffering from depression and [PTSD]” as a result of the second 
accident. Id. The Wyoming Supreme Court held Johnson satisfied the legal 
causation requirement without presenting evidence of similarly situated 
employees. Id. at 325–36.  
In Brown, after discussing the facts and holding of Johnson, we 
approvingly quoted this passage applying a same or similar job test:  
The accident also satisfies the requirement that the mental injury 
resulted from a situation or condition that is of greater magnitude 
than the day-to-day stresses and tensions all employees usually 
experience. While it may be normal for and expected of over-the-road 
truck drivers to encounter hazardous, wintery driving conditions on 
Wyoming highways, involvement in an accident when driving in those 
conditions or any weather conditions falls beyond any day-to-day 
50 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
51 
 
stress and tensions. It was the accident and not the driving in 
hazardous conditions that caused Johnson’s injuries. 
Brown, 641 N.W.2d at 728–29 (emphasis added) (quoting Johnson, 798 P.2d at 
326).6 Importantly, the focus of this test is on what is “normal for and expected 
of” the claimant’s occupation—such as over-the-road truck driving in Johnson. 
We endorsed that approach. Id. at 729. Thus, we held the shooting and robbery 
satisfied the legal causation requirement because “[t]hese events were sudden, 
traumatic, and unexpected” and “Quik Trip, in fact, d[id] not contend otherwise.” 
Id. Given the nature of the traumatic incidents in Brown and Johnson, the 
workers’ compensation claims were reinstated despite the claimant’s failure to 
introduce baseline evidence of the stress of other workers in the same or similar 
jobs.  
Other states take different approaches. Some states allow no relief under 
any circumstances for purely mental injury claims. See 4 Arthur Larson et al., 
Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Law § 56.06[1][b], at 56-50, & 56.06[4], at 
56-55 (2021) [hereinafter Larson] (“[F]ifteen states and the [federal] Jones Act 
have expressly ruled out liability in any kind of mental-mental case.” (footnotes 
omitted)). Iowa was in the middle in allowing recovery in a mental-mental case 
where an unusual stress triggered the mental injury. See id. § 56.06[6], at 56-57. 
 
6After we decided Brown, the Wyoming legislature amended its workers’ compensation 
statutory definition of “injury” to exclude compensation for mental injury unless it is “[c]aused 
by a compensable physical injury, it occurs subsequent to or simultaneously with, the physical 
injury and it is established by clear and convincing evidence.” Wyo. Stat. Ann. 
§ 27-14-102(a)(xi)(J) (West 2009). This reflects a subsequent policy choice by the Wyoming 
legislature. 
51 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
52 
 
There is also a lack of uniformity on what is considered “unusual.” This noted 
commentator observed: 
To summarize: there can thus be identified four answers to 
the question: “unusual compared with that?” These are:  
(1) Unusual compared with this employee’s normal strains.  
(2) Unusual 
compared 
with 
other, 
similarly 
situated 
employees’ strains in the normal work environment.  
(3) Unusual compared with the strains of employment life 
generally.  
(4) Unusual compared with the wear and tear of everyday 
nonemployment life.  
Unfortunately, most opinions in this area—and statutes as 
well—only use the word “unusual” without specifying which of these 
comparisons is intended.  
3 Larson, § 44.05[4][d], at 44-43 (footnotes omitted). Until today, Iowa fit in this 
treatise’s second category, comparing the claimant’s stress with workers “in the 
same or similar jobs.” Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 858.  
I am not persuaded by cases from jurisdictions that use a more lenient 
test for legal causation such as Diaz v. Illinois Workers’ Compensation 
Commission, 989 N.E.2d 233, 240 (Ill. App. Ct. 2013) (determining whether 
stress of police officer threatened with a gun exceeded “that of the general 
public”). Comparing the claimant to the “working world at large” is an approach 
we rejected as “too amorphous to be practical.” Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at  
857–58 (“In every worker’s compensation case heard under this test, the parties 
could call witnesses whose job related stress is either significantly greater or 
significantly smaller than the stress suffered by the worker seeking 
52 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
53 
 
compensation.” (quoting Graves, 713 P.2d at 193)). The proper comparison is to 
workers in the same or similar jobs. Id. Diaz is directly contrary to our decision 
in Moon, where we emphasized that Dunlavey’s legal causation test is to be 
applied with reference to the claimant’s occupation as a police officer—not 
workers in general. Moon, 548 N.W.2d at 569.7 
Arizona recently adopted an approach similar to Dunlavey in France v. 
Industrial Commission of Arizona, 481 P.3d 1162 (Ariz. 2021). In France, two 
deputy sheriffs were dispatched to perform a welfare check for a man threatening 
to kill himself with a shotgun. Id. at 1163. The man advanced toward Deputy 
Sheriff France and “point[ed] a shotgun two to three feet away from [France’s] 
chest and face.” Id. at 1164. The deputies shot the man several times and 
watched him die. Id. France developed PTSD and sought workers’ compensation 
benefits, which were denied. Id. For mental injuries from a single work-related 
event, the Supreme Court of Arizona interpreted “the central inquiry” of its 
workers’ compensation statute as “whether the work-related event itself imposed 
stress on the employee that was ‘unexpected, unusual or extraordinary.’ ” Id. at 
 
7The majority relies on Sparks v. Tulane Medical Center Hospital & Clinic, 546 So. 2d 138 
(La. 1989), but that case did not involve a first responder or a single traumatic incident. Rather, 
that court allowed recovery for a hospital “exchange card supervisor’s” mental injury triggered 
by a series of death threats, vandalism, and harassment by her fellow employees spanning years. 
Id. at 140–41. The Sparks court recognized purely mental injury claims for the first time in that 
state, over the dissent of three justices. Id. at 148–49; id. at 149 (Marcus, J., dissenting) (“I do 
not consider . . . plaintiff’s work-related stress to be an ‘injury’ ” under Louisiana’s Worker’s 
Compensation Act); id. (Hall, J., dissenting) (concluding that the statute did not allow recovery 
for “mental-mental” injuries and stating, “Any change should come from the legislature and not 
the court. Even under the new interpretation of the law enunciated in the majority opinion, I 
would hold that this plaintiff is not entitled to benefits because her mental condition, as real and 
as unfortunate as it is, was not precipitated by an accident, i.e., an unexpected and unforeseen 
event that occurred suddenly or violently. It was the result of several years of work-related 
stress”). I agree with Justice Hall’s dissent in Sparks that it is the legislature’s role to expand 
recovery for purely mental injuries, not the court’s. 
53 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
54 
 
1167 (quoting Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 23-1043.01(B) (2017)). The court further 
explained that 
not all mental injuries caused by violent encounters experienced by 
law enforcement officers in the line of duty are compensable. As a 
preliminary matter, an officer must first establish that his 
work-related stress was a substantial contributing cause of his 
mental injury. Unlike the present case, many claims may not satisfy 
this initial hurdle. Additionally, a court must examine the 
stressfulness of any such incident from the standpoint of a 
“reasonable person” with the same or similar job duties as the 
claimant, e.g., another law enforcement officer. Thus, applying this 
standard, officers may be involved in many encounters in the line of 
duty that produce expected, common, and ordinary stress. 
Id. (emphasis added) (vacating agency ruling that denied benefits under wrong 
legal standard).  
New York courts previously took the position our court adopts today, 
determining whether mental injures were compensable by looking at the 
“emotional strain or tension . . . to which all workers are occasionally subjected.” 
Wilson v. Tippetts-Abbott-McCarthy-Stratton, 253 N.Y.S.2d 149, 150 (App. Div. 
1964). New York courts then saw the light and now require claimants to 
“demonstrate that the stress that caused the claimed mental injury was greater 
than that which other similarly situated workers experienced in the normal work 
environment.” Casey v. United Refin. Comp. of Pa., 149 N.Y.S.3d 309, 311 
(App. Div. 2021) (emphasis added). Whether stress is unusual is based on the 
complainant’s occupation. See, e.g., Rivenburg v. County of Albany, 131 N.Y.S.3d 
431, 432–33 (App. Div. 2020) (affirming a denial workers’ compensation benefits 
to a correctional officer personally threatened by a colleague and whose family 
was threatened by an inmate because “[g]iven the nature of the work required of 
54 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
55 
 
correction officers and the character of the individuals under confinement, the 
stress created by dealing with the inmates was no different for claimant than it 
was for other correction officers”). 
Missouri courts likewise apply an objective standard to compare “the 
claimant’s level of stress with the level of stress faced by other employees in the 
same profession.” Mantia v. Mo. Dep’t of Transp., 529 S.W.3d 804, 810 (Mo. 2017) 
(en banc) (reversing an award of benefits because claimant failed “to present 
evidence the actual work events comprising the ‘same or similar conditions’ 
would have caused extraordinary and unusual stress to a reasonable highway 
worker”).8 
The 
Iowa 
legislature 
can 
decide 
whether 
to 
restore 
the 
occupation-specific test for mental disability claims in our state.  
III. Conclusion. 
For these reasons, I would affirm the district court judgment upholding 
the agency ruling denying Tripp’s mental injury claim based on its factual 
determination that the stress of her phone call was not unusual or unexpected 
for an emergency dispatcher. 
Mansfield and McDonald, JJ., join this dissent. 
 
8Missouri’s Workers’ Compensation Act includes a special provision exempting 
firefighters from the requirement to prove work-related stress was objectively “extraordinary and 
unusual.” Mantia, 529 S.W.3d 810–11 & 811 n.2 (citing Mo. Rev. Stat. § 287.120.10 (2005)). This 
exception presumably was enacted “because the legislature believed stress is such a regular 
matter for firefighters that it would be difficult to show that stress was of an ‘extraordinary and 
unusual’ degree for those in that occupation.” Byous v. Mo. Loc. Gov’t Emps. Ret. Sys. Bd. of Trs., 
157 S.W.3d 740, 756 n.1 (Mo. Ct. App. 2005) (Smart, J., concurring in part and dissenting in 
part). The Iowa legislature has not enacted a similar provision in Iowa Code chapter 85 or chapter 
411, and I wouldn’t create one in the guise of interpretation. The legislature is the proper 
audience for Tripp’s request for a change in the law to relax proof requirements for work-related 
PTSD or other mental injuries suffered by emergency dispatchers or first responders.  
55 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

State of Iowa Courts
Case Number
Case Title
21-0841
Tripp v. Scott Emergency Communication Center
Electronically signed on 2022-07-08 09:14:13
56 of 56
E-FILED  2022 AUG 03 2:01 PM SCOTT - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT
