Case Number: 5058024
Case Title:  WILCOX V. MARRIOTT HOTEL
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Wilcox, Nancy-5058024.District Court Decision.pdf
========================================================================

IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR POLK COUNTY 
 
MARRIOTT HOTEL & CONFERENCE 
CENTER AND MARRIOTT CLAIMS 
SERVICES, 
 
         Petitioners, 
 
v. 
 
NANCY WILCOX, 
 
         Respondent. 
 
 
      
Case No. CVCV058969 
 
  
 
RULING ON JUDICIAL REVIEW 
 
 
This judicial review action came on for hearing on April 10, 2020.  Tyler Smith 
represented petitioners Marriott Hotel & Conference Center and Marriott Claims Services 
(Marriott).  Christopher Spaulding represented respondent Nancy Wilcox (referred to as 
“claimant”).   
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Claimant is employed as a concierge in the club lounge at the Marriott hotel in Coralville.  
On October 1, 2014, she was walking down a hotel hallway preparing for her shift.  She fell to 
the hard-surface floor and hurt the area around her left knee.  It is unclear why she fell.  Claimant 
testified that it felt like her foot stuck to something and that her leg went out from under her.  
The incident was recorded on hotel video.  The video which did not show any impediments on 
the floor.  Other employees reported that the floor was clean and there was no corroboration to 
the claim that it was sticky.   
 
Claimant was off work for a little more than a month.  She engaged in conservative 
treatment but continued to have problems with the knee for more than a year after that.  In 
February of 2016, claimant’s doctor diagnosed her with a displaced fracture of her left patella.  
E-FILED  2020 APR 15 3:18 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

2 
 
By that point, the doctor found she had reached maximum medical improvement.  He found a 
seven percent impairment to the lower extremity. 
 
Claimant filed a workers’ compensation claim regarding her knee injury, as well as other 
injuries not part of this appeal.  The case was heard by a deputy workers’ compensation 
commissioner on November 2, 2017.  The deputy evaluated the case as an idiopathic fall.  She 
found the case analogous to McIlravy v. North River Ins. Co., 653 N.W.2d 323 (Iowa 2002), 
which held that an injury occurring at work while walking on a flat surface did not arise out of 
the course of employment because there was no work condition that caused the injury.  She 
found that Marriott was not liable for workers’ compensation benefits. 
 
Claimant sought an intra-agency appeal.  The commissioner designated another deputy to 
hear the appeal.  The appeal decision made two significant changes from the deputy’s decision.  
First, the commissioner’s designee found that the case should not be evaluated as an idiopathic 
fall, which refers to falls caused by an underlying medical or personal condition (such as a 
seizure).  Rather, it should be evaluated as an unexplained fall, which implicates the actual risk 
test set forth in Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 169 (Iowa 2007).  Second, the 
commissioner’s designee distinguished McIlravy to find that the hard floor was a work condition 
that caused the injury to claimant’s patella.  In McIlravy, the employee had not fallen to the floor, 
so the knee did not strike anything.  In this case, the broken bone was caused when claimant hit 
the hard surface of the floor.  Accordingly, she granted workers’ compensation benefits. 
 
Marriott filed this judicial review action to challenge the finding that the injury arose out 
of claimant’s employment.  There is no dispute as to the calculation of benefits that would be 
awarded if Marriott is liable.  The only question is whether liability exists.  Claimant did not file 
a cross-appeal.  The agency found that claimant’s injury was not caused by a sticky or slippery 
E-FILED  2020 APR 15 3:18 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

3 
 
floor or by any other impediment.  There is substantial evidence to support that finding, so the 
court will evaluate this case solely on the issue whether Marriott is liable based on claimant’s 
knee striking the hard-surface floor.  
STANDARD OF REVIEW 
Chapter 17A of the Iowa Code governs judicial review of administrative agency action. 
The district court acts in an appellate capacity to correct errors of law on the part of the agency. 
Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 219 (Iowa 2006).  The court “may grant relief if the agency 
action has prejudiced the substantial rights of the petitioner, and the agency action meets one of 
the enumerated criteria contained in section 17A.19(10)(a) through (n).” Burton v. Hilltop Care 
Cntr., 813 N.W.2d 250, 256 (Iowa 2012) (quoting Evercom Sys., Inc. v. Iowa Utilities Bd., 805 
N.W.2d 758, 762 (Iowa 2011)). Where an agency has been “clearly vested” with a fact-finding 
function, the appropriate “standard of review [on appeal] depends on the aspect of the agency's 
decision that forms the basis of the petition for judicial review”—that is, whether it involves an 
issue of 1) findings of fact, 2) interpretation of law, or 3) application of law to fact. Burton, 813 
N.W.2d at 256.  
Review of findings of fact:  The courts use a substantial evidence standard when 
considering challenges to findings of fact in agency decisions.  A reviewing court can only disturb 
factual findings if they are “not supported by substantial evidence in the record before the court 
when that record is reviewed as a whole.”  Burton, 813 N.W.2d at 256 (quoting Iowa Code § 
17A.19(10)(f)).  The Iowa Supreme Court has outlined the court’s guidelines when reviewing 
substantial evidence claims under the 17A.19 standard as follows: 
When reviewing a finding of fact for substantial evidence, we judge the finding in 
light of all the relevant evidence in the record cited by any party that detracts from 
that finding as well as all of the relevant evidence in the record cited by any party 
that supports it.  Our review of the record is fairly intensive, and we do not simply 
E-FILED  2020 APR 15 3:18 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

4 
 
rubber stamp the agency finding of fact. 
 
Evidence is not insubstantial merely because different conclusions may be drawn 
from the evidence. To that end, evidence may be substantial even though we may 
have drawn a different conclusion as fact finder. Our task, therefore, is not to 
determine whether the evidence supports a different finding; rather, our task is to 
determine whether substantial evidence, viewing the record as a whole, supports 
the findings actually made. 
 
Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 845 (Iowa 2011) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). 
Review of interpretation of law:  The courts traditionally have discretion to substitute 
their interpretations of law for that of the agency when legal challenges are made on review.  
Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 219.  However, the courts are required to give deference to an agency 
interpretation of law when the agency has been “clearly vested” with authority to interpret a 
provision of law.  Burton, 813 N.W.2d at 256.  If the legislature has not given the agency clear 
authority to interpret a provision of law, the courts may reverse the interpretation if erroneous.  Id.   
 
In Burton, the Iowa Supreme Court held the level of deference to the workers’ 
compensation commissioner’s interpretations will be determined on a case-to-case basis 
depending on the “particular phrase under consideration.”  Id.  While this appears an arduous 
standard, the court provided the following guidance:   
When a term is not defined in a statute, but the agency must necessarily interpret 
the term in order to carry out its duties, we are more likely to conclude the power 
to interpret the term was clearly vested in the agency. This is especially true “when 
the statutory provision being interpreted is a substantive term within the special 
expertise of the agency.”  However, “[w]hen a term has an independent legal 
definition that is not uniquely within the subject matter expertise of the agency,” or 
when the language to be interpreted is “found in a statute other than the statute the 
agency has been tasked with enforcing,” we are less likely to conclude that the 
agency has been clearly vested with the authority to interpret that provision of the 
statute. 
 
Id. at 256–57 (cites omitted). 
 
E-FILED  2020 APR 15 3:18 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

5 
 
Application of law to fact:  When a party challenges the ultimate conclusion reached by 
the agency, then the challenge is to the agency's application of the law to the facts.  In that event, 
the question on review is whether the agency abused its discretion by, for example, employing 
wholly irrational reasoning or ignoring important and relevant evidence.  Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 
219.  The court will only reverse the agency’s application of law to the facts if it is irrational, 
illogical, or wholly unjustifiable. Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 518 (Iowa 2012).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
It is well settled that for an injury to be compensable under Iowa’s workers’ 
compensation statute, the injury must occur both in the course of and arise out of employment.  
Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 310–11 (Iowa 1996) (citing Iowa Code § 85.3(1).  The 
first part of the test, whether the injury occurred “in the course of” employment, refers to the 
time, place, and circumstances of the injury.  See Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 169, 174 
(Iowa 2007).  In the present case, there is no question that claimant’s injury occurred in the 
course of her employment.  The injury occurred while she was on duty and on the work 
premises.  
 
The issue in this case concerns the second part of the test, that is, whether the injury arose 
out of claimant’s employment.  This requires a distinct and independent inquiry.  Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d at 311.  Injuries that occur in the course of employment or on the employer's premises 
do not necessarily arise out of that employment.  Id.  The employee must show that the nature of 
the employment exposes the employee to the risk of such an injury.  Lakeside, 743 N.W.2d at 
174.   
The commissioner’s designee correctly determined that this case is governed by the 
actual risk standard set forth in Lakeside.  This case does not involve an idiopathic fall, which is 
E-FILED  2020 APR 15 3:18 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

6 
 
a fall due to the employee’s personal condition.  See Bluml v. Dee Jay’s Inc., 920 N.W.2d 82, 86 
(Iowa 2018).  As Bluml made clear, cases involving an idiopathic fall use a different test, that is, 
the increased risk test.1  There is no evidence to show that claimant’s fall occurred due to a 
personal condition.  Rather, it fits the category of an unexplained fall.  Therefore, the actual risk 
standard applies. 
The supreme court has largely chosen to define the actual risk standard by application of 
the facts to a case.  The most analogous case is McIlravy v. N. River Ins. Co., 653 N.W.2d 323 
(Iowa 2002).  In McIlravy, the employee was walking across a level cement floor when he felt a 
pop in his knee.  Id. at 326.  He did not fall and felt no pain at the time.  Id.  The knee began to 
swell later that night and was extremely sore the next day.  Id.  The court found that an injury 
sustained while walking, without any other evidence connecting the injury to the workplace, is 
not compensable.2  Id. at 331-32.   
Lakeside cited factual scenarios from cases to illustrate when an injury does not arise out 
of employment.  In Miedema, the worker injured his back while turning to flush a toilet at the 
workplace.  The court denied the claim because there was no indication that his injury was 
caused by the design of the restroom or toilet.  Id.  As stated by the court, “the injury must not 
have coincidentally occurred while at work, but must in some way be caused by or related to the 
working environment or the conditions of his employment.”  Id.  In Gilbert v. USF Holland, Inc., 
637 N.W.2d 194, 200 (Iowa 2001), the court denied a claim after an employee injured his neck 
as he stood up after bending over to sign a work document.  In Musselman v. Cent. Tel. Co., 261 
                                                          
1 The deputy’s decision was issued before the supreme court clarified the distinctions between these tests in Bluml, 
so she did not have the benefit of that decision.  
2 McIlravy was not a judicial review action from a workers’ compensation decision, but rather, a bad faith claim 
against an insurer.  Still, the evaluation has been cited in other cases involving the actual risk standard.  See e.g. 
Lakeside, 920 N.W.2d at 175.   
E-FILED  2020 APR 15 3:18 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

7 
 
Iowa 352, 356, 361 (1967), the court denied a claim after an employee injured his back while 
putting an overshoe as he leaned against a wall.  The court found that none of the injuries in 
these cases were caused by a condition of employment.   
In Lakeside, the court found that the facts of its case were “decidedly different from 
McIlravy” and the other aforementioned cases.  Lakeside, 743 N.W.2d at 177-78.  The employee 
was hurt after she stumbled on the stairs while walking to her work assignment.  743 N.W.2d at 
178.  The agency found that the injury occurred from a hazard relating to her employment, that 
is, the act of traversing the stairs to her work station.  Id.  The court agreed, finding the stairwell 
to be the additional factor showing a causal connection between injury and employment.  Id. 
 In this case, the commissioner’s designee found the additional factor to be the hard floor.  
She distinguished McIlravy, seemingly the most analogous case, because the employee in that 
case did not fall.  His injury occurred solely while walking across the floor, whereas the claimant 
in this case broke her patella while making contact with the hard floor.  The commissioner’s 
designee did not rely on Bluml, but seems to take a page from that decision.  Although Bluml 
involved an idiopathic injury, the court held that held that the agency may consider the hardness 
of a floor as a factor when determining whether the fall meets the increased risk test.  Bluml, 920 
N.W.2d at 87, 90-91.  The court reversed the decisions of the agency and district court, which 
found as a matter of law that a fall to a hard level floor was not compensable.  Id. at 86, 90-91.  
The court held that the issue had to be decided by the agency as a question of fact.  Id.   
Application of the actual risk standard is likewise fact-dependent.  See Lakeside, 743 
N.W.2d at 173, 177-78 (evaluating the actual risk standard as an application of fact to law).  As a 
result, it follows that the agency should consider the hardness of a floor as a factor when 
E-FILED  2020 APR 15 3:18 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

8 
 
deciding actual risk in an unexplained fall case, just as it has when deciding increased risk in 
idiopathic fall cases. 
 The appeal decision is introspective.  The commissioner’s designee recognized that the 
result could be viewed as adopting the positional risk test, which is a wholly separate test that 
was rejected in Lakeside.  See Lakeside, 743 N.W.2d at 177.  She also recognized that the 
legislature recently amended chapter 85 to bar recovery for workers’ compensation claims 
resulting from injuries occurring from floors on level surfaces.  See 2019 Iowa Acts 38, § 1.  
While the amendment does not apply to this case because it was adopted after the injury, it 
clearly would have prevented the award entered by the agency.  Ultimately, the commissioner’s 
designee focused on the holding in the Lakeside case, which is the controlling precedent.  She 
determined that if the stairs in Lakeside can arise to an actual risk, so could the hard floor in this 
case. 
The agency’s decision is supported by substantial evidence and is not irrational.  This 
case is distinct from McIlravy in the sense that claimant’s injury was not caused by walking, but 
rather, by striking the hard floor.  The employee in McIlravy heard a pop in his knee while 
walking, which was later determined to be the cause of his injury.  There was no work condition 
that served as a cause.  In this case, the claimant suffered a broken bone that was caused when 
she actually hit the floor.  If the floor had been carpeted or had a softer surface, she may not have 
suffered the same injury.  In that sense, the case is comparable to Lakeside.  Accordingly, based 
on precedent and the applicable standard of review, the agency decision must be upheld.  
RULING 
 
The agency decision is affirmed.  Marriott shall pay the costs of this action.   
E-FILED  2020 APR 15 3:18 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

State of Iowa Courts
Type:
OTHER ORDER
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV058969
MARRIOTT HOTEL AND CONFERENCE CENTER ET AL VS
NANCY WILCOX
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2020-04-15 15:18:07     page 9 of 9
E-FILED  2020 APR 15 3:18 PM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT
