Case Number: 5067128
Case Title:  ALM, STEPHEN V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Alm Stephen-5067128d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
STEPHEN ALM, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                         File No. 5067128 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  :                 ARBITRATION  DECISION 
 
 
  :                
ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND 
  : 
COMPANY, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :        
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  :     Head Notes:  1108.50, 1402.20, 1402.40 
 
Defendant. 
  :     1402.60, 1802, 1803, 2401, 2907 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Stephen Alm, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Archer Daniels Midland Company, Inc., self-insured 
employer as defendant.  Hearing was held on February 6, 2020 in Des Moines, Iowa. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Stephen Alm and Arlen Steines were the only witnesses to testify live at trial.  
The evidentiary record also includes Joint Exhibits JE1-JE7, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-4, 
and Defendant’s Exhibits A-E.  All exhibits were received without objection.  The 
evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.       
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on March 16, 2020, at which time the 
case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on September 1, 2017. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Jun-10  16:12:29     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

ALM V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND COMPANY, INC. 
Page 2 
2. Whether claimant’s claim is barred by operation of Iowa Code section 85.23, 
for failure to provide timely notice of the injury. 
3. Whether claimant sustained permanent disability as the result of the 
September 1, 2017 work injury.  If so, the extent of permanent disability 
claimant sustained. 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to healing period benefits from October 28, 2018 
through February 1, 2019. 
5. Whether defendant is responsible for payment of past medical expenses. 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to be reimbursed pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.39 for the independent medical examination (IME). 
7. Assessment of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant, Stephen Alm, is 46 years old.  He is alleging a cumulative low back 
injury, with an alleged injury date of September 1, 2017.  Mr. Alm has a high school 
diploma.  He began working for Archer Daniels Midland Company, Inc. (“ADM”) in 1994.  
Initially, he worked as a construction laborer.  Mr. Alm later transferred to a processing 
assignment in the oil house.  He has also worked in the boiler house and as a coal 
handler.  In 1996, Mr. Alm began working in the sugar house and was still working there 
at the time of the hearing.  In the sugar house he started as a dryer operator.  The dryer 
operator’s job is to ensure that the crystal and dextrose is dry enough to be transferred 
into a blower and packing hopper.  On occasion, he would need to lift 50 pounds.  This 
job also involved frequent walking and climbing stairs.  Mr. Alm worked in three different 
buildings, ranging between 6 and 9 stories high.  He would move between buildings 
daily.  In 2015, Mr. Alm joined the management group.  He was still part of the 
management group at the time of the hearing.  Mr. Alm manages 18 employees; 9 are 
in the sugar house and 9 are in the refinery.  (Transcript pages 9-15) 
Mr. Alm first injured his low back on April 6, 1998 when he fell 8 feet off of a 
ladder.  He experienced severe mid and lower back pain.  He developed pain in his left 
buttock and leg.  Mr. Alm was diagnosed with degenerative disc disease, more 
prominent on the right in June of 1998.  (JE1, 2, 3)         
Mr. Alm sustained an acute work-related injury to his low back in 2000.  He was 
working in the sugar house when he slipped, but did not fall.  At that time, he felt a pull 
in his lower back.  He reported his symptoms to ADM.  Mr. Alm underwent an MRI 
which revealed a bulging disc in his lower L5-S1.  He experienced right leg pain and 

ALM V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND COMPANY, INC. 
Page 3 
numbness from his right leg into his right foot.  In July of 2000, Mr. Alm had a right L5-
S1 discectomy.  Following the surgery, he initially felt great.  Richard Roski, M.D., 
assigned 10 percent whole person impairment due to occasional pain in his right leg.  
On June 19, 2001, Mr. Alm was paid 50 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits 
by ADM.  (JE1, p. 3; JE3, p. 36; Ex. A, p. 1)   
After the 2000 surgery, Mr. Alm continued to experience right leg numbness 
when he was active.  The numbness would subside with rest and reoccur when he was 
more active.  According to Mr. Alm, the numbness would not last more than a day.  He 
was not too concerned about the numbness, because it would come and go.  His 
symptoms got progressively worse over the years.  (Tr. pp. 18-19; 31-35) 
Mr. Alm testified that he continued to have low back and right leg issues between 
2000 and 2017, but never sought treatment.  However, there is a record that 
demonstrates he did seek treatment on June 17, 2008 for abrupt right lumbar pain.  He 
was treated conservatively.  (Tr. p. 19; JE4, pp. 41-42) 
In September of 2017, Mr. Alm’s symptoms became worse.  His pain would still 
come and go, but overall his symptoms were worse.  He also had a new symptom.  He 
was sitting at one of his kid’s football games when he first noticed that his testicles were 
going numb.  His right leg and buttock symptoms progressively got worse, to the point 
that rest alone was no longer helping.  (Tr. pp. 31-35) 
In March of 2018, Mr. Alm went to J. Dixon, M.D. for a routine physical.  He 
mentioned his low back pain to Dr. Dixon.  They decided to wait and see if things would 
improve, as they had in the past.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 1, p. 3)  Mr. Alm’s symptoms 
continued to worsen.  He saw Dr. Dixon again on June 20, 2018.  He reported that his 
pain was worse with standing for longer than 5 minutes or walking farther than 50 feet.  
(JE1, p. 18; JE5, p. 44)  Dr. Dixon scheduled an MRI which was performed on July 18, 
2018.  The MRI revealed multilevel lumbar degenerative changes with a small focal 
right paracentral disc extrusion contacting thickened right S1 nerve root.  (JE1, pp. 15-
17)   
In July of 2018, after receiving the MRI results Mr. Alm reported his injury to ADM 
because he felt that his symptoms might relate back to his 2000 work injury.  Before he 
reported the injury he had not missed any time from work due to his symptoms or injury.  
(Tr. pp. 37-41) 
On August 7, 2018, Mr. Alm saw Michael Prescher, M.D.  Mr. Alm presented with 
right lower back pain that radiated into his buttock and travelled down the back of his 
right thigh into his heel.  He also reported that his right groin and testicle went numb 
with prolonged sitting.  He noted that he had a prior discectomy and had been doing fine 
until about 6 months ago when the pain started returning.  The assessment was chronic 
low back pain with right lower extremity pain.  Mr. Alm did have obvious disc protrusion 

ALM V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND COMPANY, INC. 
Page 4 
at L5-S1 on the right side complicated by his obesity.  He was scheduled for a lumbar 
epidural steroid injection.  (JE1, p. 18)   
In September of 2018, Mr. Alm saw Todd Ridenour, M.D.  He reported that he 
had intermittent right lower extremity numbness with activity since his surgery.  
Approximately 5-6 months ago, he began to develop intermittent low back pain that 
radiated into his right buttock, groin, testicles, lateral thigh, and pain in his right buttock, 
posterior thigh, calf into heel.  He also reported intermittent paresthesias of right 
buttock, groin, and lateral thigh.  Standing or walking exacerbated his symptoms.  He 
also noticed weakness in his right lower extremity which made him feel clumsy.  (JE5, 
pp. 44-45) 
Mr. Alm underwent a few injections which provided short-term relief, but then his 
pain returned.  (JE1, pp. 20-22)  His symptoms included lower back pain and right leg 
pain with numbness.  He was eventually scheduled for a second L5-S1 discectomy; this 
took place on October 22, 2018.  Dr. Ridenour noted dense scar tissue and fibrosis at 
the L5-S1 level with a great deal of fibrotic scar tissue in the canal.  (JE5, pp. 48-50)  
Mr. Alm continued to experience pain in his right leg and buttock.  His numbness was 
less than it was prior to the surgery.  After surgery, Mr. Alm was off work until February 
of 2019.  (Tr. p. 22)   
At the request of the defendant, Mr. Alm saw David Boarini, M.D. at the Iowa 
Clinic on June 12, 2019.  Dr. Boarini noted that Mr. Alm worked full time but in a non-
physical job.  Dr. Boarini stated, “patient had no specific trauma and this is simply a 
matter of aging and degenerative change.  The majority of disk herniations have nothing 
to do with trauma and simply have to do with aging changes.  The primary cause 
besides aging is the patient’s obesity.”  Dr. Boarini stated, “I think 10% permanent 
partial impairment from the original surgery covers the current situation and would not 
change that.”  It is not clear what, if any, method Dr. Boarini utilized from the AMA 
Guides.  (Defendant’s Ex. D, p. 16) 
At the request of his attorney, Mr. Alm saw John Kuhnlein, D.O. on December 
18, 2019.  Dr. Kuhnlein was familiar with Mr. Alm’s job history and duties at ADM.  He 
also reviewed claimant’s medical history.  Mr. Alm described intermittent activity-
dependent right-sided low back pain which radiated into his right buttock and down his 
posterior thigh though his calf to his right ankle.  Dr. Kuhnlein examined Mr. Alm and 
performed testing such as range of motion and sensitivity tests.  Dr. Kuhnlein listed Mr. 
Alm’s diagnoses as:  right L5-S1 disc herniation with July 6, 2000, right L5-S1 
discectomy; recurrent right L5-S1 disc herniation and scar tissue from the first surgery 
with October 22, 2018, right L5-S1 re-exploration and open microdiscectomy with scar 
removal, and residual right L5-S1 sensory deficit.  Dr. Kuhnlein opined that “the work for 
ADM may not have been the only factor in the development of the recurrent disc 
herniation but it was a substantially more than minor factor in the development of the 
recurrent disc herniation Mr. Alm experienced.”  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 8)  Dr. Kuhnlein placed 
Mr. Alm at maximum medical improvement (MMI) as of April 22, 2019, six months after 

ALM V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND COMPANY, INC. 
Page 5 
his surgery.  He utilized the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides and assigned a total of 23 
percent whole person impairment.  Dr. Kuhnlein set forth the basis for his rating.  Dr. 
Kuhnlein did not assign any material handling restrictions.  He did restrict Mr. Alm to 
sitting, standing, or walking on an occasional basis with the ability to change positions 
for comfort.  He stated Mr. Alm could occasionally bend at the waist.  (Cl. Ex. 1)       
The first issue that must be addressed is whether Mr. Alm sustained a work injury 
on September 1, 2017.  I find the opinions of Dr. Kuhnlein to be more persuasive than 
those of Dr. Boarini.  Dr. Kuhnlein’s report demonstrates his understanding of Mr. Alm’s 
job duties and physical requirements.  Additionally, Dr. Kuhnlein set forth his 
understanding of Mr. Alm’s medical history.  Dr. Kuhnlein’s also provided his rationale 
for his opinions.  Dr. Boarini merely noted that Mr. Alm sustained no specific trauma and 
that his condition was simply a matter of aging and degenerative change, but he failed 
to directly address the issue of cumulative trauma.  Additionally, Dr. Boarini does not 
demonstrate a clear understanding of Mr. Alm’s job duties.  I find Dr. Kuhnlein’s report 
to be thorough, well-reasoned, and more persuasive than that of Dr. Boarini’s.  I find Mr. 
Alm’s low back and right lower extremity conditions are causally related to his work 
duties at ADM on September 1, 2017.  With regard to permanent functional impairment 
and restrictions, I find the opinions of Dr. Kuhnlein to carry greater weight than those of 
Dr. Boarini.  Dr. Kuhnlein set forth the basis for his impairment rating.  Dr. Boarini did 
not provide an explanation for the rating he assigned, it is not even clear if he utilized 
the AMA Guides.  I find Mr. Alm sustained 23 percent permanent functional impairment 
to his whole person as the result of the September 1, 2017 work injury.     
Defendant contends Mr. Alm failed to give timely notice of his injury.  I find that 
Mr. Alm likely knew or should have known, by June 20, 2018, that he sustained an 
injury to his low back that also affected his right lower extremity and that his injury was 
work related.  June 20, 2018 is the date when he first sought treatment for his increased 
symptoms.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 3) Although Mr. Alm knew in the autumn of 2017 that he was 
having increased symptoms and he thought these were caused by work, I find Mr. Alm 
did not yet know the serious nature of his injury.  Mr. Alm’s symptoms progressively got 
worse.  It was not until July of 2018, when he was told the results of his MRI that he 
could have known the serious nature of his injury.  Up until that time, he had not missed 
time from work, nor had he received significant medical care for his condition.  It was in 
July of 2018, claimant was aware or should have known, of the serious nature of his 
injury.  
Mr. Alm reported his injury to the defendant in July of 2018.  Defendant contends 
that Mr. Alm failed to give timely notice of his injury to his employer.  However, I find 
Mr. Alm was not aware or should not have known about the serious nature of his injury 
until he was told the results of his MRI in July of 2018.  Thus, I find defendant did not 
prove by a preponderance of the evidence that Mr. Alm failed to give notice of his 
work-related injury within 90 days of him knowing or objectively learning that his injury 
was likely work-related and that it was a serious condition. 

ALM V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND COMPANY, INC. 
Page 6 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.14(6). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
The September 1, 2017 date of injury falls under the 2017 statutory changes.  
Included in those changes is Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) which states: 
In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the workers’ compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining 
functional disability and not loss of earning capacity. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) (2018).  
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude Mr. Alm sustained an injury that 
arose out of and in the course of his employment with ADM on September 1, 2017.  

ALM V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND COMPANY, INC. 
Page 7 
Mr. Alm has returned to work with the defendant employer.  There are two permanent 
partial disability ratings in the case. However, only Dr. Kuhnlein sets forth his 
methodology under The Guides.  Based on Dr. Boarini’s report, it is not known if he 
utilized The Guides.  Therefore, based on the Iowa Code which mandates that a 
functional loss shall be determined solely by utilizing the Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment, published by the AMA, the claimant's permanent partial 
disability is 23 percent whole person impairment.  Compensation for permanent partial 
disability shall begin at the termination of the healing period.  Compensation shall be 
paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability bears to the body as a whole.  Section 
85.34.  Thus, claimant has demonstrated entitlement to 115 weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the stipulated rate of eight hundred fifty-eight and 72/100 dollars 
($858.72).  The parties agree that the defendant is entitled to apportionment under Iowa 
Code section 85.34(7) for the 10 percent whole body impairment paid by ADM as the 
result of Mr. Alm’s 2000 work injury.  Thus, claimant has shown entitlement to an 
additional 13 percent body as a whole impairment rating.  Claimant has demonstrated 
entitlement to payment of 65 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits at the 
stipulated rate.   
Defendant has raised notice as an affirmative defense.  Iowa Code section 85.23 
requires an employee to give notice of the occurrence of an injury to the employer within 
90 days from the date of the occurrence, unless the employer has actual knowledge of 
the occurrence of the injury. 
The purpose of the 90-day notice or actual knowledge requirement is to give the 
employer an opportunity to timely investigate the facts surrounding the injury.  The 
actual knowledge alternative to notice is met when the employer, as a reasonably 
conscientious manager, is alerted to the possibility of a potential compensation claim 
through information which makes the employer aware that the injury occurred and that it 
may be work related.  Dillinger v. City of Sioux City, 368 N.W.2d 176 (Iowa 1985); 
Robinson v. Department of Transp., 296 N.W.2d 809 (Iowa 1980). 
Failure to give notice is an affirmative defense which the employer must prove by 
a preponderance of the evidence.  DeLong v. Highway Commission, 229 Iowa 700, 295 
N.W. 91 (1940). 
When the injury develops gradually over time, the cumulative injury rule applies.  
The date of injury for cumulative injury purposes is the date on which the disability 
manifests.  Manifestation is best characterized as that date on which both the fact of 
injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant’s employment would be 
plainly apparent to a reasonable person.  The date of manifestation inherently is a fact 
based determination.  The fact-finder is entitled to substantial latitude in making this 
determination and may consider a variety of factors, none of which is necessarily 
dispositive in establishing a manifestation date.  Among others, the factors may include 
missing work when the condition prevents performing the job, or receiving significant 
medical care for the condition.  For time limitation purposes, the discovery rule then 

ALM V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND COMPANY, INC. 
Page 8 
becomes pertinent so the statute of limitations does not begin to run until the employee, 
as a reasonable person, knows or should know, that the cumulative injury condition is 
serious enough to have a permanent, adverse impact on his or her employment.  
Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284 (Iowa 2001); Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 
483 N.W.2d 824 (Iowa 1992); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 
(Iowa 1985). 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that defendant has failed to carry 
its burden of proof to demonstrate that Mr. Alm failed to give timely notice of his injury.  I 
found Mr. Alm was not aware or should not have known about the serious nature of his 
injury until he was told the results of his MRI in July of 2018.  Mr. Alm reported his injury 
to the defendant in July of 2018.  Thus, I conclude defendant did not prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that Mr. Alm failed to give notice of his work-related 
injury within 90 days of him knowing or objectively learning that his injury was likely 
work-related and that it was a serious condition. 
Mr. Alm is seeking healing period benefits from October 28, 2018 through 
February 1, 2019.  Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to 
an injured worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has 
returned to work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or intermittent.  
Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
Defendant does not dispute that Mr. Alm was off of work during this period of 
time.  During this time period claimant was off work recovering from his surgery.  I 
conclude claimant has demonstrated that he is entitled to payment of healing period 
benefits from October 28, 2018 through February 1, 2019, at the stipulated rate.     
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Claimant is seeking reimbursement pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39 for the 
IME he underwent with Dr. Kuhnlein on December 18, 2019.  Six months earlier 
Dr. Boarini issued his report regarding Mr. Alm.  Defendant argues claimant is not 
entitled to reimbursement because Dr. Boarini only saw Mr. Alm for purposes of a 
causation opinion.  However, he also rendered his opinion on permanent impairment.  
Thus, I conclude that the prerequisites of Iowa Code section 85.39 were met and thus 

ALM V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND COMPANY, INC. 
Page 9 
defendant is responsible for reimbursement of claimant’s IME.  Defendant shall 
reimburse claimant in the amount of $3,360.50 for the IME.    
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Claimant is seeking payment of past medical expenses as set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 3.  A review of these bills demonstrates that these expenses were incurred as 
the result of claimant’s work injury.  Defendant does not make any argument as to why 
the employer should not be responsible for these expenses if the injury is found to be 
compensable.  I find defendant employer is responsible for the claimant’s medical 
expenses as set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 3. 
Finally, claimant is seeking an assessment of costs as set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 4.  Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy hearing the case.  
876 IAC 4.33.  I find that claimant was generally successful in his claim and that an 
assessment of costs is appropriate in this case.  Claimant is seeking costs in the 
amount of $100.00 for the filing fee.  I find this is an appropriate cost under 4.33(7).  
Claimant is also seeking the IME expense as a cost.  However, I concluded that 
claimant was entitled to reimbursement for the IME under Iowa Code section 85.39.  
Thus, defendant is assessed costs in the amount of one hundred and no/100 dollars 
($100.00). 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of eight hundred fifty-eight 
and 72/100 dollars ($858.72).   
Defendant shall pay sixty-five (65) weeks of permanent partial disability benefits 
commencing on the stipulated commencement date of June 25, 2019. 
Defendant shall pay healing period benefits from October 28, 2018 through 
February 1, 2019. 
Defendant shall be entitled to credit for all weekly benefits paid to date.   
Defendant is responsible for the past medical expenses as set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 3. 

ALM V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND COMPANY, INC. 
Page 10 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant in the amount of three thousand three 
hundred sixty and 50/100 dollars ($3,360.50) for the IME.    
Defendant shall reimburse claimant costs as set forth above. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this       10th       day of June, 2020. 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Dustin Mueller (via WCES) 
Paul Powers (via WCES) 
Mark Woollums (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
       ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
