Case Number: 5050594
Case Title:  SULLIVAN, BRETT V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Sullivan Brett-5050594D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
BRETT SULLIVAN, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                         File No. 5050594 
WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE, 
  : 
 
 
  :                 ARBITRATION  DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
FARMLAND MUTUAL INSURANCE 
  : 
COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :             Head Note Nos.:  1402.60, 2501, 
 
Defendants. 
  :             2700, 2701 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Brett Sullivan, filed a petition for arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from West Central Cooperative, as the employer, and Farmland 
Mutual Insurance Company, as the insurance carrier.  The claimant was represented by 
Thomas Wertz.  The defendants were represented by Jeffrey Lanz.   
The matter came on for hearing on May 6, 2020, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Andrew M. Phillips in Des Moines, Iowa.  An order issued 
on March 13, 2020, by the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, In the Matter of 
Coronavirus/COVID-19 Impact on Hearings (Available online at: 
https://www.iowaworkcomp.gov/order-coronavirus-covid-19 (last viewed May 22, 2020)) 
amended the hearing assignment order in each case before the Commissioner 
scheduled for an in-person regular proceeding hearing between March 18, 2020, and 
June 16, 2020.  The amendment makes it so that such hearings will be held by Internet-
based video, using CourtCall.  The parties appeared electronically, and the hearing 
proceeded without significant difficulties.  The matter was fully submitted on May 15, 
2020, after briefing by the parties.     
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-11, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-4, 
and Defendants’ Exhibits A-H.  Testimony under oath was also taken from the claimant, 
Brett Sullivan.  Dina Dulaney was appointed the official reporter and custodian of the 
notes of the proceeding.  The exhibits were accepted without objection.     
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Jun-05  09:25:53     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SULLIVAN V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE 
Page 2 
 
 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged 
injury. 
2. Claimant’s injury arose out of, and in the course of, employment, on 
October 2, 2011. 
3. The alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery, and a cause of permanent disability. 
Additionally, there was no dispute as to the entitlement for temporary disability 
and/or healing period benefits.  There was also no dispute as to entitlement to 
permanent partial disability benefits.  The rate of compensation was also not applicable 
to this proceeding, nor is any credit against any award.  Defendants waived their 
affirmative defenses. 
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. The claimant seeks alternate care pursuant to Iowa Code 85.27. 
2. The claimant seeks taxation of specific costs paid by the claimant. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Brett Sullivan, the claimant, was 40 years old at the time of the hearing.  He is 
currently a resident of Grand Pass, Missouri.  Claimant’s work history was not 
discussed at hearing, as it is not relevant to the issues at hand.   
On October 2, 2011, the claimant was struck by a train while in the course and 
scope of his employment.  (Testimony).  He has no memory of the accident, but 
reported spending 30-days in the hospital.  (Testimony).  The claimant reported 
undergoing significant medical intervention as a result of the accident.  (Testimony).  
Beyond the treatment in the initial aftermath of the work incident, the claimant’s medical 
history is significant for a left knee surgery.  (Joint Exhibit 1:1).  On November 22, 1999, 
while the claimant was reportedly in high school, he underwent a left knee examination 
under anesthesia at the University of Missouri Hospitals and Clinics.  (JE 1:1).  This 
surgery included a reconstruction of the left anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) due to a 

SULLIVAN V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE 
Page 3 
 
 
one-year history of left knee pain and instability.  (JE 1:1).  During the surgery, it was 
noted that there was no evidence of any full-thickness tear to the medial meniscus 
ligament, nor the posterior cruciate ligament.  (JE 1:1-2).  A partial tear of 50 percent to 
60 percent was noted to the anterior cruciate ligament, and it was determined by the 
operative team that a reconstruction would be needed.  (JE 1:2). 
On December 14, 2011, the claimant had an MRI of the left knee at St. Anthony 
Regional Hospital in Carroll, Iowa.  (JE 2:4).  The MRI results were correlated with 
x-rays done on October 3, 2011.  (JE 2:4).  Post-operative changes of an ACL repair 
were noted.  (JE 2:4).  The impression from the MRI was an ACL repair with a retear of 
the neo ligament, a grade II tear of the proximal medial collateral ligament (MCL), and 
an abnormal appearance of the posterior root of the lateral meniscus, which “could 
represent an acute meniscal injury but could also be due to prior ACL tear.  Therefore, 
the age is indeterminate.”  (JE 2:4-5).   
Subsequent to the MRI of December 14, 2011, the claimant underwent a revision 
of an anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction using an Allograft on January 19, 2012, 
performed by Thomas Dulaney, M.D.  (JE 2:6).  Historical notes indicate that the 
claimant had immediate swelling following his work injury, and that he developed feeling 
of instability and grinding in his knee.  (JE 2:6).   
On September 17, 2012, Mr. Sullivan was examined by David Hatfield, M.D. at 
the request of Dr. Goetz.  (JE 3:9).  During this examination, the claimant reported pain 
in his back, and noted that he was concerned with swelling into his lower back which 
included dull and burning pain made worse with standing.  (JE 3:9).  Dr. Hatfield found 
Mr. Sullivan to be stable with Romberg testing.  (JE 3:10).  Finally, Dr. Hatfield noted, 
“[w]e discussed that one can have symptoms following a trauma without changes for 
which intervention would be of help.”  (JE 3:10).  An MRI was ordered to investigate 
further.  (JE 3:10). 
An unenhanced MRI of the lumbar spine was performed on October 24, 2012, 
based on claimant’s complaints of persistent lower back pain since the work related 
incident.  (JE 2:8).  The study was correlated to a CT scan done October 2, 2011, which 
showed fractures to the transverse process at L3 and L4.  (JE 2:8).  The fractures were 
difficult to see on the MRI.  (JE 2:8).  The lumbar discs were noted to be healthy with no 
significant degeneration or herniation noted; however, there was minimal bulging of the 
annulus at L4-5 which was not compressing the neural elements.  (JE 2:8). 
Dr. Hatfield saw Mr. Sullivan for a repeat examination and review of the MRI 
results on October 31, 2012.  (JE 3:11).  The claimant’s symptoms were unchanged.  
(JE 3:11).  Dr. Hatfield noted, “I do not believe there is anything to offer surgically. . . .  
We are both of the opinion that he has reached a point of maximum medical 
improvement from a back standpoint. . . .  I have no restrictions for him from a spine 
standpoint.”  (JE 3:11).   
Thomas Dulaney, M.D. examined Mr. Sullivan on February 13, 2013, for a 
recheck of his left knee.  (JE 3:13).  Overall, it was noted that things were “going OK,” 

SULLIVAN V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE 
Page 4 
 
 
but it was noted that the claimant was still having mild instability in the left knee 
including a severe bout of pain several weeks prior.  (JE 3:13).  No type of recurrent 
injury or trauma was noted.  (JE 3:13).  Dr. Dulaney noted upon examination that the 
proximal tib-fib joint had some instability, but that the fibula fracture was well healed.  
(JE 3:13).  Dr. Dulaney discussed treatment options with the claimant and his wife.  (JE 
3:13).  Dr. Dulaney reported that Mr. Sullivan was “absolutely against the idea of any 
type of surgery on his left knee.  He says he has been wearing his brace daily at work 
and this has certainly made things tolerable.  He would not go through any type of 
surgery.”  (JE 3:13).  Mild low back pain was also noted during this visit.  (JE 3:13).   
On September 13, 2013, Mr. Sullivan presented for an independent medical 
evaluation (IME) and rating with Charles Mooney, M.D.  (Defense Exhibit A:1-6).  
Dr. Mooney recounts the fact that Mr. Sullivan was involved in a motor vehicle accident 
causing various injuries including: right comminuted fracture involving the acetabulum 
and L3-L4 fractures of the transverse processes, wedge fracture T8-9 vertebral bodies, 
fracture of the T8 spinous process, left 9th posterior rib fracture, S5 fracture, distal right 
clavicle fracture, head trauma with loss of consciousness and amnesia of the event.  
(Def. Ex. A:1).  Dr. Mooney noted that Dr. Hatfield considered Mr. Sullivan to have 
reached maximum medical improvement on October 31, 2012, with regard to his spinal 
injuries.  (Def. Ex. A:1).  Mr. Sullivan complained to Dr. Mooney of “near constant hip 
and back pain.”  (Def. Ex. A:2).  Dr. Mooney reports wearing an ACL brace continuously 
through his work day due to occasional breakaway of his left knee, but did not report 
any dramatic pain complaints to his left knee.  (Def. Ex. A:3).  Dr. Mooney’s examination 
of the bilateral knees showed full extension and 120-degrees of flexion.  (Def. Ex. A:3-
4).  The left knee demonstrated a 1 to 2+ ACL laxity when compared to the left.  (Def. 
Ex. A:4).  Dr. Mooney’s assessment of Mr. Sullivan was that he sustained multiple 
traumas with evidence of thoracic and lumbar fractures, right hip fracture with 
subsequent total hip arthroplasty, distal right clavicle fracture with essentially normal 
motion and strength of his shoulder.  (Def. Ex. A:4).  Dr. Mooney issued impairment 
ratings based on his examination.  (Def. Ex. A:4-6).   
The claimant had a repeat lumbar MRI performed on April 3, 2014, at the 
University of Missouri Health System.  (JE 4:32).  Michael Aro, M.D., reviewed the MRI 
and noted no significant issues beyond a minimal to mild lumbar spondylosis with facet 
arthrosis and mild disc bulging at L4-5.  (JE 4:33).  Additionally, early subchondral cyst 
formation was noted at the left facet joint at L4-5.  (JE 4:33).   
Eden Wheeler, M.D., provided a second opinion upon examination of 
Mr. Sullivan on September 3, 2014.  (JE 5:35).  Dr. Wheeler noted that the chief 
complaints were “[b]ack, legs & knee.”  (JE 5:35).  Dr. Wheeler reviewed the lengthy 
history of treatment to this point, and indicates that Mr. Sullivan follows up with 
Dr. Goetz on a yearly basis for his left hip.  (JE 5:35).  Mr. Sullivan indicated to 
Dr. Wheeler that Dr. Goetz’s office contacted him by telephone and indicated that there 
was “nothing to do” from a surgical perspective, and recommended pain management, 
which prompted the visit with Dr. Wheeler for a second opinion.  (JE 5:35).  During his 
visit with Dr. Wheeler, the claimant presented with subjective pain complaints to the left 

SULLIVAN V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE 
Page 5 
 
 
shoulder, low back, left medial thigh, and bilateral lower extremities.  (JE 5:36).  The 
claimant also reported “constant left knee pain,” but did not disclose any swelling or 
instability.  (JE 5:36).  Dr. Wheeler’s impression after reviewing the medical records, 
and examining Mr. Sullivan is: 1. Right central low back pain with differential diagnosis 
of right SI joint dysfunction and/or facet mediated pain; 2. Leg length discrepancy 
stemming from right hip surgical interventions from prior fractures; 3. Subjective left 
knee pain stemming from ACL repairs; and, 4. Left shoulder pain without evaluation or 
treatment.  (JE 5:40-41).  Dr. Wheeler spoke to Mr. and Mrs. Sullivan regarding 
treatment options and noted the following:  
1. 
Consider returning to formal therapy specifically for the lumbar 
spine with last intervention several months ago.  Although Mr. 
Sullivan reports prior therapy “irritating” his back, I can only see 
benefit from a core exercise and sacral stabilization program.   
2. 
With therapy, consider TENS unit trial for lumbar complaints with 
therapy to educate on use.   
3. 
Medication options would include: 
a. Discontinuation of OxyContin without reported benefit for 
pain.   
b. Trial of cyclobenzaprine for sleep disturbance of 10 mg, one-
half to two tablets nightly depending upon response and 
tolerance. 
c. 
Trial of Voltaren Gel 4 grams up to 3-4 times daily.   
4. 
If no benefit from the above interventions, then pain management 
could be considered for right SI joint injections under fluoroscopy, 
and if no benefit, to consider diagnostic facet block to determine 
candidacy for facet ablation.   
(JE 5:41).   
Dr. Wheeler examined Mr. Sullivan for back and leg pain again on November 6, 
2014.  (JE 5:42).  No changes in symptoms were reported, but the claimant continued to 
report lumbar discomfort.  (JE 5:42).  Dr. Wheeler’s impressions/diagnoses remained 
unchanged from the previous visit.  (JE 5:43).  Dr. Wheeler shared with Mr. Sullivan that 
he could continue to benefit from physical therapy, especially with a new therapist in 
Sedalia, Missouri.  (JE 5:43).   
Mr. Sullivan had another follow-up with Dr. Wheeler on December 10, 2014.  (JE 
5:44).  The claimant had completed five sessions of physical therapy, and noted more 
mobility and looseness, but that he back was “hurting worse.”  (JE 5:44).  A request was 
made for seven remaining visits of physical therapy.  (JE 5:45).  Dr. Wheeler’s 

SULLIVAN V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE 
Page 6 
 
 
impression was: 1. Right central low back pain, with lesser right SI joint involvement, 
and greater facet symptoms with MRI findings of minimal bulging L3-S1 levels and facet 
arthropathy L4-S1; 2. Continued right medial thigh pain status post arthroplasty; leg 
length discrepancy status post right hip surgical interventions from prior fractures; and, 
subjective left knee pain status post ACL repairs.  (JE 5:45).  Mr. Sullivan is noted to 
desire to maximize therapy before undertaking invasive treatment.  (JE 5:45).   
Dr. Wheeler saw Mr. Sullivan again on January 14, 2015, wherein Mr. Sullivan 
complained of being in considerable pain over the previous few days.  (JE 5:46).  He 
described his pain as constant aching, burning, and stabbing in the back, along with 
aching into the legs.  (JE 5:46).  Despite the pain, the claimant noted his back pain was 
improved with therapy.  (JE 5:46).  Dr. Wheeler spoke with Mr. Sullivan’s therapist, who 
indicated that Mr. Sullivan had attended 12 sessions of physical therapy.  (JE 5:47).  
Dr. Wheeler noted that without focal tenderness, there is the possibility of a radicular 
component to his back pain, “although his MRI does not necessarily match this with no 
significant pathology or stenosis identified in the L2-3-4 regions.”  (JE 5:47).  It was 
noted that the claimant would continue for an additional three to five weeks in physical 
therapy.  (JE 5:47).  Dr. Wheeler noted that pain management may still be considered 
depending on Mr. Sullivan’s symptoms, including multiple types of injections.  (JE 5:47).   
Mr. Sullivan continued his visits to Dr. Wheeler on February 12, 2015, indicating 
that “[t]he lower part of my back may be better.”  (JE 5:48).  Mr. Sullivan also indicated 
that the therapy aggravates his complaints of pain.  (JE 5:48).  He completed 19 
physical therapy treatments as of February 11, 2015.  (JE 5:48).  Pain management 
options were discussed, including a referral to consider two options for injections.  (JE 
5:49).  
On April 23, 2015, Mr. Sullivan commenced care with Daniel Bruning, M.D., due 
to low back pain and leg pain.  (JE 6:52).  The claimant indicated his pain was 6/10.  (JE 
6:52).  Dr. Bruning assessed Mr. Sullivan with lumbar disc displacement, lumbar 
spondylosis, and lumbar radiculopathy.  (JE 6:53).  An epidural steroid injection was 
performed.  (JE 6:53).   
Dr. Bruning’s office saw Mr. Sullivan for a repeat examination on May 8, 2015.  
(JE 6:55).  It was reported that the claimant had 20 percent relief since the last 
procedure, including two-to-three days where his lower back pain was “tolerable,” but 
that it worsened in the last several days.  (JE 6:55).  Mr. Sullivan also reported left leg 
pain.  (JE 6:55).  Mr. Sullivan also had hyperglycemia after the last injection, and 
Dr. Bruning stated that the risk for hyperglycemia was too high, thus another steroid 
injection was not offered.  (JE 6:55).  A diagnostic facet joint injection was done at L3-5.  
(JE 6:56).   
On May 19, 2015, the claimant again visited Dr. Wheeler.  (JE 5:50).  He 
complained that he was feeling worse than he had in several months.  (JE 5:50).  
Mr. Sullivan noted that an epidural steroid injection resulted in him experiencing 
hyperglycemia.  (JE 5:50).  Diagnostic facet injections were completed through pain 
management.  (JE 5:50).  Dr. Wheeler notes, “I also discussed, however, my continued 

SULLIVAN V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE 
Page 7 
 
 
opinion that his lumbar MRI does not necessarily correlate with his right inguinal/medial 
thigh pain.  Indeed, only minimal bulging was noted at the right L3-4 disc, with only 
minimal foraminal stenosis at L4-5 from a mild concentric bulge.”  (JE 5:51).    
Mr. Sullivan was seen again by Devon D. Goetz, M.D. on May 21, 2015.  (JE 
3:15).  The epidural steroid injection done by Dr. Bruning was noted to not be 
particularly helpful, along with trigger point injections.  (JE 3:15).  Physical therapy was 
also noted to increase his pain.  (JE 3:15).  He complained of a perceived leg length 
discrepancy, but Dr. Goetz noted nothing significant.  (JE 3:15).  The claimant visited 
Dr. Goetz again on March 3, 2016.  (JE 3:18).   
Dr. Goetz saw Mr. Sullivan on August 9, 2016, for a follow-up.  (JE 3:21).  
Persistent pain in the low back with occasional tingling in the legs and groin was noted.  
(JE 3:21).  This pain is noted to be severe and disabling.  (JE 3:21).  Mr. Sullivan 
wanted to consider a second opinion as well as a pain management evaluation.  (JE 
3:21).  He requested a new MRI of his lumbar spine, which Dr. Goetz offered to 
arrange.  (JE 3:21).  The MRI of the lumbar spine was performed on September 7, 
2016, at Des Moines Orthopaedic Surgeons, P.C., and reviewed by James Choi, M.D.  
(JE 3:23).  The impression from the MRI was that there was no evidence for an acute 
lumbar spine fracture, and that there was a mild disk bulge at L4-5 and facet 
hypertrophic changes to bilateral lateral recess narrowing without compression of the 
traversing L5 nerves.  (JE 3:23).  A September 14, 2016, nurse’s note from Michelle 
Strait, CMA, indicated that Dr. Goetz recommended another epidural steroid injection.  
(JE 3:24). 
During a follow-up visit with Dr. Goetz on March 6, 2018, Mr. Sullivan noted 
chronic lower back pain which is intermittently bad.  (JE 3:25).  He also sought 
evaluation for his left knee, as he was getting sharp lateral knee pain along with chronic 
anterior knee pain.  (JE 3:25).  The 2016 MRI of Mr. Sullivan’s lumbar spine showing 
L4-5 stenosis was also noted.  (JE 3:25).  A repeat epidural steroid injection was not 
done, as Mr. Sullivan is a diabetic and was worried about his blood sugars.  (JE 3:25).  
Dr. Goetz notably diagnosed Mr. Sullivan with moderate left knee osteoarthritis post-
ACL reconstruction, chronic low back pain with lumbar spinal stenosis. (JE 3:27).   
An MRI of the left knee was performed at DMOS Orthopaedic Centers on 
June 22, 2018.  (JE 3:28).  This was done based on a referral from Dr. Goetz.  (JE 3:28)  
The impression, as reported by James Choi, M.D. was: mild secondary lateral 
compartment degenerative changes with suggestion of irregular marginal tear of the 
posterior horn/root of the lateral meniscus, an intact ACL with a suspected Cyclops 
lesion, and a presumed myxoid change to the posterior horn of the medial meniscus.  
(JE 3:28).  Dr. Goetz, in a note from June 27, 2018, reports on his review of the MRI 
and x-rays of the left knee.  Dr. Goetz reports that the MRI shows a tear to the posterior 
horn of the medial meniscus.  (JE 3:29).  Dr. Goetz reviewed the imaging with Dr. Jason 
Sullivan who “felt that there is a good chance that he could be helped with arthroscopy,” 
and that Mr. Sullivan would be best served with a referral to Dr. Jason Sullivan, who 
practices sports medicine.  (JE 3:29).  

SULLIVAN V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE 
Page 8 
 
 
Mr. Sullivan was seen by Central States Medicine beginning on June 22, 2018, 
for evaluation and management of low back pain.  (JE 7:58).  There was also a notation 
of left knee pain in the initial record.  (JE 7:58).  His MRI results from 2016 were 
reviewed, and it was noted that his leg paresthesias do not match any dermatome, they 
are noted to be bilaterally symmetric, and include the entire extremity but spare the 
perineum.  (JE 7:62).  An updated MRI was ordered, in addition to bilateral EMGs.  (JE 
7:62).   
On July 17, 2018, Mr. Sullivan admitted himself to Valley Hope for treatment for 
alcohol dependence.  (JE 8:84).  It was noted in the initial intake form from July 18, 
2018, that Mr. Sullivan drank 24-30 cans of beer per day.  (JE 8:84).  His examination 
upon entrance notes a normal physical examination.  (JE 8:84-86).  He was discharged 
from Valley Hope on August 3, 2018, with a referral to attend 12 step meetings and a 
relapse prevention group.  (JE 8:87).     
Pursuant to a referral from Dr. Goetz, Mr. Sullivan commenced treatment with 
Dr. Sullivan on August 30, 2018.  (JE 3:30).  Continued pain in the claimant’s left knee 
was noted since the 2011 revision surgery along with a note that Mr. Sullivan had 
attempted seven years of conservative management without relief.  (JE 3:30).  The 
results of the MRI showing a “possible lateral meniscus tear” were also noted by 
Dr. Sullivan.  (JE 3:30).  Dr. Sullivan discussed with the claimant that if his symptoms 
were stemming from the lateral meniscus, that an arthroscopic surgery would provide a 
benefit.  (JE 3:30).  The claimant indicated his agreement with Dr. Sullivan that he 
would like to proceed with the surgery.  (JE 3:30).   
Dr. Ledet referred Mr. Sullivan for an MRI on August 30, 2018, at Iowa 
Diagnostic Imaging, Ankeny North.  (JE 9:89).  The MRI of the lumbar spine was noted 
to show no lumbar disc herniation, no spinal canal stenosis, nor neural foraminal 
stenosis.  (JE 9:89).  The MRI did show “[v]ery subtle 1 mm focus of intrathecal T1 
hypersensitivity right L5 spinal canal nonspecific but has a benign appearance 
representing an incidental finding of uncertain clinical significance.”  (JE 9:89).   
An EMG was performed on September 5, 2018, at Capital Orthopaedics & Sports 
Medicine in Clive, Iowa.  (JE 10:90).  Mr. Sullivan reported having tingling in his legs, 
along with weakness and fatigue and chronic low back pain.  (JE 10:90).  The findings 
from the EMG were noted as: “1. Bilateral sural distal latencies slightly prolonged.  2. 
Bilateral peroneal and Rt. tibial motor distal latencies normal.  Motor NCVs slowed in 
the legs.  3.  No membrane instability to bilateral LE muscles screened and associated 
paraspinals.”  (JE 10:91).  The conducting physician discussed the findings with 
Mr. Sullivan and his wife indicating “[e]vidence for mild peripheral neuropathy with motor 
NCV slowing in the legs but not distally and mild slowing of the sensory nerves.”  (JE 
10:91).  No evidence of acute lower extremity radiculopathy was noted.  (JE 10:91).   
Mr. Sullivan visited Christian Ledet, M.D. at Central States Medicine on 
October 3, 2018.  (JE 7:64).  Dr. Ledet was an authorized treating physician.  (Claimant 
Exhibit 3:2).  He continued to complain of low back pain, buttocks pain, and lower 
extremity pain.  (JE 7:64).  The pain remained unchanged from previous examinations.  

SULLIVAN V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE 
Page 9 
 
 
(JE 7:64).  His current problems were noted to be lumbar radiculopathy and sacroiliitis.  
(JE 7:66).  Lumbar and pelvic MRI results were reviewed, which were “reassuring in that 
there is no evidence of bio-mechanical impingement.”  (JE 7:67).  An EMG/NCV was 
also reviewed, which showed, “a picture of peripheral neuropathy with slowing of 
sensory and motor nerves,” which suggests injury associated with the traumatic events.  
(JE 7:67).  Medication based treatments were recommended, to include Lyrica, along 
with injections.  (JE 7:67).  Dr. Ledet notes, “[u]ltimately, if we fail to treat the symptoms 
with the membrane stabilizer medications, we will consider trial of implantable 
technologies to include spinal cord stimulation.”  (JE 7:67).   
On October 9, 2018, Dr. Sullivan signed the equivalent of a check-box letter from 
defendants’ attorney wherein Dr. Sullivan agreed that Dr. Dulaney did not mention new 
meniscal findings in his January 19, 2012, operative report.  (Def. Ex. B:9-10).  
Dr. Sullivan agreed that “it is most likely that Mr. Sullivan’s current knee symptoms, the 
June 22, 2017, MRI findings (arthritis/degenerative changes and meniscal changes), 
and the need for any further treatment (including the left knee scope you have 
recommended) are related to the original ACL injury and repair performed prior to the 
October 2, 2011, work (train) injury.”  (Def. Ex. B:9).  Based upon Dr. Sullivan’s 
opinions, defendants denied the need for a left knee arthroscopy.  (Def. Ex. F:35; Def. 
Ex. F:37).   
Dr. Ledet examined Mr. Sullivan again on October 26, 2018.  (JE 7:68).  
Dr. Ledet noted that spinal cord stimulation therapy was discussed with Mr. Sullivan, 
including a trial process and permanent implantation.  (JE 7:71).  Mr. Sullivan was given 
educational materials from the spinal cord stimulator manufacturer to review.  (JE 7:71).  
Despite these discussions, Dr. Ledet notes, “I continue to recommended [sic] that the 
injured worker pursue medication based treatments at this time.”  (JE 7:71).   
Mr. Sullivan followed-up with Dr. Ledet at Central States Medicine on 
December 17, 2018.  (JE 7:72).  The claimant reported continued lower back pain.  (JE 
7:72).  His current problems were noted as chronic pain due to trauma, and 
radiculopathy of the lumbar region.  (JE 7:74).  Dr. Ledet notes that Mr. Sullivan is 
scheduled for “BH evaluation and planning for SCS trial.”  (JE 7:74).  Dr. Ledet notes 
further,  
Clinical history, physical examination and radiographic studies indicate 
that the patient may be a candidate for dorsal column stimulation.  The 
patient is experiencing moderate to severe pain that has been refractory to 
standard medication therapy.  The symptoms are predominately 
neuropathic in origin. . . .  The pain cannot be treated by a curative 
surgical procedure. 
(JE 7:74).   
Dr. Ledet examined the claimant again on February 12, 2019, wherein 
Mr. Sullivan again reported low back pain bilaterally into the right thigh and left knee.  
(JE 7:76).  Dr. Ledet noted that the claimant had completed a behavioral health 

SULLIVAN V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE 
Page 10 
 
 
evaluation and planning for a spinal cord stimulator trial.  (JE 7:78).  Dr. Ledet 
discussed scheduling a thoracic MRI for additional examination of the claimant’s spine, 
but indicated that the plan was to proceed with a trial of implantable technologies.  (JE 
7:78).  Mr. Sullivan returned to Dr. Ledet’s office on February 12, 2019, for a 
biopsychosocial evaluation ahead of a spinal cord stimulator trial.  (JE 7:80).  
Mr. Sullivan rated his pain 9 out of 10 for the prior two weeks, and was noted to be 
interested in a spinal cord stimulator “in hopes of reducing his pain intensity in his low 
back and lower extremity by 50% or more allowing him to reduce or eliminate 
prescription and over the counter medications to manage pain, improve his mood, 
improve his sleep quality, . . . and possibly return to work in some form.”  (JE 7:80-81).  
The social worker who is noted in the medical record indicated that Mr. Sullivan may be 
at risk of medical non-compliance with the spinal cord stimulator due to a history of non-
compliance with checking his blood sugar levels as recommended.  (JE 7:82).  The 
biopsychosocial examination of the claimant was authorized by the defendants.  (Cl. Ex. 
3:3).     
Based upon Dr. Ledet’s referral of February 12, 2019, Mr. Sullivan had an MRI of 
his thoracic spine at Ray County Memorial Hospital in Richmond, Missouri.  (JE 11:92).  
Vertebral body heights were noted to be maintained on exam, along with a normal cord.  
(JE 11:92).  Minimal thoracic disc disease was observed, including tiny disc osteophytes 
at T6-7 and T7-8 with no significant narrowing of the central canal.  (JE 11:92).   
On March 11, 2019, Joseph J. Chen, M.D., performed an IME on Mr. Sullivan at 
the request of the defendants.  (Def. Ex. C:15-25).  Dr. Chen performed a thorough, 
well-documented review of Mr. Sullivan’s treatment records from the time of the work 
accident through the time of the IME.  (Def. Ex. C:15-25).  At the time of the 
examination, Mr. Sullivan reported symptoms of tingling and pain from the waist down in 
both legs anteriorly and posteriorly.  (Def. Ex. C:19).  Any type of movement of his spine 
and legs cause his pain to worsen, so he reported he needs to rest to decrease the 
pain.  (Def. Ex. C:19).  Largely due to fragmented care without improvements in his 
conditions, Mr. Sullivan again reported wanting to proceed with a spinal cord stimulator 
as suggested by Dr. Ledet.  (Def. Ex. C:19).  Dr. Chen examined Mr. Sullivan’s lumbar 
spine and noted that the alignment was intact with no areas of swelling or deformity.  
(Def. Ex. C:20).  There was diffuse tenderness to light tactile stimulation of the midline 
lower lumbar spine and paraspinal muscle mass bilaterally along with difficulty with 
range of motion.  (Def. Ex. C:20).  Mr. Sullivan also reported being unable to sit 
comfortably with either leg crossed on top of the other, which Dr. Chen opined reflected 
significant hip and gluteal inflexibility.  (Def. Ex. C:20).  Dr. Chen noted, “[t]here is no 
doubt that Mr. Sullivan sustained severe trauma to multiple areas of his body as a result 
of his work injury of October 2, 2011.”  (Def Ex. C:21).  Further, Mr. Sullivan reported “a 
variety of pain symptoms covering areas of his left knee anteriorly and posteriorly . . . .” 
along with “aching, stabbing pain mainly in all joints . . . .”  (Def. Ex. C:21).  Dr. Chen 
indicated that Mr. Sullivan injured his T8 and T9 vertebral bodies, T8 spinous process, 
and L3 and L4 transverse processes.  (Def. Ex. C:22).  Dr. Chen further indicated that 
the fractures healed in the intervening seven years, and that Mr. Sullivan’s current back 
pain was chronic mechanical and myofascial thoracic and low back pain.  (Def. Ex. 

SULLIVAN V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE 
Page 11 
 
 
C:22-23).  Dr. Chen noted that Mr. Sullivan’s recovery was promising, as he was able to 
return to work without needing any medical restrictions, until he separated from 
employment with the defendant nearly two years post-injury.  (Def. Ex. C:23).  Dr. Chen 
opined, “[i]t is my medical opinion that a spinal cord stimulator trial is NOT causally 
related to Mr. Sullivan’s work-related back injury.  There are many pathways that one 
can develop chronic back pain even in the absence of trauma that Mr. Sullivan 
experienced in 2011.”  (Def. Ex. C:23). (emphasis omitted).  Further, Mr. Sullivan’s 
complaints are noted to not follow dermatomal or myotomal distribution that would be 
improved by use of a spinal cord stimulator.  (Def. Ex. C:23).  According to Dr. Chen, “a 
spinal cord stimulator trial is NOT a reasonable and necessary treatment for his work-
related back injury.”  (Def. Ex. C:24). (emphasis omitted).  Dr. Chen concluded his 
report by recommending a non-surgical course of treatment to reduce the pain which 
Mr. Sullivan experienced.  (Def. Ex. C:25).   
On May 9, 2019, William Boulden, M.D., of Capital Orthopaedics & Sports 
Medicine, performed a records review at the request of defendants.  (Def. Ex. D:29-30).  
Dr. Boulden opined that Mr. Sullivan’s pain is “chronic mechanical and myofascial 
thoracic and low back pain with healed fractures that needed no surgical intervention.”  
(Def. Ex. D:30).  Further, Mr. Sullivan has degenerative changes in his back, which are 
not in need of surgical intervention.  (Def. Ex. D:29).  Dr. Boulden believes that one 
reason for the claimant’s back pain is that the claimant is a smoker.  (Def. Ex. D:29).  
Dr. Boulden notes that he believes Dr. Chen’s assessment is “very well written.”  (Def. 
Ex. D:29).  Dr. Boulden does not believe that the use of a spinal cord stimulator would 
be causally related, or reasonable and necessary treatment for his work-related back 
injury.  (Def. Ex. D:30).  Dr. Boulden concludes with indicating that Mr. Sullivan’s 
neuropathic pain is not related to his back trauma, nor does he believe the literature 
supports that opinion.  (Def. Ex. D:30).   
John Kuhnlein, D.O., MPH, FACPM, FACOEM, provided a record review on 
behalf of the claimant, dated October 5, 2019.  (Cl. Ex. 2:3-5).  Dr. Kuhnlein disagrees 
with the opinions of Dr. Sullivan and Dr. Dulaney.  (Cl. Ex. 2:4).  It’s noted that 
Dr. Sullivan would not have known what Mr. Sullivan’s left knee was like prior to the 
injury, nor how Mr. Sullivan’s left knee situation in 2018 was unrelated to the October 2, 
2011, work injury.  (Cl. Ex. 2:4).  Dr. Kuhnlein opined, “[g]iven the changes with the 
significant injury, it is more likely than not that the left knee complaints are related to the 
October 2, 2011, significant injury where Mr. Sullivan was struck by a train.”  (Cl. Ex. 
2:5).  Regarding Mr. Sullivan’s lower back pain, Dr. Kuhnlein notes that the pain is 
chronic and has been unresponsive to other forms of conservative treatment.  (Cl. Ex. 
2:5).  Dr. Kuhnlein agrees with Dr. Ledet that a trial of a spinal cord stimulator is what is 
indicated for the chronic low back pain experienced by Mr. Sullivan, as this is the “end 
of the treatment trial for such chronic pain.”  (Cl. Ex. 2:5).   
Dr. Ledet responded to an October 21, 2019, letter from claimant’s attorney 
wherein several questions were posed.  On November 11, 2019, Dr. Ledet sent a 
response to the claimant’s attorney.  (Cl. Ex. 1:5-7).  Dr. Ledet noted that he has 
practiced medicine for more than two decades and performs between 30 and 50 spinal 

SULLIVAN V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE 
Page 12 
 
 
cord stimulator trials and implants every year.  (Cl. Ex. 1:5).  Dr. Ledet would not implant 
a spinal cord stimulator unless there was a substantive improvement in Mr. Sullivan’s 
condition based upon the trial period.  (Cl. Ex. 1:5).  The only way to determine whether 
a patient is a good candidate for implantation of a spinal cord stimulator is through the 
process of trial stimulation.  (Cl. Ex. 1:5).  Dr. Ledet opines that Mr. Sullivan’s chronic 
pain symptoms are causally related to his work injury.  (Cl. Ex. 1:5).  Dr. Ledet directly 
contradicts Dr. Chen and differentiates the type of pain experienced by Mr. Sullivan.  
(Cl. Ex. 1:6).  In fact, Dr. Ledet believes that it is precisely because of Mr. Sullivan’s 
poorly differentiated pain that Mr. Sullivan is a good candidate for a trial of a spinal cord 
stimulator.  (Cl. Ex. 1:6).     
In a supplemental opinion dated January 18, 2020, Dr. Chen reviewed the 
opinions of Dr. Boulden and Dr. Ledet.  (Def. Ex. C:26-28).  Interestingly, Dr. Chen 
opens his supplemental opinion by stating that his opinions are “not intended to prevent 
Mr. Sullivan from getting treatment for his pain.  I view my subjective advice similar to a 
posted warning to hikers to choose a different path because those who have been down 
that trail are aware of significant pitfalls that may unknowingly lead to treacherous 
outcomes.”  (Def. Ex. C:28).  Dr. Chen again recommended that the claimant start a 
general flexibility exercise program, along with simple and consistent walking or 
swimming.  (Def. Ex. C:27).   
A supplemental record review was completed by Dr. Boulden, dated January 20, 
2020.  (Def. Ex. D:31-32).  Dr. Boulden reviewed a letter drafted by Dr. Ledet.  
Dr. Boulden agrees with Dr. Ledet that a spinal cord stimulator requires a trial, but 
disagrees that Mr. Sullivan would be a good candidate for a spinal cord stimulator trial.  
(Def. Ex. D:31).  Dr. Boulden confirms again that Mr. Sullivan’s neurotropic pain is not 
related to the work accident.  (Def. Ex. D:31).  Dr. Boulden concludes by stating 
“[f]inally, I would state that there would be a significant chance that the spinal cord 
stimulator would not help his back pain at all.  I think it is primarily indicated for 
neurotropic pain issues, but once again, I do not see the correlation between his 
accident and that.”  (Def. Ex. D:32).   
Dr. Wheeler signed the equivalent of a check-box letter from defendants’ attorney 
wherein she noted she did not recommend a spinal cord stimulator.  (Def. Ex. E:33).  
Based upon Dr. Wheeler’s treatment, she agreed with Dr. Chen’s opinions, nor would 
she recommend a spinal cord stimulator for Mr. Sullivan.  (Def. Ex. E:33).  Dr. Wheeler 
agreed that a spinal cord stimulator would not be reasonable and necessary medical 
treatment for the work injury.  (Def. Ex. E:34).  Since Mr. Sullivan did not follow-up with 
Dr. Wheeler for subsequent treatment, she questioned whether he would be compliant 
with ongoing spinal cord stimulator treatment.  (Def. Ex. E:34).   
On or around March 6, 2020, Dr. Goetz signed the equivalent of a check-box 
letter from defendants’ attorney wherein Dr. Goetz agrees he reviewed multiple MRI’s 
performed on Mr. Sullivan’s back and knee.  (Def. Ex. B:11-12).  Dr. Goetz agreed that 
he would defer to the October 9, 2018, opinions of Dr. Sullivan, as noted above.  (Def. 
Ex. B:12).  With regards to the recommended spinal cord stimulator trial, Dr. Goetz 
agrees to being aware of the opinions of Dr. Ledet, Dr. Chen, Dr. Boulden, and Dr. 

SULLIVAN V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE 
Page 13 
 
 
Wheeler.  (Def. Ex. B:12).  Dr. Goetz agrees that based upon his examinations of the 
claimant, his review of the MRI findings, and his experience treating patients, it is 
Dr. Goetz’s opinion that the odds of a spinal cord stimulator “working in the long term for 
Mr. Sullivan are low.”  (Def. Ex. B:12).  Finally, Dr. Goetz indicates that he agrees with 
the opinions of Dr. Chen, Dr. Boulden and Dr. Wheeler that he would not recommend 
Mr. Sullivan having a spinal stimulator.  (Def. Ex. B:12).   
On or around April 2, 2020, Dr. Dulaney, signed the equivalent of a check-box 
letter from defendants’ attorney wherein he agreed that he examined and treated 
Mr. Sullivan.  (Def. Ex. C:13-14).  Dr. Dulaney performed a hip surgery and a revision to 
a left knee ACL surgery on Mr. Sullivan.  (Def. Ex. B:13).  Dr. Dulaney reviewed 
Dr. Sullivan’s office notes, and the June of 2018 knee MRI.  (Def. Ex. B:13).  
Dr. Dulaney agrees that the arthritic, degenerative, and meniscal changes as noted on 
the June 22, 2018, knee MRI were not caused by or substantially aggravated by the 
October 2, 2011 work injury.  (Def. Ex. B:13).  Finally, Dr. Dulaney noted that since 
there was no meniscal tear found during the January 19, 2012, knee surgery, it would 
be difficult for him to relate the current meniscal findings to the October 2, 2011, work 
injury.  (Def. Ex. B:13).  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
This case has a lengthy procedural history including arbitration awards, and 
appeals to Iowa district court and the Iowa Court of Appeals.  The question before the 
undersigned is whether or not alternate care pursuant to Iowa Code 85.27 is 
appropriate. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of 
Appellate Procedure 6.14(6)(e).   
Causation 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is 
probable, rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 
148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); 
Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).   
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156.  When considering 
the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination 
occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the 

SULLIVAN V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE 
Page 14 
 
 
nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and 
practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  
Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985).  Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994).  Supportive lay testimony may be used 
to buttress expert testimony, and therefore is also relevant and material to the causation 
question.   
The claimant is seeking further medical treatment to include a left knee surgery 
and trial of a spinal cord stimulator with the potential for implantation of a spinal cord 
stimulator.  The defendants deny that the spinal cord stimulator trial, potential 
implantation of a spinal cord stimulator, and the left knee surgery are causally related or 
reasonable and necessary treatment.   
The claimant has a history of sustaining a left knee injury during his time in high 
school.  (Testimony).  Mr. Sullivan had left knee surgery, including an ACL 
reconstruction and repair in November of 1999.  (JE 1:1-3).  After the work injury of 
October 2, 2011, the claimant experienced pain in his left knee.  In December of 2011, 
Mr. Sullivan underwent an MRI of the left knee, which showed his prior ACL repair, a 
tear of the proximal MCL and an abnormal appearance of the posterior root of the 
lateral meniscus.  (JE 2:4-5).  In January of 2012, Dr. Dulaney performed a revision of 
the anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction using an Allograft.  (JE 2:6).  Dr. Dulaney 
examined Mr. Sullivan again in February of 2013, noting that there was still mild 
instability in the left knee, and that the claimant was still experiencing pain.  (JE 3:13).  
Mr. Sullivan indicated to Dr. Dulaney at that time that he was against the idea of any 
type of surgery on his left knee.  (JE 3:13).  Dr. Mooney performed an IME in 
September of 2013 wherein the examination found an ACL laxity in the left knee, and no 
dramatic pain complaints.  (Def Ex. A:3-4).  In March of 2018, Dr. Goetz diagnosed Mr. 
Sullivan with moderate left knee osteoarthritis post-ACL reconstruction.  (JE 3:27).  A 
repeat MRI of the left knee was performed in June of 2018 which showed mild 
secondary lateral compartment degenerative changes with suggestion of irregular 
marginal tear of the posterior horn/root of the lateral meniscus and a presumed myxoid 
change to the posterior horn of the medial meniscus.  (JE 3:28).  This was reviewed 
with Dr. Sullivan who indicated that Mr. Sullivan’s left knee could be helped with an 
arthroscopic surgery.  (JE 3:29-30).  Dr. Sullivan revised his opinion and agreed, “it is 
most likely that Mr. Sullivan’s current knee symptoms, the June 22, 2017, MRI findings 
(arthritis/degenerative changes and meniscal changes), and the need for any further 
treatment (including the left knee scope you have recommended) are related to the 
original ACL injury and repair performed prior to the October 2, 2011, work (train) 
injury.”  (Def. Ex. B:9).  As of March 6, 2020, Dr. Goetz indicated that he defers to the 
October of 2018 opinion of Dr. Sullivan.  (Def. Ex. B:12).  Finally, as of April 2, 2020, 
Dr. Dulaney indicated that the arthritic, degenerative and meniscal changes noted in the 
June of 2018, MRI were not caused by, or substantially aggravated by, the work injury.  
(Def. Ex. B:13).  He further indicated that he found no meniscal tear during the January 
of 2012, knee surgery.  (Def. Ex. B:13).   

SULLIVAN V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE 
Page 15 
 
 
The only medical expert who supports the need for a left knee surgery is 
Dr. Sullivan.  Dr. Sullivan later revised his opinion to indicate that Mr. Sullivan’s left knee 
complaints were caused by the 1990’s injury and surgery, not the October of 2011 work 
injury.  Dr. Dulaney, who performed the ACL revision surgery on Mr. Sullivan in January 
of 2012, indicated that there was no meniscal tear seen during the surgery.  Dr. Dulaney 
clarified his opinion that there was no causation for the left knee meniscal tear.  Based 
on the record, there are no physicians, including retained experts, that attribute the left 
knee injury to the work incident of October 2, 2011.  Based upon the opinions of 
Dr. Sullivan and Dr. Dulaney, I find that the left knee meniscus injuries and resulting 
surgery were not caused by the October 2, 2011, work incident.   
Mr. Sullivan has consistently complained of lower back pain.  He testified that he 
continued to have lower back pain at the time of the hearing.  (Testimony).  Mr. Sullivan 
sustained injuries to his back in the October 2, 2011, work incident, including: right 
comminuted fracture involving the acetabulum and L3-L4 fractures of the transverse 
processes, wedge fracture T8-9 vertebral bodies, fracture of the T8 spinous process, 
left 9th posterior rib fracture, and S5 fracture.  (Def. Ex. A:1).  During a September 2012 
visit with Dr. Hatfield, Mr. Sullivan was told that he could experience symptoms following 
a trauma without changes for which any intervention could help.  (JE 3:10).  An MRI of 
the lumbar spine was performed on Mr. Sullivan on October 24, 2012.  The MRI showed 
healthy lumbar discs with no significant degeneration or herniation, but also minimal 
bulging of the annulus at L4-5.  (JE 2:8).  These bulges were not compressing the 
neural elements.  (JE 2:8).  The MRI results were reviewed by treating physician 
Dr. Hatfield on October 31, 2012.  (JE 3:11).  During this visit, Dr. Hatfield noted, “I do 
not believe there is anything to offer surgically.”  (JE 3:11).   
Mr. Sullivan had a repeat MRI of his lumbar spine on April 3, 2014, which 
showed, no significant issues beyond a minimal to mild lumbar spondylosis with facet 
arthrosis and mild disc bulging at L4-5.  (JE 4:33).  Dr. Wheeler provided a second 
opinion and commenced treatment of Mr. Sullivan on September 3, 2014.  (JE 5:35).  
Dr. Wheeler recommended Mr. Sullivan return to formal physical therapy, and change 
his medication.  (JE 5:41).  If there was no benefit, from continued therapy, then 
Dr. Wheeler noted pain management might be considered for SI injections, or facet 
block injections to determine Mr. Sullivan’s candidacy for facet ablation.  (JE 5:41).  In 
December of 2014, Mr. Sullivan indicated to Dr. Wheeler that he wished to maximize 
physical therapy before undertaking invasive treatment.  (JE 5:45).  In January of 2015, 
Dr. Wheeler noted that pain management may still be considered dependent upon 
Mr. Sullivan’s continued symptoms, including consideration for different types of 
injections.  (JE 5:47).  Dr. Wheeler also noted that Mr. Sullivan’s MRI did not match his 
back pain with no significant pathology or stenosis in the L2-4 regions.  (JE 5:47).  In 
February of 2015, Mr. Sullivan indicated that the lower part of his back may be 
improved.  (JE 5:48).  Pain management options, including injections, were again 
discussed.  (JE 5:49).   
Mr. Sullivan then underwent an epidural steroid injection in April of 2015.  (JE 
6:52).  The injections caused Mr. Sullivan’s diabetes to flare-up.  (JE 5:50).  In May of 

SULLIVAN V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE 
Page 16 
 
 
2015, Dr. Wheeler again noted, “I also discussed, however, my continued opinion that 
his lumbar MRI does not necessarily correlate with his right inguinal/medial thigh pain.  
Indeed, only minimal bulging was noted at the right L3-4 disc, with only minimal 
foraminal stenosis at L4-5 from a mild concentric bulge.”  (JE 5:51).  Another MRI was 
done in September of 2016, which showed a mild disk bulge at L4-5 and facet 
hypertrophic changes to the bilateral lateral recess narrowing without compression of 
the traversing L5 nerves.  (JE 3:23).  Another epidural steroid injection was 
recommended by Dr. Goetz.  (JE 3:34).   
In June of 2018, Mr. Sullivan began seeing Dr. Ledet.  During this initial visit, MRI 
results from 2016 were reviewed, and it was noted that Mr. Sullivan’s symptoms do not 
match any dermatome.  (JE 7:62).  Dr. Ledet ordered an updated MRI.  (JE 7:62).  The 
MRI of the lumbar spine showed “[v]ery subtle 1 mm focus of intrathecal T1 
hyperintensity right L5 spinal canal nonspecific but has a benign appearance 
representing an incidental finding of uncertain clinical significance.”  (JE 9:89).  The 
EMG showed “a picture of peripheral neuropathy with slowing of sensory and motor 
nerves,” suggesting injury associated with traumatic events.  (JE 7:67).  Dr. Ledet 
makes his first mention of a trial of implantable technology should medication not work.  
(JE 7:67).  In October of 2018, Dr. Ledet continued to recommend medication based 
treatments.  (JE 7:71).  By February of 2019, Dr. Ledet began planning for a trial of a 
spinal cord stimulator, including a behavioral health analysis and subsequent MRI, both 
of which were approved by the defendants.  (JE 7:82; JE 11:92; Cl. Ex. 3:3) 
At this time, a series of IMEs and the equivalents of check-box letters began.  
Dr. Chen examined Mr. Sullivan during an IME on March 11, 2019.  Dr. Chen is board 
certified in pain management.  Dr. Chen noted, ““[t]here is no doubt that Mr. Sullivan 
sustained severe trauma to multiple areas of his body as a result of his work injury of 
October 2, 2011.”  (Def Ex. C:21).  Dr. Chen opined, “[i]t is my medical opinion that a 
spinal cord stimulator trial is NOT causally related to Mr. Sullivan’s work-related back 
injury.  There are many pathways that one can develop chronic back pain even in the 
absence of trauma that Mr. Sullivan experienced in 2011.”  (Def. Ex. C:23).  (emphasis 
omitted).  Further, Mr. Sullivan’s complaints are noted to not follow dermatomal or 
myotomal distribution that would be improved by use of a spinal cord stimulator.  (Def. 
Ex. C:23).  According to Dr. Chen, “a spinal cord stimulator trial is NOT a reasonable 
and necessary treatment for his work-related back injury.”  (Def. Ex. C:24).  (emphasis 
omitted).  Dr. Chen concluded his report by recommending a non-surgical course of 
treatment to reduce the pain experienced by Mr. Sullivan.  (Def. Ex. C:25).   
Dr. Boulden, an orthopedic surgeon, opined that Mr. Sullivan’s pain is “chronic 
mechanical and myofascial thoracic and low back pain with healed fractures that 
needed no surgical intervention.”  (Def. Ex. D:30).  Dr. Boulden does not believe that the 
use of a spinal cord stimulator would be causally related, or reasonable and necessary 
treatment for his work-related back injury.  (Def. Ex. D:30).  Dr. Kuhnlein performed a 
previous IME and opined in an October 5, 2019 letter that he agrees with Dr. Ledet that 
a trial of a spinal cord stimulator is what is indicated for the chronic low back pain 

SULLIVAN V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE 
Page 17 
 
 
experienced by Mr. Sullivan, as this is the “end of the treatment trial for such chronic 
pain.”  (Cl. Ex. 2:5).   
Dr. Wheeler issued a letter indicating that she agreed with Dr. Chen’s opinions, 
nor would she recommend a spinal cord stimulator for Mr. Sullivan.  (Def. Ex. E:33).  
Dr. Wheeler agreed that a spinal cord stimulator would not be reasonable and 
necessary medical treatment for the work injury.  (Def. Ex. E:34).  Finally, Dr. Goetz 
opined that based upon his examinations of the claimant, his review of the MRI findings, 
and his experience treating patients, it is Dr. Goetz’s opinion that the odds of a spinal 
cord stimulator “working in the long term for Mr. Sullivan are low.”  (Def. Ex. B:12).  
Finally, Dr. Goetz indicates that he agrees with the opinions of Dr. Chen, Dr. Boulden 
and Dr. Wheeler that he would not recommend Mr. Sullivan having a spinal stimulator.  
(Def. Ex. B:12).   
Two treating physicians, Dr. Goetz and Dr. Wheeler indicate that they do not 
agree with the requested trial for a spinal cord stimulator.  Additionally, Dr. Chen, a 
board certified pain management physician, and Dr. Boulden, an orthopedic physician, 
also do not agree with the requested trial for a spinal cord stimulator.  On the other 
hand, treating physician Dr. Ledet, and Dr. Kuhnlein, agree that Mr. Sullivan’s chronic 
pain would be best served by a spinal cord stimulator trial.  Dr. Ledet is a pain 
management physician, while Dr. Kuhnlein specializes in occupational medicine.  I find 
the opinions of Dr. Goetz, Dr. Wheeler, Dr. Boulden and Dr. Chen more persuasive than 
the opinions of Dr. Ledet and Dr. Kuhnlein.   
Alternate Care Under Iowa Code 85.27 
Iowa Code 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obligated to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has 
the right to choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly 
and be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience 
to the employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the 
care offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care.   
Iowa Code 85.27(4). See Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433 (Iowa 
1997).   
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the 
employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend 
Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 
(Review-Reopening, October 16, 1975).  An employer’s right to select the provider of 

SULLIVAN V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE 
Page 18 
 
 
medical treatment to an injured worker does not include the right to determine how an 
injured worker should be diagnosed, evaluated, treated, or other matters of professional 
medical judgment.  Assmann v. Blue Star Foods, File No. 866389 (Declaratory Ruling, 
May 19, 1988).  Reasonable care includes care necessary to diagnose the condition 
and defendants are not entitled to interfere with the medical judgment of their own 
treating physician.  Pote v. Mickow Corp., File No. 694639 (Review-Reopening 
Decision, June 17, 1986).   
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment - and seeking alternate care – 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable.  See, 
e.g., Iowa R. App. P. 14(f)(5); Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 
N.W.2d 193, 209 (Iowa 2010); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995).  
Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.  Long, 528 
N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). 
An application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because 
claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving.  Mere dissatisfaction with 
the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical 
care.  Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not 
reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that care was unduly inconvenient for the 
claimant.  Id.  Because “the employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the 
question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” an injured employee’s dissatisfaction 
with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough to find such care 
unreasonable.  Id.  Reasonable care includes care necessary to diagnose the condition, 
and defendants are not entitled to interfere with the medical judgement of their own 
treating physician.  Pote v. Mickow Corp., File No. 694639 (Review-Reopening 
Decision, June 17, 1986). 
The undersigned previously noted that I find the opinions of Dr. Goetz, Dr. 
Wheeler, Dr. Boulden, Dr. Chen, Dr. Dulaney, and Dr. Sullivan, more persuasive than 
the opinions of Dr. Kuhnlein and Dr. Ledet.  Based upon the record, I do not find any 
information indicating that the claimant has carried their burden of proof to order the 
alternate care requested.  Dr. Chen has outlined a reasonable course of treatment that 
could serve as an alternative to a trial of a spinal cord stimulator.   
Fees 
Mr. Sullivan seeks to recover $13.60 for certified mail fees, $1,625.00 for the 
opinion letter of Dr. Ledet, and $570.00 for the opinion letter of Dr. Kuhnlein.  (Cl. Ex. 
4:1-5).   
Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner hearing 
the case.  See 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33; Iowa Code 86.40.  876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 4.33(6) provides:  
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 

SULLIVAN V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE 
Page 19 
 
 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by 
Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes.   
The administrative rule expressly allows the undersigned the discretion to assess costs.  
In this case, the undersigned declines to assess costs.   
Defendants’ Motion to Compel IME 
In their post-hearing brief, defendants restate their request to compel an IME with 
Dr. Boulden pursuant to Iowa Code 85.39 and Iowa Rule of  Civil Procedure 1.515.  The 
undersigned has now ruled on this motion in writing on two occasions (April 8, 2020, 
and May 5, 2020), as well as an on the record ruling during the hearing on May 6, 2020.  
Despite defendants’ persistence, no additional evidence has been provided in support 
of the defendants’ motion.  There is no good cause shown to compel the IME under 
Iowa Code 85.39 and Iowa R. Civ. P. 1.515.  Additionally, the defendants have had the 
opportunity to fully and fairly develop their defenses without prejudice.  The record in 
this case closed on May 6, 2020, and upon receipt of post-hearing briefs on May 15, 
2020.  The defendants’ renewed motion is denied.    
ORDER 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED: 
1. Claimant’s petition for alternate medical care pursuant to Iowa Code 85.27 is 
denied.   
2. Claimant’s request for fees is denied.   
3. Defendants motion to compel IME is denied. 
Signed and filed this      5th      day of June, 2020. 
 
 
 
   ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

SULLIVAN V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE 
Page 20 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Thomas M. Wertz (via WCES)  
Jeffrey W. Lanz (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
