Case Number: 5067998
Case Title:  BROWN JR, MERLYN E V. NAYLOR SEED CO INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Brown Merlyn-5067998d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MERLYN BROWN, JR., 
 : 
 
 
  :                         File No. 5067998 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
NAYLOR SEED CO., 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
FARM BUREAU PROPERTY & 
  : 
CASUALTY INSURANCE COMPANY,   : 
 
 
  :               Head Note No.:  1108 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :   
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Merlyn Brown, filed a petition for arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from Naylor Seed Company, employer, and Farm Bureau 
Property & Casualty Insurance Company, insurance carrier.  The claimant was 
represented by Gary Nelson.  The defendants were represented by Jeff Russell. 
The matter came on for hearing on February 10, 2021, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Court Call 
videoconferencing system.  The record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 
6; Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 5; and Defense Exhibits A through D.  The claimant 
testified at hearing, in addition to Dustin Farber.  Dina Dulaney was appointed and 
served as the court reporter for this proceeding.  The matter was fully submitted on 
March 15, 2021, after helpful briefing by the parties. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course 
of his employment on October 26, 2018.  The defendants have asserted the 
defense that the injury is idiopathic.  Defendants have also asserted an 
apportionment defense. 
2. Whether this alleged injury is a cause of any temporary or permanent 
disability. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Nov-23  16:14:33     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BROWN V. NAYLOR SEED CO 
Page 2 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to healing period benefits from June 11, 2019 
through August 11, 2019.  Defendants deny responsibility for the injury, 
however, they stipulate that if they are found liable for the alleged injury, the 
claimant is entitled to healing period benefits during this period. 
4. Claimant seeks permanent partial disability benefits commencing December 
12, 2019. 
5. Claimant seeks Iowa Code section 85.27 medical expenses.  These are 
denied on the basis of medical causation. 
6. Claimant seeks an order of alternate medical care. 
7. Claimant is seeking penalty for an unreasonable denial of benefits. 
8. Claimant seeks an independent medical evaluation (IME) under Section 
85.39, and other costs. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following.  These 
stipulations are accepted and deemed binding: 
1. The parties had an employer-employee relationship as of the alleged date of 
injury. 
2. The commencement date for any permanent disability benefits is December 
12, 2019, if any are owed. 
3. The elements comprising the weekly rate of compensation are all stipulated 
and the parties assert the correct weekly rate to be $489.57. 
4. Affirmative defenses have been waived, although defendants have preserved 
the defense that the injury is idiopathic.  Defendants alternatively contend that 
his disability should be apportioned. 
5. Credit is not an issue 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Merlyn “Brownie” Brown was 67 years old as of the date of hearing.  
(Transcript, page 14)  He is married with no dependents.  Mr. Brown graduated from 
high school in 1972 and has worked in manual labor jobs for his adult life.  He has no 
formal education beyond high school.  He is highly skilled in maintenance and mechanic 
work.  He resides in the small town of Olin, Iowa. 
 
 

BROWN V. NAYLOR SEED CO 
Page 3 
Mr. Brown testified live and under oath at the video hearing and I find his 
testimony to be highly credible.  Mr. Brown provided concise answers.  He was a good 
historian and his responses were consistent with the remainder of the record.  There 
was nothing about his demeanor at hearing which caused me concern about his 
honesty. 
Mr. Brown has been employed with Naylor Seed Company (hereafter, Naylor) 
since 2005.  He is the warehouse manager.  He manages the warehouse and farm sites 
which includes performing a variety of manual labor activities.  He also does 
management activities including some paperwork.  The job, however, regularly requires 
him to engage in physical labor.  Naylor views Mr. Brown as a skilled worker who brings 
great value to the employer. 
The central issue in this case is whether Mr. Brown sustained a low back injury 
for Naylor which arose out of and in the course of his employment.  The employer 
contends that Mr. Brown had serious low back problems for a long time prior to his 
alleged injury.  Mr. Brown admits he had a preexisting low back condition.  That fact is 
not really in dispute.  The issue is whether the alleged incident of injury on October 26, 
2018, materially aggravated or lit up this condition. 
While there is no doubt that Mr. Brown had a preexisting low back condition, the 
fact of the matter is he never had any treatment whatsoever on his low back prior to his 
alleged work injury.  He had a degenerative condition described by physicians as 
“stenosis.”  In the entire record of evidence, however, there is not a single documented 
medical record indicating that he had ever seen a physician, or any sort of medical 
practitioner for his low back.  Mr. Brown concedes that he had back complaints over the 
years, however, he downplayed the significance of his symptoms prior to the work injury 
at hearing.  He testified that he had an acute incident of low back pain in 2011 which 
resolved quickly without any treatment.  (Tr., pp. 16, 35-36)  He testified he never had 
any restrictions or inabilities related to his low back prior to October 26, 2018.  (Tr., p. 
65) 
Mr. Brown, however, undoubtedly had symptoms in his low back prior to his work 
injury. Dustin Farber testified live and under oath at hearing.  He managed the day-to-
day operations at Naylor Seeds.  His testimony is generally credible and it is noted that 
he testified about Mr. Brown’s strong work ethic, general honesty and value to the 
company.  He testified that over the course of his employment with Naylor, Mr. Brown 
began walking with a hunch in his back.  (Tr., p. 77)  He testified Mr. Brown would 
occasionally grimace in pain when he was lifting and seek the help of other employees.  
(Tr., pp. 77-78)  Mr. Brown had, in fact, requested help with labor which was described 
in detail by Mr. Farber.  (Tr., pp. 78-80)  I find all of this testimony credible and I find 
that, in all likelihood, Mr. Brown’s low back was mildly symptomatic, at least on an 
intermittent or occasional basis.  Because Mr. Brown never sought medical treatment 
for this, however, there is no evidence in the record which could quantify this in any 
meaningful way. 

BROWN V. NAYLOR SEED CO 
Page 4 
On October 26, 2018, Mr. Brown was operating a tractor backing an auger 
toward a grain bin.  He had one foot on the brake and the other on the clutch.  His left 
hand was on the steering wheel.  His right hand was behind him, working hydraulic 
levers.  He was twisted around attempting to look back through the cab windows toward 
the grain bin.  His co-worker, Tyler was on top of a 30 foot grain bin, guiding the 
process.  Mr. Brown testified that while he was in this awkward position he felt his back 
“snap.”  (Tr., pp. 17-20; 38-39; Def. Ex. C, p. 10)  He described that the pain took his 
breath away.  He immediately reported the injury.   
Having reviewed the entire record, I find that there is really no doubt that this 
incident occurred.  Mr. Brown’s credible testimony has been consistent through his 
recorded statement, his sworn deposition testimony and his hearing testimony.  His 
account is properly documented as one would expect in the practitioner’s reports.  
There is really no question that he sustained an injury which arose out of and in the 
course of his employment. 
Mr. Brown completed the remainder of his shift on October 26, 2018, although he 
testified he did not perform any physical labor.  He returned to work on October 29, 
2018, and worked through November 1, 2018.  He testified he did not lift much and was 
“babying” his back since the injury.  (Tr., pp. 20-21)  He reported to the emergency room 
on November 3, 2018.  The following is documented: 
65-year-old male patient without major medical problems presents to 
the emergency room with complaints of back pain.  Patient states that he 
felt like his back went out 1 week ago when he was trying to back in Auger 
while he was on a tractor.  He has been ‘babying’ his back for the last 
week and using ibuprofen.  This morning he was trying to get into a truck 
and had to turn into kind of at the same time and felt a worsening pain.  It 
is a sharp pain mostly to the right as well as midline to the thoracic/lumbar 
back that radiates down the right butt cheek.  No numbness or tingling or 
weakness of the legs.  No loss of bowel or bladder function.  No saddle 
anesthesia. 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 2)  Mr. Brown testified about the truck incident in detail at hearing.  This 
incident did not occur at work.  He was simply getting in a pickup truck. 
Mr. Brown stayed off work after his emergency room visit.  He was evaluated at 
his family medical clinic on November 9, 2018.  Those notes document the original work 
injury, as well as the flare-up when he was getting into the pickup truck.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 
29)  He underwent an MRI on November 12, 2018.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 43)  He was able to 
return to work on light-duty on November 19, 2021. 
He was eventually referred to Jeannette Liu, M.D., at UnityPoint Neurosurgery in 
January 2019.  She recited a generally accurate, consistent history of the injury and 
reviewed his MRI.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 56)  She diagnosed spondylolisthesis of lumbar region 
and recommended physical therapy.  (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 56-57)  After attempting further 

BROWN V. NAYLOR SEED CO 
Page 5 
conservative treatment, fusion surgery was recommended and performed on June 11, 
2019.  The surgery described as L4-5 laminectomy and posterior lateral fusion was 
successful.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 67)  The parties have stipulated Mr. Brown was off work for 
this surgery and condition from June 11, 2019 to August 11, 2019.  He had a relatively 
normal post-surgical care and remained on restrictions.  Mr. Brown returned to work for 
the employer on light-duty thereafter, performing the less physical portions of his job.  
(Tr., pp. 24-26)  Mr. Brown continues to work for Naylor earning the same or better 
wages. In June 2020, he was provided restrictions of no lifting more than 50 pounds, 
however, it appears the remainder of his restrictions were lifted.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 97) 
Two physicians rendered expert opinions regarding Mr. Brown’s condition, 
including medical causation.  Chad Abernathey, M.D., provided an opinion on June 1, 
2020.  He reviewed records and interviewed Mr. Brown.  He diagnosed lumbosacral 
strain related to activity aggravating underlying L4-5 spondylolisthesis and stenosis.  He 
opined that Mr. Brown was not under any increased risk of injury based upon 
performing the work he was performing on October 26, 2018.  (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 105-106)  
He further opined that “the patient did not have any acute structural change following 
the 10/26/18 event.  His symptoms were subjective and did not recur until 11/3/2018.”  
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 106)  Dr. Abernathey’s opinions appear to have been highly influenced by 
the letter written by defense counsel, who had prepared a well-written, detailed five 
page letter outlining the factual history.  When provided a different history by claimant’s 
counsel in January 2021, Dr. Abernathey provided significantly different opinions.  “If 
Merlyn’s oral history as outlined above, is accepted as accurate, the surgery performed 
in December 2019, which was reasonable and appropriate, would be causally 
connected to the October 26, 2018 event at work.”  (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 32)  Dr. Abernathey 
amended this opinion again after conferring with defense counsel in February 2021.  
(Def. Ex. D, pp. 19-20)  After reviewing all of Dr. Abernathey’s reports, I find it is likely 
that his opinion is highly dependent upon what the actual facts are. 
Mark Taylor, M.D., also offered expert opinions in August 2020.  Dr. Taylor 
reviewed appropriate medical, as well as legal records and accurately summarized the 
same.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 10-13)  He also examined Mr. Brown.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 14-15)  He 
diagnosed spinal stenosis, facet hypertrophy, and spondylolisthesis and persistent 
lumbago.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 16)  He provided the following opinions on medical causation.  
“Given the history, and the currently available medical records, it is my opinion that Mr. 
Brown’s October 26, 2018 incident at work was a substantial contributing factor with 
regard to aggravating a pre-existing condition.  It could also be viewed as ‘lighting-up.’”  
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 16)  He went on to explain, in some detail, his basis for this opinion.  Dr. 
Taylor assigned a 22 percent whole person impairment related to this condition.  He 
also recommended additional restrictions to those recommended by the treating 
providers.  (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 17-18) 
At the time of hearing, Mr. Brown continues to work for Naylor with no loss of 
income.  His low back continues to be symptomatic.  He testified that he has to alternate 
sitting and standing, both at home and at work.  He testified he is unable to sleep in a 
bed and instead uses a recliner.  He has muscle spasms.  He no longer lifts heavy bags 

BROWN V. NAYLOR SEED CO 
Page 6 
at work and his climbing is limited.  He testified his physician advised him to consider 
other work.  (Tr., pp. 26-31) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first question submitted is whether the claimant sustained an injury which 
arose out of and in the course of his employment. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 
440 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 
1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985).  An 
occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically excluded from the definition 
of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4) (b); Iowa Code section 85A.8; Iowa 
Code section 85A.14. 
There is really no doubt that the incident that claimant described at hearing 
actually occurred.  On October 26, 2018, Mr. Brown was backing an auger up to a grain 
bin when he had a sudden onset of low back pain that took his breath away.  He was 
backing up in a tractor in an awkward twisting position when the pain came on.  In their 
argument, defendants did not truly argue that this incident did not occur.  “While Brown 
may have sustained a minor muscle injury when working for Naylor Seeds on October 
26, 2018, the incident was at most a temporary exacerbation of Brown’s 

BROWN V. NAYLOR SEED CO 
Page 7 
symptoms . . . .”  (Def. Brief, p. 15)  The defendants’ argument is geared more toward 
denying medical causation. 
Defendants did contend via the Hearing Report, that the injury is idiopathic and in 
their brief argue that the injury did not “arise out of” his employment.  Defendants cite 
Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996).  I find the defendants’ 
reliance on Miedema is misplaced.  The claimant in Miedema was using a toilet while 
Mr. Brown was twisted in an awkward position backing up a tractor to a grain bin for his 
employer. 
The real fighting question in this case is medical causation. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
The expert medical opinions in this case are conflicted.  Dr. Taylor has provided 
a well-reasoned opinion that claimant’s conditions (spinal stenosis, facet hypertrophy, 
and spondylolisthesis and persistent lumbago) were materially aggravated or “lit up” by 
the work injury.  Defendants’ expert, Dr. Abernathey provided different, conflicting 
opinions to the attorneys based upon which set of facts he was provided.  I find the 
opinions of Dr. Taylor to be more convincing.  Furthermore, I find the facts set forth by 
the claimant to be more in line with the record than those submitted by defendants. 
While there is no doubt that Mr. Brown had back symptoms prior to the work 
injury, it is equally clear that his symptoms did not cause him any meaningful or 
quantifiable disability prior to the work injury.  The fact that there is not a single medical 
record documenting any type of treatment for a low back condition before the October 

BROWN V. NAYLOR SEED CO 
Page 8 
26, 2018, is important.  While the evidence reflects and Mr. Brown even admits, that he 
did experience some low back symptoms prior to the work injury, a preponderance of 
evidence strongly supports the finding that the work accident materially aggravated or lit 
up the degenerative conditions in his low back, necessitating surgery and recovery. 
The defendants also argue that the incident where claimant was climbing into a 
pickup truck on or about November 3, 2018, was an intervening or superseding cause 
of disability.  I find this incident was not an intervening or superseding cause.  See Carl 
A. Nelson & Co. v. Sloan, 873 N.W.2d 552, 555 (Iowa Ct. App. 2015).  The greater 
weight of evidence supports a finding that the claimant was already significantly 
symptomatic with his condition when this minor, non-work injury occurred and further 
aggravated his condition. 
For the foregoing reasons, I find that Mr. Brown has proven that his injury is a 
cause of temporary and permanent disability.  The next question is the extent of 
disability. 
Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an injured 
worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has returned to 
work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 
312N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or 
intermittent.  Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
I find the claimant is entitled to healing period benefits commencing June 11, 
2019, through August 11, 2019. 
The parties have stipulated that the claimant’s disability is a scheduled disability 
under Iowa Code Section 85.34(2)(v) (2019).  While the claimant’s injury is to his whole 
body, the parties agree that he has not lost any income as a result of his injury and his 
damages are limited to the extent of the functional impairment rating at this time.  
Therefore, the only function of the agency in assessing the degree of disability to the 
claimant’s body as a whole, is to choose one of the impairment ratings in the record. 
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs 
“a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability 
and not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides 
to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
medical association, as adopted by the workers’ compensation 
commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency 
expertise shall not be utilized in determining loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or 
paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not loss of 

BROWN V. NAYLOR SEED CO 
Page 9 
earning capacity. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) (2019). Thus, the law, as written, is not concerned with 
an injured worker’s actual functional loss or disability as determined by the evidence, 
but rather the impairment rating as assigned by the adopted version of The AMA 
Guides.  The only function of the agency is to determine which impairment rating should 
be utilized. 
Having thoroughly reviewed all of the evidence in the record related to claimant’s 
extent of impairment under the AMA Guides, I find claimant has sustained a 22 percent 
impairment of the body as a whole as a result of his work-connected low back condition.  
This is based upon Dr. Taylor’s rating.  Therefore, I conclude, the claimant is entitled to 
110 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits commencing on December 12, 2019. 
To the extent defendants argue that claimant’s disability should be apportioned 
out, this argument is rejected.  There is no evidence in the record claimant had 
sustained any ascertainable impairment to his low back prior to the work injury. 
The next issue is medical expenses. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Claimant is entitled to an order of reimbursement only if he has paid treatment 
costs; otherwise, to an order directing the responsible defendants to make payments 
directly to the provider.  See, Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988).  Defendants 
should also pay any lawful late payment fees imposed by providers.  Laughlin v. IBP, 
Inc., File No. 1020226 (App., February 27, 1995). 
I find the claimant is entitled to the medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 2, including mileage.  Alternate medical care was also set forth as an issue in 
the Hearing Report, however, this issue was not briefed.  The claimant is entitled to 
ongoing medical treatment for his condition if necessary and requested. 
The next issue is whether claimant is entitled to an independent medical 
examination (IME) under Section 85.39 or other costs. 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 

BROWN V. NAYLOR SEED CO 
Page 10 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).   
Iowa Code section 86.40 states: 
Costs.  All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall 
be taxed in the discretion of the commissioner. 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand 
reporter or presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential 
depositions, (2) transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service 
of the original notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as 
provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of 
doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs 
do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 
622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of notice and 
subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or agency by the 
party utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining 
doctors’ or practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, 
doctors or practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called 
or by whom the report is requested. Witness fees shall be paid in 
accordance with Iowa Code section 622.74. Proof of payment of any cost 
shall be filed with the workers’ compensation commissioner before it is 
taxed. The party initially paying the expense shall be reimbursed by the 
party taxed with the cost. If the expense is unpaid, it shall be paid by the 
party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the 
deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation commissioner hearing the 
case unless otherwise required by the rules of civil procedure governing 
discovery.  This rule is intended to implement Iowa Code section 86.40. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.17 includes as a practitioner, “persons engaged 
in physical or vocational rehabilitation or evaluation for rehabilitation.”  A report or 
evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert constitutes a practitioner report under 
our administrative rules.  Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. 
November 23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. 
December 8, 2010)  The entire reasonable costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ reports 

BROWN V. NAYLOR SEED CO 
Page 11 
may be taxed as costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.  Caven v. John Deere Dubuque 
Works, File Nos. 5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009). 
I find that claimant is entitled to an IME under Section 85.39 in the amount of 
$3,175.50.  Claimant is entitled to costs in the amount of $487.90, as set forth in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 3. 
The final issue is whether claimant is entitled to a penalty for unreasonably 
denied benefits. 
Claimant also seeks an award of penalty benefits pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 86.13.  Iowa Code section 86.13(4) provides: 
a. If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs 
without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or 
insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits, the workers’ compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or chapter 85, 
85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, 
delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 
b. The workers’ compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
under this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following 
facts: 
(1) The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in 
payment, or termination in benefits. 
(2) The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or 
probable cause or excuse for the denial, delay in 
payment, or termination of benefits. 
c. In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or 
excuse under paragraph “b,” an excuse shall satisfy all of the 
following criteria: 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable 
investigation and evaluation by the employer or 
insurance carrier into whether benefits were owed 
to the employee. 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and 
evaluation were the actual basis upon which the 
employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously 
relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits. 

BROWN V. NAYLOR SEED CO 
Page 12 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously conveyed the basis for the 
denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits 
to the employee at the time of the denial, delay, or 
termination of benefits. 
The defendants denied this claim on March 15, 2019, alleging that an intervening 
cause was the real cause of claimant’s disability.  Defendants reviewed evidence at that 
time, including a recorded statement from the claimant.  (Def. Ex. C)  While I have 
rejected the defendants’ arguments on the facts, I find that the defendants did have a 
reasonable basis for denying the claim at that time.  Later defendants continued to 
investigate the claim and obtained medical evidence from Dr. Abernathey, which 
provided further reasonable basis for the denial.  The underlying facts herein were 
disputed.  The fact that I have found in favor of the claimant on these disputed issues 
does not mean the disputes were per se unreasonable.  I conclude the claimant is not 
entitled to a penalty on this record. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
All benefits shall be paid at the rate of four hundred eighty-nine and 57/100 
($489.57). 
Defendants shall pay healing period benefits to the claimant from June 11, 2019, 
through August 11, 2019. 
Defendants shall pay the claimant one hundred ten (110) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits commencing December 12, 2019. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall satisfy the amounts of medical expenses in Claimant’s Exhibit 2 
which are outstanding, have been paid by a provider/insurer or claimant’s behalf, or 
have been paid by claimant out-of-pocket.  Defendants shall reimburse claimant directly 
only for payments he made out-of-pocket in addition to the mileage in the amount of one 
thousand three hundred sixty-seven and 79/100 dollars ($1,367.79).  Defendants shall 
reimburse/pay any remaining amounts owed to a provider/insurer directly to the 
applicable provider/insurer. 
Defendants shall reimburse IME costs in the amount of three thousand one-
hundred and seventy-five and 50/100 dollars ($3,175.50). 
 
 

BROWN V. NAYLOR SEED CO 
Page 13 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants in the amount of four hundred eight-seven and 
90/100 dollars ($487.90). 
Signed and filed this _23rd _ day of November, 2021. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Gary Nelson (via WCES) 
James Russell (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal pe riod 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
