Case Number: 5050594
Case Title:  SULLIVAN, BRETT V. WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE
Doc Type:    Decision - Court of Appeals
Source:      Sullivan, Brett-5050594.Court of Appeals Decision.pdf
========================================================================

IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF IOWA 
 
No. 21-1559 
Filed August 31, 2022 
 
 
WEST CENTRAL COOPERATIVE and FARMLAND MUTUAL INSURANCE 
COMPANY, 
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants, 
 
vs. 
 
BRETT V. SULLIVAN, 
 
Defendant-Appellee. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Polk County, William P. Kelly, Judge. 
 
 
The employer and its insurance company appeal from the district court 
ruling affirming the decision of the workers’ compensation commissioner ordering 
the employer to authorize a medical procedure requested by the employee.  
AFFIRMED.  
 
 
Jeffrey W. Lanz of Huber, Book, Lanz & McConkey, P.L.L.C., West Des 
Moines, for appellants. 
 
Thomas M. Wertz and Mindi M. Vervaecke of Wertz Law Firm, P.C., Cedar 
Rapids, for appellee. 
 
 
Considered by Bower, C.J., Chicchelly, J., and Potterfield, S.J.* 
 
*Senior judge assigned by order pursuant to Iowa Code section 602.9206 
(2022). 

 
2
POTTERFIELD, Senior Judge. 
 
Brett Sullivan, who was injured in a workplace accident in 2011, sought 
authorization from his former employer1 for a trial of a spinal cord stimulator (SCS) 
to treat chronic back pain.2  The employer denied liability, arguing Sullivan’s 
chronic back pain was not causally related to the 2011 accident.  Alternatively, the 
employer maintained the SCS trial was not a reasonable and necessary treatment 
for the pain and claimed Sullivan should instead start a general flexibility exercise 
program and a consistent walking program, as at least one doctor recommended.     
 
The workers’ compensation commissioner concluded Sullivan’s chronic 
back pain was causally related to the 2011 accident and that the SCS trial was a 
reasonable and necessary treatment for the condition.  On rehearing, the 
commissioner also concluded that the employer did not actually authorize any 
alternate treatment, which was unreasonable.  The employer was ordered to 
authorize the SCS trial.   
 
On judicial review, the district court concluded substantial evidence 
supported the conclusions that Sullivan’s chronic back pain is causally related to 
the work injury and that Sullivan proved the treatment offered by the employer was 
unreasonable.  The court also concluded that, while the commissioner applied the 
wrong test in the initial ruling, the commissioner corrected that mistake by applying 
 
1 At the time of his injury, Sullivan was employed by West Central Cooperative.  
The employer’s insurance company is Farmland Mutual Insurance Company.  For 
ease, we refer to West Central Cooperative and Farmland Mutual Insurance 
Company collectively as “the employer” throughout this opinion.  
2 Sullivan also sought authorization for surgery on his left knee.  The workers’ 
compensation commissioner ruled in Sullivan’s favor; the employer does not 
contest that ruling on appeal.  

 
3
the correct test in the ruling on the motion for rehearing—to the same result.  So, 
the court affirmed the order to authorize the SCS trial.   
 
The employer appeals.  
I. Background Facts and Proceedings.  
 
Sullivan experienced a workplace injury in October 2011 when the wheel 
loader he was driving was struck by a train.  His initial assessment showed injuries 
including L3 and L4 fractures of the transverse processes, wedge fractures of T8 
and T9 vertebral bodies, and a fracture of the T8 spinous process—among others.3  
Sullivan’s injuries required a lengthy hospital stay and a number of surgeries.  The 
employer admitted the injury and paid Sullivan lost time and permanent partial 
disability benefits.4   
 
Sullivan returned to work at West Central Cooperative, where he remained 
employed for a couple of years—until the parties entered into a mutual separation 
agreement in 2013.  Even after, Sullivan continued to need and receive medical 
treatment for his injuries stemming from the 2011 accident.   
 
As time progressed, Sullivan continued to report back pain to his treating 
doctors.  One of them, Dr. Devon Goetz, referred Sullivan to Dr. Christian Ledet 
for pain management.  Dr. Ledet evaluated Sullivan on June 22, 2018, ordering an 
EMG and pelvic and lumbar spine MRIs.  Dr. Ledet initially recommended 
medication-based treatments.  In December 2018, when Sullivan reported he had 
 
3 Sullivan also sustained injuries to his ribs, right hip, right shoulder, and head.  
4 Six issues arising from the workplace injury were part of a contested case; the 
commissioner’s decision was challenged, and a panel of this court issued a ruling 
affirming on the issues raised on appeal.  See Sullivan v. W. Cent. Coop., No. 18-
1811, 2019 WL 3946004, at *3–4 (Iowa Ct. App. Aug. 21, 2019).    

 
4
not experienced significant improvement from the medication, Dr. Ledet suggested 
Sullivan proceed with the SCS trial.  This required Sullivan to first complete a 
biopsychological evaluation and a thoracic spine MRI, which were done in 
February 2019.  Up to this point, the employer authorized and paid for all of 
Dr. Ledet’s treatment recommendations.  The employer then sent Sullivan to 
Dr. Joseph Chen for an independent medical examination (IME).    
 
Dr. Chen opined the physiological injuries sustained by Sullivan to his back 
“have healed in the intervening 7 years.”  Dr. Chen listed Sullivan’s “current 
diagnosis of his back pain condition is chronic mechanical and myofascial thoracic 
low back pain.”  He continued: 
The development of chronic pain is multifactorial and best 
characterized within a biopsychosocial model of pain that includes 
not only physical trauma, but also personal psychological and social 
factors that contribute to an individual’s experience of pain. . . .   
Mr. Sullivan’s complaints of severe pain that greatly interferes 
with his life and subsequently leading to a high ODI score to be a 
result of Fear Avoidance Beliefs and Behaviors along with cognitive 
distortions as noted on his Pain Catastrophizing Scale responses.  
Mr. Sullivan also reports severe anxiety and depression that further 
contributes to his ongoing pain leading to further fear avoidance and 
pain catastrophization.    
 
Dr. Chen opined that the SCS trial was not causally related to Sullivan’s worked-
related back injury, noting that Sullivan’s “recovery took a downward course after 
he separated from his employer nearly 2 years after his injury”—suggesting the 
chronic pain was linked to his unemployment and the possible loss of his self-
identity, perceived self-worth, or a negative change in financial stability.  
Additionally, Dr. Chen denied that the SCS was reasonable or necessary to treat 
Sullivan’s chronic back pain because it would “not address [his] fear avoidance 
beliefs and behaviors nor his pain catastrophization, rumination, anxiety, or 

 
5
depression.”  Rather than the SCS trial for treatment of his chronic back pain, 
Dr. Chen suggested that Sullivan “may eventually be suited to pursue an intensive 
cognitive behavior therapy [program] with a pain psychologist.”  He questioned 
whether the treatment would be effective at the time of his report because he was 
“not convinced” Sullivan was “receptive towards understanding chronic pain in a 
different manner,” namely that his “chronic pain [is] no longer actual tissue damage 
which should have healed in the interim 7+ years post trauma but of more 
neurological hypersensitivity that has evolved and intensified after failed or 
unsuccessful treatments of isolated body parts.”  He recommended Sullivan start 
a general flexibility exercise program and a consistent walking program.   
 
In March 2019, the employer denied Sullivan’s request for the SCS trial, 
relying on Dr. Chen’s opinion to state “that the need for the [SCS] is not causally 
related to the 10/02/2011 work injury.”  Sullivan filed an application for alternate 
medical care, seeking authorization for the SCS trial from the commissioner.  See 
Iowa Code § 85.27 (2019).  The employer responded, disputing liability and 
attaching the report from Dr. Chen.  
 
The agency dismissed Sullivan’s application for alternate medical care due 
to the employer’s denial that “the condition for which treatment is sought is causally 
connected to the work injury” and because “[t]he summary provisions of Iowa Code 
section 85.27 as more particularly described in [Iowa Administrative Code rule 876-
4.48] are not designed to adjudicate disputed compensability of a claim.”    
 
Sullivan moved for rehearing, stating that “[m]edical benefits for [Sullivan’s] 
low back were established by the adjudication in [the] arbitration decision filed 
December 21, 2015,” and arguing the employer’s “denial of liability was 

 
6
inappropriate given the judicial adjudication of the injury.”  He noted it was 
Dr. Ledet—whom the employer authorized as a treating physician—who 
recommended the SCS trial.  The employer resisted,5 and the agency denied the 
motion. 
 
5 In paragraph (3) of his motion for rehearing, Sullivan claimed:  
 
Medical benefits for Claimant’s low back were established by 
adjudication in Arbitration Decision filed December 21, 2015, in File 
No. 5050594.  That decision recognized the medical opinions of 
Dr. [Charles] Mooney wherein he established an 8% impairment to 
the whole person applicable to the DRE Lumbar Category II due to 
L3-L4 fractures of the transverse processes, as well as the opinions 
of Dr. Kuhnlein. 
In making this claim, Sullivan relies on the 2015 arbitration decision, which, in its 
“findings of fact and conclusions of law” section, quoted Dr. Mooney.  The 
arbitration decision states: 
On September 13, 2013, defendants sent claimant to Charles 
Mooney, M.D., MPH, for an [IME].  Dr. Mooney provided the following 
impairment ratings: 
IMPAIRMENT RATINGS: 
It is my opinion based on the 5th edition AMA Guide that Mr. 
Sullivan demonstrates the following impairments as it relates to the 
injuries discussed above: 
THORACIC AND LUMBAR SPINE: 
It is my opinion based on table 15-3, that Mr. Sullivan has an 
8% impairment of the whole person applicable to DRE lumbar 
category 2, due to L3-L4 fractures of the transverse processes, 
Further, it is my opinion based on table 15-4, that he 
demonstrates an 8% impairment rating of the whole person based 
on DRE thoracic category 2, due to wedge fracture T9 vertebral body 
and fracture of the T8 spinous process 
The decision went on to quote other doctors who offered different opinions.  And, 
contrary to Sullivan’s assertion, the commissioner did not adopt Dr. Mooney’s 
ratings or opinions.  Still, in its resistance to Sullivan’s motion for rehearing, the 
employer: 
admit[ted] paragraph 3 to the extent that the Arbitration Decision 
found claimant’s back condition related, found claimant suffered an 
8% BAW impairment rating for the lumbar fractures, and awarded 
future medical benefits for claimant’s back condition.   However, the 
Arbitration Decision does not preclude defendants from addressing 
causation of claimant’s future back condition and need for ongoing 
treatment at a date 3+ years after the Arbitration Decision. 

 
7
 
Sullivan initiated the contested case at issue in this appeal, seeking 
approval of the requested medical benefit.  The arbitration hearing took place in 
May 2020, at which Sullivan testified he “never” had “any low back problem” until 
the October 2011 accident and that he did not have any “new injuries” to his low 
back since the work injury.  In contrast, he testified the severity and frequency of 
the pain had worsened; he described it as “stabbing,” “burning,” and “the absolute 
worst.”  On cross-examination, Sullivan agreed that his back pain had gotten worse 
in 2018 and 2019 and that a recent nerve test did not show any radiculopathy from 
his back.  The employer resisted, asserting Sullivan’s current back condition and 
the need for the SCS trial were not caused by the work injury and the SCS trial 
was not reasonable and necessary treatment for Sullivan’s chronic pain.  
 
In the written arbitration decision, the deputy commissioner denied the 
request for alternate medical care, concluding the SCS trial was not a reasonable 
and necessary treatment and ruling, “Dr. Chen has outlined a reasonable course 
of treatment that could serve as an alternative to a trial of a [SCS].”   
 
Sullivan moved for rehearing, asking the deputy to address the question of 
whether the 2011 work injury caused his chronic back pain.  The employer 
resisted, and the deputy denied the motion, concluding the cause of the back pain 
did not need to be addressed because Sullivan failed to prove the SCS trial he was 
requesting was a necessary treatment for the back pain.   

 
8
 
Sullivan appealed the decision.  In a May 2021 ruling, the commissioner6 
first addressed the causation question that the deputy “leapfrogged,” reversing the 
deputy and finding “while smoking and diabetes may contribute to [Sullivan’s] back 
pain, it is undisputed that [his] back pain did not begin until after that incident and 
was chronic thereafter. . . .  [Sullivan’s] chronic pain symptoms are causally related 
to [his] 2011 work injury.”  Additionally, the commissioner concluded the SCS trial 
was intended to treat Sullivan’s “work-related chronic pain symptoms” and so was 
“causally related to [the] work injury.”  The commissioner then turned to the 
question of whether the SCS trial was reasonable and necessary to treat Sullivan’s 
chronic pain.  Given Dr. Ledet’s “specific expertise . . . when it comes to treatment 
of chronic pain and implementation of neuromodulation devices,” the 
commissioner found his opinion that the SCS trial is appropriate treatment “to be 
most persuasive.”  Because Sullivan met his burden to establish causation and 
prove that the requested treatment was reasonable and necessary, the 
commissioner ordered the employer to “promptly authorize and pay for the [SCS] 
recommended by Dr. Ledet.”   
 
The 
employer 
requested 
rehearing, 
challenging 
the 
credibility 
determinations made by the commissioner as to the various experts and the 
causation determination.  Additionally, the employer claimed the commissioner 
used the wrong standard when considering whether the SCS trial should be 
authorized, arguing that because Sullivan sought alternate medical care, he had 
 
6 The commissioner delegated authority to a different deputy commissioner to 
issue the final agency decision on appeal.  We ascribe all actions taken by the 
deputy commissioner acting on behalf of the commissioner to the commissioner. 

 
9
the burden of proving the care authorized by the employer was unreasonable.  
Sullivan resisted; he argued the employer was attempting to “reframe the issue as 
an alternative care question,” which was inaccurate because the employer denied 
liability for the chronic back pain and, as a result, Sullivan’s application for alternate 
medical care was dismissed.  He maintained that, because the employer denied 
the 2011 injury was the cause of his chronic back pain, it “made no offer of 
alternative care,” which precluded him from having to establish any such 
alternative care was unreasonable.  According to Sullivan: 
There is no evidence, and at no time, did [the employer] offer any 
alternative to the [SCS] trial.  To so argue flies in the face of their 
denial of liability/causation.  [The employer’s] position essentially is 
we have no liability for the current back pain and we are offering 
treatment.  [They] are attempting to have the best of both worlds. 
 
 
The commissioner denied the petition for rehearing.  First, the 
commissioner concluded it did not use the wrong standard; this “case  . . . [was] 
not the traditional alternate medical care setting” because the employer denied 
liability for Sullivan’s chronic back pain.  In the alternative, the commissioner 
determined that even if the proper question was whether the employer authorized 
a reasonable alternative care—for which the employer relied on Dr. Chen’s 
recommendations regarding stretching and walking—“the employer offered no 
evidence that they were actually offering [Sullivan] the treatment recommended by 
Dr. Chen. . . .  By denying liability and not offering any care, including that 
recommended by Dr. Chen, [the] defendants abandoned their obligation to provide 
care.”   
 
The employer sought judicial review.   

 
10 
 
The district court determined substantial evidence supported the 
commissioner’s conclusion that Sullivan’s chronic back pain is causally connected 
to his 2011 work injury.  But the court ruled the commissioner was wrong to 
conclude the employer forfeited its right to direct medical care when it denied 
Sullivan’s chronic back pain was caused by the 2011 accident.  Relying on case 
law,7 the court drew a distinction between denying an injury completely—which it 
found the employer had not done because it admitted Sullivan suffered a back 
injury in the original accident and acknowledged future medical benefits were 
awarded for his back condition—and denying the extent of the current injury was 
causally related to the workplace injury.  The court reasoned that because the 
employer was not liable for Sullivan’s chronic back pain until the commissioner 
ruled the back pain was causally related to the workplace injury, and because 
Sullivan was seeking authorization for a future medical procedure—not 
reimbursement for care he obtained during the time period compensability was at 
question—Sullivan had to “establish the claim for alternative medical care by 
proving the alternate medical care is reasonable and necessary, or that the 
medical care provided by the employer is unreasonable.”  The court concluded the 
commissioner “correctly applie[d] the test and burden of proof” in the ruling on the 
 
7 See Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 201 (Iowa 
2010) (“[W]e reject the notion that an employer loses the right to choose medical 
care under section 85.27 when the employer acknowledges the compensability of 
a work-related injury and furnishes care but later disputes the nature and extent of 
the disability.  The employer’s right to control medical care attaches under the 
statute when the employer acknowledges compensability following notice and 
furnishes care to the employee, and it remains with the employer under the statute 
until the employer denies the injury is work-related, withdraws authorization of the 
care, or until the commissioner orders alternative care.”).  

 
11 
motion for rehearing when the court considered whether any treatment authorized 
by the employer was unreasonable.  The court continued: 
Under [Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 124 (Iowa 
1995)], the test is not what is the most appropriate treatment plan or 
the more desirable treatment plan, but whether the treatment plan 
offered by [the employer is] unreasonable.  [The commissioner] 
found prompt care was not provided by [the employer] at the 
inception of the injury had compensability been acknowledged.  Due 
to care not being offered promptly, the Agency has the authority to 
order alternate care, including care from a doctor chosen by the 
claimant.  [The employer] argue[s] they did offer Dr. Chen’s 
recommendations at the time of the hearing.  They contend they 
introduced evidence of reasonable care as recommended by four 
physicians.  The Court acknowledges there are references in the 
record to Dr. Chen’s recommendation of a general flexibility program 
being a reasonable treatment plan for Sullivan’s chronic back pain.  
However, our task is not to determine whether there is evidence 
supporting a different finding, but rather, viewing the record as a 
whole, supports the findings actually made.  As a result, [the 
commissioner’s] findings are supported by substantial evidence   
 
(Citations omitted).  The district court affirmed the commissioner’s ruling ordering 
the employer to authorize and pay for the SCS trial.  The employer appeals. 
II. Standard of Review.  
 
“We review a district court decision reviewing an agency action to determine 
if we would reach the same result as the district court in our application of the Iowa 
Administrative Procedure Act.”  Staff Mgmt. v. Jimenez, 839 N.W.2d 640, 653 
(Iowa 2013).  Like the district court, we apply the standards of judicial review set 
forth in Iowa Code chapter 17A—the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act.  See Iowa 
Code § 17A.19(10); see also Taylor v. Iowa Dep’t of Human Servs., 870 N.W.2d 
262, 266 (Iowa 2015).  “The applicable standard of review depends upon the error 
asserted by the petitioner.”  Colwell v. Iowa Dep’t of Human Servs., 923 N.W.2d 
225, 231 (Iowa 2019).   

 
12 
III. Discussion. 
 
Here on appeal, the employer argues there is not substantial evidence to 
support the commissioner’s ruling that (1) Sullivan’s chronic back pain is causally 
related to his 2011 work injury or (2) that the SCS trial is reasonable and necessary 
treatment for the back pain.  The employer also challenges whether the 
commissioner’s determination that the treatment being provided by the employer 
was unreasonable constitutes an abuse of discretion or an error at law. 
 
A. Whether substantial evidence supports the conclusion Sullivan’s 
chronic back pain is causally related to his 2011 workplace injury. 
 
“Medical causation presents a question of fact that is vested in the discretion 
of the workers’ compensation commission.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. 
Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844 (Iowa 2011).  “We will therefore only disturb the 
commissioner’s finding of medical causation if it is not supported by substantial 
evidence.”  Id. (citing Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f)).  “‘Substantial evidence’ means 
the quantity and quality of evidence that would be deemed sufficient by a neutral, 
detached, and reasonable person, to establish the fact at issue when the 
consequences resulting from the establishment of the fact are understood to be 
serious and of great importance.”  Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f)(1).  In conducting 
our review, we “determine whether substantial evidence, viewing the record as a 
whole, supports the findings actually made.”  Pease, 807 N.W.2d at 845.  In other 
words, “[e]vidence is not insubstantial merely because different conclusions may 
be drawn from” it, and “evidence may be substantial even though we may have 
drawn a different conclusion” than the commissioner.  Id.   

 
13 
 
Here on appeal, the employer challenges the commissioner’s conclusion 
that Sullivan’s chronic back pain is causally connected to the 2011 workplace 
accident.  The employer argues the commissioner should have given more weight 
to the opinions of Dr. William Boulden, Dr. Eden Wheeler, and Dr. Chen—who 
each opined that Sullivan’s current back condition is not related to the trauma from 
the 2011 accident.  The employer argues these experts’ opinions are more credible 
than those of Dr. Ledet and Dr. John Kuhnlein—who each opined there was a 
causal connection—and offers a variety of reasons it believes this to be true.   
 
“Medical causation ‘is essentially within the domain of expert testimony.”’  
Pease, 807 N.W.2d at 845 (citation omitted).  And it is the commissioner, as the 
trier of fact, who determines “whether to accept or reject an expert opinion.”  Id.; 
see also Deaver v. Armstrong Rubber Co., 170 N.W.2d 455, 464 (Iowa 1969) 
(“Acceptance or rejection of the expert’s testimony is within the ‘peculiar province’ 
of the . . . commissioner.”).  Nothing in our standard of review gives us the authority 
to make credibility findings anew.  See Taylor, 870 N.W.2d at 266 (noting it is the 
agency’s duty to determine the credibility of witnesses and we “must give 
appropriate deference to the agency’s findings”).  Because the commissioner 
found the opinions of Dr. Ledet and Dr. Kuhnlein to be more credible, and those 
opinions support the conclusion that Sullivan’s chronic back pain is causally related 
to his workplace injury, substantial evidence supports the commissioner’s 
causation determination.  

 
14 
 
B. Whether substantial evidence supports the conclusion the SCS trial 
is reasonable and necessary treatment for Sullivan’s chronic back pain. 
 
Next, the employers argue that even if Sullivan’s chronic back pain is 
causally related to the workplace injury, there is not substantial evidence to support 
the commissioner’s determination that the SCS trial is reasonable and necessary 
treatment for the back pain.8  See Iowa Code § 85.27(1)(a).  But as it was in the 
prior argument, the employer’s challenge boils down to reasons we should credit 
the opinions of some experts over those the commissioner found to be credible 
and more persuasive—Drs. Kuhnlein and Ledet.  As we stated before, “the weight 
to be given conflicting expert opinions is within the provision of the commissioner.”  
Pease, 807 N.W.2d at 852.  And because our “review is not de novo, [we] must 
not reassess the weight to be accorded various items of evidence.”  Burns v. Bd. 
of Nursing, 495 N.W.2d 698, 699 (Iowa 1993).   
 
Therefore, substantial evidence supports the commissioner’s determination 
that the SCS trial is a reasonable and necessary treatment for Sullivan’s chronic 
back pain.   
 
8 The employer has a duty to “furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, 
osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, 
and hospital services and supplies” for all compensable injuries and a duty to 
“furnish reasonable and necessary crutches, artificial members, and appliances.”  
See Iowa Code § 85.27(1)(a) (emphasis added).  Presumably both parties are in 
agreement that the device involved in an SCS trial is an “appliance” within the 
meaning of section 85.27.  See Iowa Admin. Code r. 876-8.5 (“Appliances are 
defined as hearing aids, corrective lenses, orthodontic devices, dentures, 
orthopedic braces, or any other artificial device used to provide function or for 
therapeutic purposes.”).   

 
15 
 
C. Whether the commissioner’s determination that the treatment being 
provided by the employer was unreasonable constitutes an abuse of 
discretion or an error at law.  
 
In its decision, the commissioner determined the SCS trial was reasonable 
and necessary treatment for Sullivan’s chronic back pain and ordered the employer 
to authorize and pay for it.  The employer moved for rehearing; it argued the 
commissioner had not applied the correct standard, asserting, “By seeking 
alternate medical care in challenging the employer’s choice of treatment, the 
claimant has the burden of proving that the care authorized by the employer is 
unreasonable.”  See Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123 (“The ultimate question is whether 
. . . the employer met its obligation under Iowa Code section 85.27 . . . .  By 
challenging the employer’s choice of treating—seeking alternate care—[the 
claimant] has assumed the burden of proving that the authorized care is 
unreasonable.”).  The commissioner denied the motion for rehearing; it recognized 
this was “not the traditional alternate medical care setting” as presented in Long 
but also ruled in the alternative that if Long applied, the employer’s denial of liability 
and failure to offer any care was unreasonable.  The district court affirmed this 
ruling on judicial review.  
 
As it did in its motion for rehearing to the commissioner, the employer 
advocates that we apply the standards of an alternate medical care proceeding to 
this case—i.e., determining whether the treatment actually authorized by the 
employer was unreasonable before ordering the treatment requested by Sullivan—
and that we apply those standards to the employer’s actions as of March 2021—
when compensability had already been determined by the commissioner and the 

 
16 
employer suggested Sullivan should utilize the walking and stretching regimen 
instead of the SCS trial.  The employer argues that because it had no obligation to 
provide reasonable treatment until compensability was decided, it would be wrong 
to hold its earlier denial of treatment against it. 
 
In an alternate medical care setting, the employee has the burden to prove 
the care actually being offered by the employer is unreasonable.  See Pirelli-
Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 436 (Iowa 1997).  The 
employer’s right to direct care—and the presumption that the care is reasonable—
stems from the employer’s duty to provide reasonable care.  Bells Bros., 779 
N.W.2d at 204 (“The right to control medical care emanates entirely from the duty 
to furnish medical care for injuries compensable under the workers’ compensation 
laws.”).  But once the employer denies liability, the employer no longer has the 
right to direct care and a proceeding for alternate medical care is no longer proper.  
See R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 197 n.2 (Iowa 2003) (“We 
emphasize that the commissioner’s ability to decide the merits of a section 
85.27(4) alternate medical care claim is limited to situations where the 
compensability of an injury is conceded, but the reasonableness of a particular 
course of treatment for the compensable injury is disputed.”); see also Bells Bros., 
779 N.W.2d at 207 (“The employer’s right to control medical care attaches under 
the statute when the employer acknowledges compensability . . . and it remains 
with the employer under the statute until the employer denies the injury is work-
related . . . .”).   
 
In demanding that the Long standard applies to this case, the employer is 
attempting to—as Sullivan charged in his resistance to the employer’s motion for 

 
17 
rehearing—“have the best of both worlds.”  The employer denied liability for 
Sullivan’s chronic back pain.9  It filed an answer to Sullivan’s application for 
alternate medical care, checking the box on the form to show it disputed liability of 
the claim.  Attached to its answer was the report of Dr. Chen, which opined the 
physiological injuries sustained by Sullivan to his back “have healed in the 
intervening 7 years” and suggesting other causes for the condition.  And there 
could be no misunderstanding about what it was doing because once the agency 
dismissed Sullivan’s application, he sought rehearing and argued the denial of 
liability was inappropriate.  The employer resisted, explicitly stating it “denied 
[Sullivan’s] current back complaints and the need for the [SCS] trial are causally 
related to the work injury.”  In response to Sullivan’s claim that the employer could 
 
9 The employer attempts to recharacterize its denial of liability as challenging just 
the “nature and extent” of Sullivan’s disability.  In Bell Brothers, an employee 
suffered a foot injury while at work and, over the course of years, continued to 
experience pain.  779 N.W.2d at 196.   The doctor authorized by the employer 
diagnosed the employee with tendinitis and recommended physical therapy; the 
employee’s doctor—who was not authorized to treat the employee—made a 
different diagnosis and recommended surgery.  Id. at 197.  Without receiving 
approval from the employer or seeking an order from the commission for alternate 
medical care, the employee underwent surgery with his unauthorized doctor.  Id. 
at 198.  When the employee sought reimbursement after the fact, the commission 
found he was entitled to recover the medical expenses because the employer 
disputed liability.  Id. at 198–99.  Our supreme court reversed, concluding the 
employer had acknowledged compensability and provided the employee care; the 
right to control medical care attached at that point and it remained with the 
employer because it had never “denie[d] the injury is work-related, withdraw[n] 
authorization of the care, or [had] the commissioner order[] alternative care.”  Id. 
at 207.   
 
In Bell Brothers, the employer disagreed with the nature and extent of the 
employer’s injury as diagnosed by the employee’s chosen doctor, but the employer 
never denied it was liable for the employee’s foot injury.  In contrast, in this case, 
the employer not only disagreed with the extent and nature of Sullivan’s injury—
as Drs. Ledet and Kuhnlein diagnosed it—but also repeatedly, in writing denied 
liability for the injury once Sullivan sought medical care.   

 
18 
not disregard the treatment recommendations of an authorized treating 
physician—Dr. Ledet—the employer responded that it “had the right to question 
an authorized treating physician’s recommendations by having an IME and then 
deauthorize the authorized treating physician based upon the opinions of the IME 
physician.”   
 
Because of the employer’s denial of liability, Sullivan had to file a contested 
case petition—moving the issue outside the fast-tracked alternate-medical-care 
proceedings.  See Iowa Code § 85.27(4) (requiring the commissioner to issue a 
decision on a request for alternate medical care “within ten working days of receipt 
of an application for alternate care made pursuant to a telephone hearing or within 
fourteen working days of receipt of an application for alternate care made pursuant 
to an in-person hearing”); see also R.R. Donnelly, 670 N.W.2d at 195 (“The 
procedure [outlined in section 85.27(4)] permits disputes over the medical care for 
compensable injuries to be quickly resolved . . . .”).  And it took almost two years 
after he filed his application for alternate medical care before the commissioner 
issues its appeal decision, which concluded the employer was liable for Sullivan’s 
chronic back pain.   
 
The employer does not get the deference it is afforded in an alternate-
medical-care proceeding after it denied liability and caused that proceeding to be 
dismissed; this case was not decided in an alternate medical care proceeding.  See 
R.R. Donnelly, 670 N.W.2d at 195 (Iowa 2003) (recognizing that section 85.27(4) 
both obligates the employer to furnish reasonable services and supplies to treat 
an injured employee and gives the employee the right to choose the care).  And 
once the commissioner determined Sullivan’s chronic back pain was 

 
19 
compensable, it could order the employer to authorize the care sought by 
Sullivan—without forcing Sullivan to restart the alternate-medical-care proceeding 
over again with a new application upon which the employer could not dispute 
liability or giving the employer the benefit of allowing it to offer up what it would 
now authorize as treatment and considering whether that treatment was 
unreasonable.  See Bell Bros., 779 N.W.2d at 204 (“If the employee establishes 
the compensability of the injury at a contested case hearing, then the statutory duty 
of the employer to furnish medical care for compensable injuries emerges to 
support an award of reasonable medical care the employer should have furnished 
from the inception of the injury had compensability been acknowledged.”); cf. R.R. 
Donnelly, 670 N.W.2d at 197 (noting that when a compensability issue arises in an 
alternate-medical-care proceeding, “the commissioner cannot order that the 
alternate care sought by the employee be furnished by the employer” until there is 
“a determination of the compensability of the injury in a contested case proceeding 
or some other proceeding”).   
 
Insofar as the commissioner—and the district court—applied Long to this 
case, it was in error.  Because the employer denied liability for Sullivan’s chronic 
back pain, the proper question was not whether the employer was meeting its 
obligation to provide reasonable treatment—and it couldn’t be; the employer was 
not offering any.  See Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123 (“The ultimate question is whether 
. . . the employer met its obligation under Iowa Code section 85.27 . . . .  By 
challenging the employer’s choice of treating—seeking alternate care—[the 
claimant] has assumed the burden of proving that the authorized care is 
unreasonable.”).  However, we agree with the district court and the commissioner 

 
20 
that Sullivan met his burden to establish his chronic back pain is causally related 
to his 2011 injury and the SCS trial is reasonable and necessary to treat the 
condition.  We affirm.  
 
AFFIRMED.  
 
