Case Number: 20009913.01
Case Title:  FLACK, BRIANA V. CHRISTENSEN FARMS & FEEDLOTS, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Flack Briana-20009913.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
BRIANA FLACK, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
      
FILE NOS.:  20009913.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
 
210000111.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
      
 
 
  :                          
CHRISTENSEN FARMS & 
  : 
            ARBITRATION DECISION  
FEEDLOTS, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                               
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                                 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ACE AMERICAN INSURANCE CO.    
  : 
HEAD NOTES: 1402.40, 1402.60, 1803,  
 
 
  : 
      2907 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Briana Flack, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers' 
compensation benefits from defendants Christensen Farms & Feedlots, Inc., employer, 
and Ace American Insurance Co., insurer.  The hearing occurred before the 
undersigned on August 5, 2024, via Zoom. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  In the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of those 
stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision, 
and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties' stipulations will be raised or 
discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 11; Claimant's Exhibits 
1 through 7; and Defendants' Exhibits A through G. Claimant testified on her own 
behalf.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing.  The 
case was considered fully submitted upon receipt of the parties' briefs on September 27, 
2024. 
ISSUES 
1. Whether the stipulated injury caused permanent disability; 
2. The extent of claimant's entitlement to permanent disability benefits; 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of medical expenses;  
4. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.27; and 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Apr-21  11:43:26     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

FLACK V. CHRISTENSEN FARMS & FEEDLOTS, INC. 
Page 2 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The instant case involves stipulated back injuries occurring on July 28, 2020, and 
December 15, 2020.  The claimant at the center of this case is Briana Flack, a 23-year-
old individual living in Stanhope, Iowa.  Ms. Flack began working for the defendant 
employer on April 27, 2020. (Hearing Transcript, p. 40)  Her job duties entailed power-
washing hog trailers.  The position required the ability to lift up to 100 pounds. (See 
Joint Exhibit 6, p. 101) 
Ms. Flack’s pre-existing medical history is relevant for neck and back pain dating 
back to approximately 2015.  Her complaints of neck and back pain continued 
intermittently up until the July 28, 2020, date of injury.  Notably, while complaints of low 
back and neck pain typically decreased with time, the thoracic spine pain did not. 
Ms. Flack presented to Ackley Chiropractic Clinic on August 3, 2018, reporting 
constant back pain since trap shooting a few months prior. (JE1, p. 2)  It is noted that 
Ms. Flack had been suffering with a similar back pain for three years. (Id.)  Ms. Flack 
rated her pain 9 out of 10 and provided that the pain greatly affected her daily activities. 
(JE1, p. 1)  Of note, Ms. Flack’s intake form provides that she had been in a total of 
three “mild” car and ATV accidents. (JE1, p. 2) 
Ms. Flack returned to Ackley Chiropractic Clinic on August 17, 2018, relaying that 
her back felt the best it had in years following her most recent adjustment. (Id.)  She 
reportedly experienced no pain for one week; however, her pain had slowly started to 
come back by the August 17, 2018, appointment. (Id.)  Kurt Sperfslage, D.C. 
recommended chiropractic treatment as needed. (Id.) 
In January 2019, Ms. Flack was involved in a rollover motor vehicle accident. 
(See JE2, p. 8)  For the next several months, Ms. Flack sought chiropractic treatment 
for frequent low, middle, and upper back discomfort.  
On March 15, 2019, Ms. Flack presented to Shane Krukow, D.C., at Iowa Falls 
Chiropractic Clinic. (JE2, p. 8)  She reported that she rolled her car two months prior 
and had been experiencing back pain ever since. (Id.)  With respect to her neck, Ms. 
Flack reported pain and discomfort over the bilateral upper neck, bilateral lower neck, 
and bilateral upper traps. (Id.)  She rated her pain 7 out of a possible 10 and considered 
her discomfort severe in nature. (Id.)  For the thoracic spine, Ms. Flack reported pain 
and discomfort over the shoulder blades and mid back. (Id.)  According to Ms. Flack, the 
mid back pain radiated towards the right shoulder blade. (Id.)  She rated her pain 8 out 
of 10. (Id.)  Lastly, she complained of pain and discomfort over the lower back.  She 
rated the pain 8 out of 10. (Id.) 
Four days later, Ms. Flack returned to Iowa Falls Chiropractic Clinic and reported 
similar neck and low back complaints; however, she reported that her thoracic spine 
pain was “much worse than before.” (JE2, p. 11)  Ms. Flack reported an increase in 
thoracic spine pain after installing insulation all morning on March 19, 2019. (Id.)  She 
rated her pain 10 out of 10 and described difficulties with bending over, turning over, 
and breathing. (Id.) 

FLACK V. CHRISTENSEN FARMS & FEEDLOTS, INC. 
Page 3 
By March 22, 2019, Ms. Flack’s low back pain had considerably improved. (JE2, 
p. 14)  Unfortunately, she was still reporting 7 out of 10 neck pain and 10 out of 10 
thoracic spine pain. (Id.)  Ms. Flack returned to Dr. Krukow on March 26, 2019, and 
reported an increase in neck pain. (JE2, p. 17)  She reported 9 out of 10 neck pain, and 
10 out of 10 thoracic spine pain. (Id.) 
On April 2, 2019, Ms. Flack reported slight improvements in her neck and 
thoracic spine symptoms. (JE2, p. 20)  However, the improvements were short lived as 
she reported 7 out of 10 neck pain and 7 out of 10 thoracic spine pain, after returning to 
work and stocking shelves on April 8, 2019. (JE2, p. 23) 
In July 2019, Ms. Flack returned to Dr. Krukow and reported 5 out of 10 neck 
pain and 8 out of 10 thoracic spine pain. (JE2, p. 26)  On July 30, 2019, claimant 
described a stiff and sore low back and neck, “from all the driving they did and sleeping 
in different beds while on a 10 day vacation.” (JE1, pp. 3-4)  On August 8, 2019, Ms. 
Flack reported 3 out of 10 neck pain and 9 out of 10 thoracic spine pain. (JE2, p. 28) 
Defendants assert that claimant’s chiropractor restricted her from working for an 
extended period of time in 2019; however, the evidence on this issue is inconclusive.  In 
some of the chiropractic records, Shane Krukow, D.C. notes, “No work until.”  However, 
most of the records do not provide a date following the word “until.” (See JE2, pp. 19, 
22, 25) 
Ms. Flack presented to Mason City Chiropractic on December 6, 2019, and 
described upper back and neck pain. (JE3, p. 30)  She reported, “I was volunteering 
yesterday at the Humane Society and was walking some really big dogs and they were 
yanking me quite a bit.” (Id.)  Thereafter, claimant went to work where she had to lift 
heavy boxes, bend, and twist for approximately five hours. (Id.)  Her pain worsened and 
she had difficulty sleeping that night. (Id.)  According to claimant, she could barely move 
the next morning. (Id.)  She rated her upper back and neck pain as 9 out of 10 and 
reported difficulty with bending, twisting, standing, sitting, and lying down. (Id.) 
The next day, Ms. Flack reported improvement in her symptoms. (JE3, p. 34)  
Nevertheless, she returned to Mason City Chiropractic in order to “stay on top of this 
and also to keep it from getting worse again.” (Id.) 
Two weeks prior to the July 28, 2020, work injury, Ms. Flack presented to Mason 
City Chiropractic and reported “a lot of upper back and neck pain” as well as a 
headache. (JE3, p. 36)  Ms. Flack relayed that she had been walking her dog and felt a 
“pop” when her dog pulled her. (Id.)  She described difficulty with cleaning out “pens for 
the animals” and tightness in her low back. (Id.)  On examination, Ms. Flack 
demonstrated tenderness to palpation over the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine.  
She also demonstrated swelling of the thoracic spine. (Id.)  A cervical compression test, 
as well as a Kemp’s test, were positive. (Id.) 
On July 28, 2020, Ms. Flack sustained a stipulated work injury while power 
washing the bottom of a hog trailer.  It is somewhat unclear how the injury occurred.  
The initial medical records provide, “[S]he was underneath a trailer, and went to go get 
out from underneath the trailer, slipped and banged her back hard against the bottom of 

FLACK V. CHRISTENSEN FARMS & FEEDLOTS, INC. 
Page 4 
a hard metal trailer.” (JE4, p. 38)  Claimant’s expert physician provides a similar 
description of the injury. (JE9, p. 145)  In comparison, Ms. Flack testified at her 
deposition, “I had slipped and fallen underneath the trailer and I stood up under, like, the 
edge of the trailer and then my lower back and it kind of jolted me.” (Ex. G, Depo. Tr., p. 
9)  At hearing, Ms. Flack testified that she “slipped a little bit” on a grease spot, “And as 
I was standing up, I thought I was out from under the trailer, and I ended up standing up 
into the bottom edge of the trailer.” (Hr. Tr., p. 18)  This description is supported by at 
least one of Ms. Flack’s treating physicians. (JE7, p. 113) 
Ms. Flack presented to Craig Gibson, D.O. on July 31, 2020. (JE4, p. 38)  Ms. 
Flack described the work injury and relayed that her pain had worsened over the past 
few days. (Id.)  She reported pain in her low back, with radiating pain into her right 
upper back. (Id.)  Dr. Gibson noted that there was no bruising or laceration on 
examination. (Id.)  X-rays of the thoracic and lumbar spine did not reveal any acute 
abnormalities. (See JE4, p. 39)  Dr. Gibson diagnosed a back strain and recommended 
Ms. Flack avoid work and rest for 7 days. (JE4, p. 39) 
 
Ms. Flack returned to Dr. Gibson on August 6, 2020. (JE4, p. 41)  She continued 
to report left low back and right upper back pain in the rhomboid area. (Id.)  She did not 
feel as though she would be able to return to her normal job duties due to her ongoing 
pain. (Id.)  Dr. Gibson seemingly agreed and provided Ms. Flack “should really not be 
doing anything with her upper arms or torso that might exacerbate or reinjure her back 
spasm or back pain.” (JE4, p. 42)  Dr. Gibson referred Ms. Flack to physical therapy. 
(Id.) 
 
Ms. Flack returned to work; however, she was not performing her normal job 
duties.  Instead, she was mainly doing laundry. (JE4, p. 44)  Ms. Flack washed the 
clothes that the other washers wore while cleaning the hog trailers. (Hr. Tr., p. 44)  It 
does not appear as though Ms. Flack had to handle a significant amount of laundry. 
(See Hr. Tr., pp. 44-45)  She testified that she would wash and fold four rain suits plus 
underwear at a time. (Hr. Tr., p. 44)  When she was not washing or folding clothes, Ms. 
Flack was waiting to wash and fold more clothes. (Hr. Tr., p. 45)  According to Ms. 
Flack, laundry only needed to be completed once or twice per day. (See Hr. Tr., p. 45)   
 
Ms. Flack’s pain continued through August and into September. (JE4, pp. 47-55)  
It is noted in her final physical therapy visit, dated September 9, 2020, that Ms. Flack 
continued to have significant pain and evidence of reduced motion in the right-sided 
paraspinals, lower trapezius, and rhomboids from T7-T12.  She was unable to achieve 
her goals in either motion or lifting. (JE5, pp. 90-91)  Given her lack of improvement, Dr. 
Gibson continued physical therapy and ordered an MRI of the thoracic spine. (JE4, p. 
55)   
 
The recommended imaging and additional physical therapy had not been 
authorized prior to Ms. Flack’s September 21, 2020, appointment with Dr. Gibson. (JE4, 
p. 59) 
 
Ms. Flack moved into her father’s house in late October 2020. (See JE4, p. 65; 
Hr. Tr., p. 42)  Dr. Gibson’s medical records provide that the move put additional strain 
on claimant’s body. (JE4, p. 65) 

FLACK V. CHRISTENSEN FARMS & FEEDLOTS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
Charles Mooney, M.D. evaluated Ms. Flack for a second opinion on November 
18, 2020. (JE6, p. 100)  He assessed myofascial pain involving the right-sided 
paraspinals and interscapular musculature, possible radicular symptoms involving the 
lower cervical spine or upper thoracic spine, and a resolved lumbar strain. (JE6, p. 104)  
Based on his examination and review of the medical records, Dr. Mooney 
recommended MRIs of the cervical and thoracic spine. (Id.)   
 
There was a miscommunication regarding Ms. Flack’s work restrictions in 
December 2020. (See JE4, p. 75)  According to Ms. Flack, the defendant employer 
could not read Dr. Gibson’s November 27, 2020, workability report and elected to return 
Ms. Flack to her full-duty job. (See JE4, p. 75)  While performing work outside of her 
restrictions, Ms. Flack sustained a second injury on December 15, 2020. (See JE5, p. 
92)  While power washing a hog trailer, Ms. Flack experienced pain in her neck and her 
right arm went numb. (See JE9, p. 138)   
 
An MRI of the cervical spine revealed no degenerative changes and some loss of 
normal cervical lordosis, otherwise, unremarkable. (JE11, p. 153; See JE7, p. 123) 
 
Ms. Flack returned to Dr. Mooney’s office on January 5, 2021. (JE6, p. 108)  She 
reported the December 15, 2020, work injury to Dr. Mooney, and complained of 
increased pain in the interscapular region on the right. (Id.)  Dr. Mooney assessed Ms. 
Flack with myofascial pain and documented evidence of somatic complaints and 
psychological overlay. (Id.)  Following his examination, Dr. Mooney recommended and 
administered a trigger point injection into the right inferior rhomboid. (Id.)  He then 
ordered another course of physical therapy and restricted Ms. Flack from overhead 
work and lifting, pushing, or pulling greater than 10 pounds with the right arm. (JE6, p. 
109) 
A functional status evaluation of Ms. Flack occurred on February 3, 2021. (JE5, 
p. 96)  At the time, Ms. Flack had only met three of the 11 physical therapy goals put in 
place according to her job demands. (JE5, pp. 96-97)  The report concluded that Ms. 
Flack had not responded as expected to physical therapy. (JE5, p. 98) 
 
Ms. Flack last presented to Dr. Mooney on February 8, 2021. (JE6, p. 110)  She 
reported a 50 percent improvement in her symptoms following the trigger point injection. 
(Id.)  Dr. Mooney noted that Ms. Flack’s range of motion appeared better, with no 
inhibition. (Id.)  Given these improvements, Dr. Mooney recommended that Ms. Flack 
progress to normal work activities and estimated that she would reach maximum 
medical improvement in one month’s time. (JE6, p. 111)   
 
Ms. Flack voluntarily terminated her employment with the defendant employer on 
or about February 23, 2021. (Exhibit D, p. 15; Hr. Tr., p. 46)  Ms. Flack testified that she 
quit because she was tired of sitting around and not doing anything when she was on 
the clock. (Hr. Tr., p. 27)  She testified that moving to a different town and having to 
drive further just to sit around also factored into her decision. (Hr. Tr., pp. 27-28) 
After leaving Christensen Farms, Ms. Flack applied for a position at Bethany Life 
on February 22, 2022. (Ex. C, p. 7) Claimant did not inform Bethany Life that she had 
work restrictions. (Ex. G. p. 30) Her job duties included bathing and dressing the elderly, 

FLACK V. CHRISTENSEN FARMS & FEEDLOTS, INC. 
Page 6 
cleaning, and serving food. (Id.)  Claimant generally agreed that she was able to do the 
job. (Ex. G, pp. 29-30)  Claimant resigned from Bethany Life on July 5, 2022, and was 
noted to be eligible for rehire. (Ex. C, p. 13) The July 28, 2020, work injury did not factor 
into her decision to resign.  
Claimant started her own business, Nails by Briana, in 2021. (Ex. G, p. 30)  She 
now has two business locations. (Id.)  She offers manicures, pedicures, and permanent 
jewelry. (Id.)  She personally performs 20 to 30 manicures per month.  She also 
performs pedicures and provides services at craft shows and private parties. (Ex. G, p. 
31)  Claimant is by all accounts a successful entrepreneur. 
 
Ms. Flack returned to Dr. Gibson on March 25, 2021, and reported the December 
15, 2020, work injury. (JE4, p. 77)  Ms. Flack was brought to tears during Dr. Gibson’s 
physical examination of her right upper back. (Id.)  She described the right thoracic pain 
as sharp and burning. (Id.)  Dr. Gibson felt that Ms. Flack’s pain could be myofascial, 
but because of the burning and sharp pain, as well as the nonresolution of pain, it was 
likely she had some nerve involvement. (JE4, p. 78)  To address her ongoing 
complaints, Dr. Gibson referred Ms. Flack to pain management. (Id.) 
 
On April 5, 2021, Dr. Mooney assigned zero percent impairment of the whole 
person for the July 28, 2020, and December 15, 2020, work injuries. (JE6, p. 112)  Dr. 
Mooney provided his final opinion without reexamining Ms. Flack.  
 
Ms. Flack presented to Dr. Gibson on April 21, 2021, and reported a two-week 
history of headaches. (JE4, p. 82)  She believed the headaches were causing some 
tunnel vision, dizziness, and balance issues. (Id.)  Dr. Gibson advised Ms. Flack to 
follow-up with a massage therapist or chiropractor as there could be a neck and back 
component to her headaches. (JE4, p. 83) 
 
Given her ongoing complaints of pain, defendants referred Ms. Flack to Daniel 
Miller, M.D. of Occupational Medicine Plus on May 12, 2021. (JE7, p. 113)  At her initial 
evaluation, Ms. Flack reported right back pain at her bra line. (Id.)  She also reported 
occasional pain into the right side of her neck. (Id.)  Dr. Miller ordered MRIs of the 
thoracic and lumbar spine and instructed Ms. Flack to return once they had been 
obtained. (JE7, p. 114) 
 
A May 18, 2021, MRI of the thoracic spine revealed no disc herniation or spinal 
canal or neural foraminal stenosis. (See JE7, pp. 116, 124)   A lumbar spine MRI from 
the same date revealed bilateral L5 pars defects. (See JE7, pp. 116, 124)  After 
reviewing the imaging, Dr. Miller prescribed gabapentin and ibuprofen. (JE7, p. 116)  He 
opined, “The only thing has not been tried that I can see to control her pain is 
gabapentin.  If she fails this, and she is at MMI as she has failed numerous other 
therapies including trigger point injections.” (JE7, p. 116) 
Dr. Miller released Ms. Flack from care and placed her at maximum medical 
improvement on June 21, 2021. (JE7, p. 118)  Ms. Flack demonstrated full range of 
motion and strength at her June 21, 2021, appointment. (JE7, p. 125)  According to the 
medical note, Ms. Flack was released because she did not experience any 
improvement despite “numerous and appropriate treatments.” (JE7, p. 118)  

FLACK V. CHRISTENSEN FARMS & FEEDLOTS, INC. 
Page 7 
On July 7, 2021, Ms. Flack presented to Trinity Regional Medical Center 
Emergency Department and was evaluated by Christopher Carzoli, D.O. (JE8, pp. 127-
132)  She reported significant mid to upper right-sided back pain with no recent injury. 
(JE8, p. 129)  She rated her pain 10 out of 10. (JE8, p. 132)  On examination, she 
demonstrated spasms, tenderness, and decreased range of motion. (JE8, p. 130)  The 
medical record provides, “patient states she had a work injury about a year ago but she 
has never had pain like this before.” (JE8, p. 132)  Ms. Flack experienced significant 
relief after ingesting prednisone, hydrocodone, ibuprofen, and cyclobenzaprine. (JE8, p. 
131) 
Dr. Miller drafted a final report for defendants on July 26, 2021. (JE7, p. 119)  
After reviewing Ms. Flack’s medical records, Dr. Miller diagnosed a low back 
contusion/sprain and myofascial pain of the right thoracic spine. (JE7, p. 125)  Dr. Miller 
opined that Ms. Flack had a pre-existing condition, and her chronic back pain was 
temporarily flared by the work injuries. (Id.) Based on the mechanism of injury, physical 
findings, and diagnostic imaging, Dr. Miller opined that there was no significant 
permanent trauma to any area of the spine due to the work-related injuries. (Id.)  He 
assessed zero percent permanent impairment and recommended no permanent 
restrictions. (Id.) 
Two months later, Ms. Flack presented to Shelley Wells, D.O. for a pain 
management evaluation. (See JE9, p. 141)  Following the evaluation, Dr. Wells 
administered cervical medial branch blocks at C4-5 and C5-6. (See JE9, p. 141)  
Unfortunately, the injections did not help claimant’s symptoms. (See JE9, p. 141) 
Since September 2021, Ms. Flack has pursued chiropractic care to address her 
symptoms.  In August and September 2023, Ms. Flack presented to Ackley Chiropractic 
and reported neck and back pain that had been aggravated by bending over while 
performing a manicure or a pedicure.  She also reported pain with carrying her 
newborn. (JE1, p. 6) 
Claimant has a nonsurgical condition. The diagnostic imaging has returned 
largely unremarkable. While it is clear claimant is in pain, the pain fluctuates depending 
on activity.  Given the lack of objective medical evidence to show claimant sustained a 
significant thoracic spine injury, it is reasonable for defendants to question claimant’s 
credibility.   
In this regard, defendants assert Ms. Flack failed to disclose and/or downplayed 
her pre-existing injuries when speaking to the medical professionals in this 
case.  Indeed, despite the well-documented pre-existing lumbar, thoracic, and cervical 
spine issues, Ms. Flack told Dr. Gibson that she did not normally have issues with her 
back. (JE4, pp. 38, 41)  When presenting to Dr. Mooney, Ms. Flack denied that she had 
sustained similar injuries prior to the date of injury. (JE6, p. 106) When presenting to her 
expert physician, Ms. Flack only disclosed that she had seen a chiropractor for issues 
related to playing sports, and her current symptoms were nothing like what she 
experienced in the past. (JE9, p. 135)  
While I recognize medical records may exist outside of the evidentiary record to 
corroborate such an assertion, there are no chiropractic records in evidence that note 

FLACK V. CHRISTENSEN FARMS & FEEDLOTS, INC. 
Page 8 
softball or volleyball as the reason for treatment.  In 2018, Ms. Flack attributed her 
complaints to trap shooting and her chiropractor hypothesized that her chronic back 
pain could be due to her motor vehicle/ATV accidents.  In 2019, Ms. Flack attributed her 
complaints to a rollover motor vehicle accident.  Ms. Flack's pain flared in December 
2019 after walking large dogs for the Humane Society and subsequently lifting heavy 
boxes, bending, and twisting at her job.  Then, two weeks prior to the date of injury, Ms. 
Flack's back "popped" while walking her dog and she started having "a lot of upper back 
and neck pain[.]" (JE3, p. 36)  I agree with defendants and find Ms. Flack’s candor when 
speaking to the medical professionals in this case concerning. 
Defendants also assert Ms. Flack did not disclose her subsequent employment 
with Bethany Life until pressed about the same during her deposition. (Ex. G, Depo. Tr., 
p. 17)  Indeed, Ms. Flack's answers to interrogatories do not list Bethany Life as a 
subsequent employer.  When given the opportunity to disclose any additional 
subsequent employers at her deposition, Ms. Flack twice provided she had not worked 
for any employers since leaving Christensen Farms. (Id.)  While it is possible Ms. Flack 
forgot about her brief employment with Bethany Life, it is more likely the information was 
withheld as it demonstrates Ms. Flack’s ability to return to relatively physical work.   
As mentioned, Ms. Flack did not inform Bethany Life of her work restrictions 
during the hiring process. (Ex. G. p. 30) Her job duties at Bethany Life included bathing 
and dressing the elderly, cleaning throughout the facility, and serving food. (Id.)  
Claimant generally agreed that she was able to perform the job duties required of her. 
(See Ex. G, pp. 29-30)  Claimant resigned from Bethany Life on July 5, 2022.  Ms. Flack 
resigned in part because she was pregnant and feared for the safety of her child after a 
resident fell on her. (Ex. G, Depo. Tr., p. 18)  She also testified that Bethany Life 
required weekly in-person COVID testing, which she did not want to complete during 
her maternity leave. (Ex. G, Depo. Tr., pp. 18-19) 
In assessing Ms. Flack’s credibility, I note some omissions and inconsistencies 
that undermine the reliability of her testimony.  While I do not necessarily find that the 
claimant intended to deceive, the nature and significance of the omitted information 
suggest a pattern of selective disclosure.  These inconsistencies and omissions prevent 
the undersigned from affording Ms. Flack’s testimony full weight.  
In support of her claims, Ms. Flack sought an independent medical examination 
with Robin Sassman, M.D. (Joint Exhibit 9, p. 133)  Dr. Sassman conducted a physical 
examination of Ms. Flack on April 17, 2024. (Id.)  During the evaluation, Ms. Flack 
reported some of her pre-existing conditions and injuries.  Ms. Flack relayed that prior to 
her injury she had presented to a chiropractor for issues related to playing sports in high 
school. (JE9, p. 135)  She also disclosed a 2015 ATV accident in which she sustained a 
concussion. (Id.)   
In terms of her current symptoms, Ms. Flack described a “knot” under her right 
shoulder blade, and occasional numbness in her right hand. (JE9, p. 141)  She reported 
that her low back pain had resolved. (Id.)  According to Ms. Flack, her current symptoms 
were nothing like what she experienced in the past related to playing sports.  She 
asserted that her past complaints would resolve with chiropractic treatment. (See JE9, 
p. 135) 

FLACK V. CHRISTENSEN FARMS & FEEDLOTS, INC. 
Page 9 
Ultimately, Dr. Sassman diagnosed Ms. Flack with thoracic pain and lumbar pain. 
(JE9, p. 144)  In terms of ongoing care, Dr. Sassman recommended Ms. Flack pursue 
trigger point injections through a pain management specialist. (JE9, p. 146) 
Utilizing the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition, Dr. Sassman placed Ms. Flack in DRE Thoracic Category II and assigned 7 
percent whole person impairment for the thoracic spine injury. (Id.)  Dr. Sassman opined 
her impairment rating was more consistent with Ms. Flack’s physical examination and 
ongoing symptoms when compared to the impairment rating of Dr. Mooney. (JE9, pp. 
144-145)  Despite this argument, Dr. Sassman did not divulge how she calculated the 7 
percent impairment rating.1  
As for restrictions, Dr. Sassman recommended Ms. Flack limit lifting, pushing, 
pulling, and carrying to 20 pounds from floor to waist level, and from waist to shoulder 
level, on an occasional basis.  Dr. Sassman further recommended Ms. Flack avoid 
lifting, pushing, pulling, or carrying above shoulder height or with her arms extended 
away from her body. (JE9, p. 145)  Lastly, she recommended against using vibratory 
tools and power tools. (Id.) 
I do not find Dr. Sassman’s recommendations convincing.  While it is clear Ms. 
Flack is limited due to her pain complaints, all physicians agreed that there is nothing 
anatomically wrong with claimant’s thoracic spine.  Moreover, Ms. Flack did not undergo 
a functional capacity evaluation and there is no indication Dr. Sassman conducted any 
testing to assess her functional abilities.  For these reasons, I decline to adopt Dr. 
Sassman’s restrictions.   
Defendants assert Dr. Sassman did not have a complete and accurate history of 
Ms. Flack’s medical records.  Alternatively, defendants assert Dr. Sassman ignored Ms. 
Flack’s pre-existing medical records.  Dr. Sassman documented the medical records 
she was asked to review as part of her independent medical evaluation.  According to 
the report, Dr. Sassman reviewed pre-existing medical records from Hickman 
Chiropractic, Iowa Falls Chiropractic Clinic, Ackley Chiropractic Clinic, Mason City 
Chiropractic, and Iowa Falls Clinic. (JE9, p. 134)  I have little doubt claimant provided 
these medical records to Dr. Sassman for her review.  That being said, the records are 
not discussed in the medical records summary or referenced in Dr. Sassman’s analysis.  
Such an omission is concerning and damages the credibility of Dr. Sassman’s opinions 
in this case to an extent. 
Defendants further assert Dr. Sassman’s impairment rating is not supported by 
the evidentiary record or the findings from her physical examination of Ms. Flack.  On 
examination, Dr. Sassman noted tenderness at the T4-5 level to the right of the thoracic 
spine, but no tenderness directly over the thoracic spine. (JE9, p. 144)  She made no 
other findings with respect to the thoracic spine.  Dr. Sassman provided no explanation 
as to why Ms. Flack’s condition qualifies for placement in DRE Category II or how she 
reached her 7 percent impairment rating.  Dr. Sassman did not document significant 
muscle guarding or spasms at the time of examination, asymmetric loss of range of 
                                                                 
1 Table 15-4 provides an impairment range of 5 to 8 percent for DRE Thoracic Category II. 

FLACK V. CHRISTENSEN FARMS & FEEDLOTS, INC. 
Page 10 
motion, or nonverifiable radicular complaints.  Dr. Sassman’s lack of analysis further 
diminishes the credibility and persuasiveness of her opinions. 
Lastly, I note Dr. Sassman documented a slightly different mechanism of injury 
when compared to Ms. Flack’s testimony.  According to Dr. Sassman, Ms. Flack slipped 
and hit her middle back against the bottom of a hog trailer. (JE9, p. 145)  At her 
deposition, Ms. Flack testified, “I had slipped and fallen underneath the trailer and I 
stood up under, like, the edge of the trailer and then my lower back and it kind of jolted 
me.” (Ex. G, Depo. Tr., p. 9)  Similarly, Ms. Flack testified at hearing that she “slipped a 
little bit” on a grease spot, “And as I was standing up, I thought I was out from under the 
trailer, and I ended up standing up into the bottom edge of the trailer.” (Hr. Tr., p. 18)  
While similar, these two descriptions are not interchangeable.  They describe two 
distinct mechanisms of injury, and the difference could significantly affect a physician’s 
analysis of causation and force. For instance, a slip typically involves uncontrolled 
movement, which would reduce Ms. Flack’s ability to brace or react upon impact.  In 
contrast, if Ms. Flack stood up and struck her back on the trailer, her movement would 
have been more controlled, allowing her a greater opportunity to respond to the contact.  
Ultimately, I find the opinions of Dr. Sassman are based on an inaccurate or 
incomplete understanding of claimant’s medical history and therefore, Dr. Sassman’s 
opinions are not probative and cannot be relied upon.  Without a credible expert 
opinion, I find insufficient evidence that claimant’s conditions were caused by or 
materially aggravated by the stipulated work injuries on July 28, 2020, and December 
15, 2020.   
Having considered Ms. Flack’s testimony, the pre-existing and contemporaneous 
medical records, and the expert opinions in this case, I find that Ms. Flack failed to 
prove she sustained a permanent aggravation of her pre-existing back condition as a 
result of her work activities on July 28, 2020, and December 15, 2020. 
All other disputed issues are rendered moot. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The parties stipulate that claimant sustained injuries on July 28, 2020, and 
December 15, 2020, which arose out of and in the course of her employment.   
The primary issue to be addressed is whether Ms. Flack carried her burden of 
proving the stipulated injuries caused permanent disability, and if so, the extent of the 
same. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 

FLACK V. CHRISTENSEN FARMS & FEEDLOTS, INC. 
Page 11 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke's Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense. 
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956). If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover. Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961). 
In this case, I found claimant provided insufficient evidence to establish the July 
28, 2020, and December 15, 2020, injuries caused permanent disability.  Accordingly, I 
conclude that the claimant failed to prove entitlement to an award of permanent 
disability benefits for the July 28, 2020, and December 15, 2020, injuries. 
The final disputed issue is whether costs should be assessed against either 
party. Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency. Iowa Code section 86.40. 
Exercising the agency's discretion, I conclude that neither party's costs should be 
assessed in this case. Rather, all parties should bear their own costs. 
The above conclusion that claimant failed to carry her burden of proof renders all 
other issues moot. 
ORDER 
Claimant takes nothing. 
All parties shall pay their own costs. 
Signed and filed this __21st __ day of April, 2025. 
 
 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            MICHAEL J. LUNN  
 
 
 
 
 
                                DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
          COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

FLACK V. CHRISTENSEN FARMS & FEEDLOTS, INC. 
Page 12 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Janece Valentine  (via WCES) 
  
Abigail Wenninghoff (via WCES) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Division, 6200 Park Avenue, Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321.  The notice of appeal must 
be received by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
 
 
 
