Case Number: 5044236
Case Title:  BLASDELL, HEATHER (DEC) V. LINNHAVEN, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Supreme Court
Source:      Blasdell, Heather-5044236.SC Decision.pdf
========================================================================

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF IOWA 
 
No. 21–1968 
 
Submitted January 19, 2023—Filed April 7, 2023 
 
 
ROGER BLASDELL, 
 
 
Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
LINNHAVEN, INC. and ACCIDENT FUND NATIONAL INSURANCE 
COMPANY/UNITED HEARTLAND, 
 
 
Appellants. 
 
 
On review from the Iowa Court of Appeals. 
 
Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Polk County, Celene Gogerty, 
Judge. 
An employer seeks further review from a court of appeals decision that 
affirmed the district court’s ruling in favor of the claimant in a workers’ 
compensation proceeding. DECISION OF COURT OF APPEALS AND DISTRICT 
COURT JUDGMENT AFFIRMED. 
 
Christensen, C.J., delivered the opinion of the court, in which Waterman, 
Mansfield, and McDermott, JJ., joined. McDonald, J., filed a dissenting opinion, 
in which Oxley, J., joined. May, J., took no part in the consideration or decision 
of the case. 
 
Laura Ostrander, Lansing, Michigan, for appellants. 

 
2 
 
 
Thomas M. Wertz and Mindi M. Vervaecke of Wertz Law Firm, Cedar 
Rapids, for appellees. 

 
3 
 
CHRISTENSEN, Chief Justice.  
We must decide when a married couple’s separation results in spousal 
desertion within the meaning of Iowa Code section 85.42(1)(a) (2017). Almost two 
and a half years into their marriage, the wife in this case left the marital home 
in Delhi in search of employment elsewhere. She ultimately accepted a position 
in Cedar Rapids and moved in with a family friend. Meanwhile, the husband and 
the wife’s son from a previous relationship moved for financial reasons to 
Manchester, where the husband worked. The husband and wife never lived 
together again, but they remained in contact, supported each other financially, 
and never sought a divorce.  
A year after her move, the wife was permanently and totally disabled as a 
result of a work injury and was awarded workers’ compensation benefits. She 
passed away from an overdose of prescription medication approximately four 
years later. When the husband filed a claim for burial expenses and death 
benefits as the surviving spouse, his wife’s employer and her insurer claimed he 
was not entitled to those benefits under Iowa Code section 85.42(1)(a) because 
he had willfully deserted his wife without any fault by her. The workers’ 
compensation commissioner agreed.  
On judicial review, the district court reversed the workers’ compensation 
commissioner’s decision, concluding it was not supported by substantial 
evidence. The court of appeals affirmed the district court, and we granted the 
employer’s application for further review. For the reasons explained below, we 
affirm the district court decision that there was not substantial evidence to 

 
4 
 
support a finding that the husband deserted his wife without fault by her under 
Iowa Code section 85.42(1)(a). 
I. Background Facts and Proceedings. 
Roger and Heather Blasdell long held a nontraditional relationship that 
dates back to at least 1998. In March 1999, Heather gave birth to their daughter, 
whom Heather and Roger placed in a guardianship with a maternal relative who 
they felt was better able to address their daughter’s needs, including special 
health issues. They eventually married on August 23, 2008, and lived together 
with Heather’s teenage son from a previous relationship until January 2011, 
when they separated largely for financial reasons. Heather had just lost her job, 
and Roger could not afford their rent alone in Delhi. Unable to find another job 
in the area, Heather moved to Clinton for a few months with only her clothes and 
vehicle. Shortly thereafter, she moved in with a family friend in Cedar Rapids 
and started a position there with Linnhaven, Inc., as a direct care provider. Roger 
stayed in the Delhi home with Heather’s son for three to four months after 
Heather left, but he could not afford to continue paying the rent. Consequently, 
Heather’s son moved with Roger to Manchester, where Roger worked. 
Roger began dating another woman, Angela, in Manchester, and Heather’s 
son later moved in with Heather in Cedar Rapids but continued to commute with 
an uncle to attend school in Manchester. In 2011 and 2012, Roger filed his taxes 
as “married filing separately.” He did not list Heather as a spouse on his 2012 
Iowa return and listed himself as single on a W-4 form in 2011 and 2015.  

 
5 
 
On November 5, 2012, Heather sustained an injury while working at 
Linnhaven, Inc., and sought workers’ compensation benefits from Linnhaven, 
Inc., and its insurer, Accident Fund National Insurance Company/United 
Heartland (collectively Linnhaven). Heather’s marital status was not an issue in 
the workers’ compensation proceedings, but she stated during a January 21, 
2014 deposition that she was legally married to Roger. However, she explained 
that the pair were separated and had not divorced because of “money.” A deputy 
workers’ compensation commissioner ultimately determined Heather was 
permanently disabled as a result of the work injury and awarded Heather 
workers’ compensation benefits for as long as she remained permanently and 
totally disabled. The workers’ compensation commissioner delegated a deputy 
workers’ compensation commissioner with the authority to issue a final agency 
decision, which subsequently affirmed the prior decision.  
On September 9, 2016, Heather died from an overdose of a mix of 
prescription medications quetiapine (Seroquel) and zolpidem (Ambien).1 Roger 
filed a claim for death benefits as Heather’s surviving spouse and sought 
reimbursement for Heather’s burial expenses, which he had paid. Linnhaven 
asserted that Roger was barred from receiving death benefits under Iowa Code 
section 85.42(1)(a), which states: “When it is shown that at the time of the injury 
the surviving spouse had willfully deserted the deceased without fault of the 
 
1Whether Heather’s death was accidental or intentional is not an issue in this appeal. 

 
6 
 
deceased, then the surviving spouse shall not be considered as dependent in any 
degree.”  
In a deposition on April 3, 2018, Roger stated that Heather was listed as 
his emergency contact at work, the beneficiary of his life insurance policy, and 
as a driver on his car insurance for two vehicles at the time of her 2012 injury. 
He described his relationship with Heather as “kind of on and off.” According to 
Roger, Heather would stay with him occasionally, and they continued to see each 
other “[a]lmost weekly” even though they did not have a sexual relationship.  
Roger’s former girlfriend, Angela, was deposed on the same day. Angela 
reported that she had dated Roger from July 2011 until July 2017 and lived with 
him in a home they rented together from around 2015 until they ended their 
relationship. She knew Roger was still legally married to Heather and continued 
to communicate with Heather throughout her relationship with Roger. When 
asked how often Roger would communicate with Heather, Angela stated, “It 
didn’t come up too much, so I -- I would say maybe like once a month.” Angela 
was not aware of any financial support that Roger may have provided to Heather.  
Roger’s claim went to hearing on May 15, 2018. Roger’s testimony was 
similar to his deposition testimony. He reiterated that he and Heather separated 
in January 2011 primarily for financial reasons but remained in contact. When 
asked whether he recalled providing Heather with financial assistance after her 
injury, Roger testified that he “would give her money almost weekly, anywhere 
from 50- to 100-dollars.” In contrast, he rarely received financial assistance from 
Heather.  

 
7 
 
Heather’s son testified next. He lived with Heather at the time of her injury 
and recalled Heather and Roger maintaining “frequent conversations throughout 
the week” during that time period. He elaborated that he did not “necessarily 
know what they talked about” but knew “that they were in contact with each 
other.” He continued, “And throughout -- after her injury, I had been present a 
few different times when they had met up with each other.” When they met up, 
Heather’s son recalled, “Sometimes it was just a -- have a conversation and check 
up and see how everybody was doing. Sometimes it was Roger loaning my mom 
money to help out with bills.” 
The deputy workers’ compensation commissioner who presided over the 
hearing became unavailable before issuing a decision, so the workers’ 
compensation commissioner authorized another deputy to issue a proposed 
decision. This deputy relied on the record and posthearing briefs in concluding 
that “Roger had willfully deserted Heather without fault by Heather as of 2011—
before her underlying work-related injury”—and was thus not entitled to death 
benefits under Iowa Code section 85.42(1)(a). Roger requested a rehearing based 
on the change in deputy commissioners after his hearing, arguing witness 
demeanor was a substantial factor in the case. A deputy commissioner acting 
with authorization from the commissioner granted this request “in an effort to 
maintain the integrity of the contested case process before the agency.”  
The deputy who issued the first proposed decision presided over Roger’s 
new hearing in July 2020. No new exhibits were permitted, and only Roger 
testified, repeating much of what he had already stated in his deposition and the 

 
8 
 
first hearing. The deputy found Roger “to be a generally credible witness” but 
again determined that Roger was not entitled to death benefits because he 
willfully deserted Heather. On appeal, a deputy commissioner acting with the 
commissioner’s authorization agreed. The deputy bolstered this final agency 
decision with the following summary: 
The record indicates that Roger and Heather intended to 
terminate their marriage relationship in January 2011. The record 
indicates Heather moved out of the house she shared with Roger at 
that time. Shortly after that in early 2011, Roger began a 
relationship with [Angela]. This was a relationship that lasted at 
least five years and included several years of cohabitation. The 
record reflects that after January 2011, Roger and Heather never 
lived together or had any sexual relationship. Given this record, it is 
found that Heather and Roger ended their marital relationship in 
January 2011. It is also found that Roger willfully and intentionally 
separated from Heather at that time. 
As noted in the record, the separation between Heather and 
Roger occurred due to financial reasons. Given this fact, it is found 
that Roger’s willful separation from Heather was without the fault of 
Heather. 
Roger petitioned for judicial review before the district court. The district 
court reversed the agency’s decision, noting the agency’s “finding that both 
parties intended to end the marriage suggests that Heather is not without fault.” 
The district court remarked that both parties and the deputy commissioner 
“seem to treat the questions of whether [Roger] and Heather were married at the 
time of injury and whether [Roger] abandoned Heather as one in the same[;] 
[t]hey are not.” (Footnote omitted.)  
In concluding Roger lacked the requisite intent to desert Heather, the 
district court cited the following facts: 

 
9 
 
Claimant remained in the marital home with Heather’s child. 
Additionally, according to unrefuted testimony, Claimant attempted 
to contact Heather several times. Heather’s son testified that 
Claimant was successful, while [Angela] stated Claimant was 
unsuccessful in contacting Heather. Finally, while true that 
Claimant listed himself as single on his 2011 W4 form, Claimant 
stated on his 2011 and 2012 taxes that his marital status was 
“married fil[ing] separately.”  
(Citations omitted.)  
The district court remanded the case to the commissioner for a ruling on 
whether Heather’s death met the willful-injury exception under Iowa Code 
section 85.16 to bar Roger from recovering survivor’s benefits. See Iowa Code 
§ 85.16. Linnhaven appealed, and we transferred the case to the court of appeals, 
which affirmed the district court’s ruling. We subsequently granted Linnhaven’s 
application for further review.  
II. Standard of Review. 
Iowa Code chapter 17A guides our judicial review of agency 
decision-making to determine whether we reach the same result as the district 
court. Chavez v. MS Tech., LLC, 972 N.W.2d 662, 666 (Iowa 2022). In this case, 
we are asked to determine whether the commissioner erred in concluding that 
Roger deserted Heather without fault on Heather’s part under Iowa Code section 
85.42(1)(a). This issue presents a mixed question of law and fact: the operative 
facts that gave rise to the desertion claim present a question of fact, while the 
question of law is inherent in the commissioner’s decision on whether those facts 
support a conclusion that Roger “had willfully deserted [Heather] without fault 
of [Heather]” at the time of her injury. Iowa Code § 85.42(1)(a); see Meyer v. IBP, 
Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 218 (Iowa 2006).  

 
10 
 
We “are bound by the commissioner’s resolution of the first question—
finding the operative facts from the evidence presented—if supported by 
substantial evidence in the record as a whole.” Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 218. In 
contrast, “the application of the law to the facts . . . can be affected by other 
grounds of error such as erroneous interpretation of law; irrational reasoning; 
failure to consider relevant facts; or irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable 
application of law to the facts.” Id. Accordingly, “[w]hen the agency exercises its 
discretion based on an erroneous interpretation of the law, we are not bound by 
those ‘legal conclusions but may correct misapplications of the law.’ ” Id. at 219 
(quoting Stroup v. Reno, 530 N.W.2d 441, 443 (Iowa 1995) (en banc)). 
III. Analysis. 
In addition to arguing the district court erred in finding Roger did not 
desert Heather, Linnhaven maintains: (1) we should affirm the district court’s 
conclusion that the commissioner’s designee could issue the final agency 
decision, and (2) we should find the doctrine of estoppel does not bar Linnhaven 
from raising the defense of spousal desertion. Neither of those requests is 
properly before us. Roger did not cross-appeal the district court’s conclusion that 
the commissioner’s designee could issue the final agency decision, so there is no 
dispute over this matter for us to resolve. Likewise, Roger is not claiming 
Linnhaven is estopped from raising the spousal desertion defense, and the 
district court declined to address the issue. Accordingly, we only address 
whether the district court erred by finding Roger did not desert Heather. 

 
11 
 
In relevant part, Iowa Code section 85.31(1)(a) states, “When death results 
from the [workplace] injury, the employer shall pay the dependents who were 
wholly dependent on the earnings of the employee for support at the time of the 
injury.” Iowa Code section 85.42(1)(a) establishes that a surviving spouse “shall 
be conclusively presumed to be wholly dependent upon the deceased employee” 
unless “it is shown that at the time of the injury the surviving spouse had 
willfully deserted the deceased without fault of the deceased, then the surviving 
spouse shall not be considered as dependent in any degree.” Here, neither party 
disputes that Roger and Heather were still legally married at the time of Heather’s 
injury. Additionally, Iowa does not recognize common law divorce. See In re Est. 
of Weems’, 139 N.W.2d 922, 924 (Iowa 1966) (“[W]e know of no such thing as a 
common law divorce, or divorce resting on nothing more secure than bigamy.”). 
See generally Iowa Code ch. 598 (governing the dissolution of marriage). So, the 
only question here is whether Roger willfully deserted Heather without fault by 
her. See Iowa Code § 85.42(1)(a).  
We have seldom had the opportunity to examine the spousal desertion 
exception. In fact, the pertinent Iowa precedent analyzing spousal desertion in 
workers’ compensation proceedings is from over a hundred years ago in James 
Black Dry Goods Co. v. Iowa Indus. Com’r, 173 N.W. 23, 24 (Iowa 1919). There, 
the husband left the marital residence after years of marriage due to “serious 
financial difficulty” and traveled to find work. Id. Yet the husband and wife met 
periodically, and the husband mailed money to the wife. Id. at 25.  

 
12 
 
We borrowed from fault divorce cases in concluding that the following 
elements must exist to show desertion: (1) “the cessation of the marriage 
relations,” (2) “the intent to desert,” (3) “a continuance of the desertion during 
the statutory period,” and (4) “the absence of consent or misconduct of the party 
alleged to have been deserted.” Id. at 24. In considering these elements, we held 
that the wife had not deserted her husband simply because the parties agreed 
to live apart. Id. at 25. As we explained, “[S]eparation and desertion are not 
synonymous.” Id. Rather,  
the act [of desertion] is willful when there is a design to forsake the 
other spouse willfully or without cause, and thereby break up the 
marital union, deliberate intent to cease living with the other as 
spouse, abnegation of all duties of the marriage relations, the actual 
ceasing of cohabitation, and the intent to desert.  
Id. Perhaps most importantly, we approvingly cited Iowa caselaw for the principle 
that “if plaintiff consented to defendant living apart from him, there was no 
desertion.” Id.; see also Day v. Day, 50 N.W. 979, 980 (Iowa 1892) (“If the 
separation was by mutual agreement, there could have been no willful desertion, 
and hence no divorce on that ground.”).  
With that legal background in mind, the district court correctly determined 
Roger did not intend to desert Heather—especially without fault on Heather’s 
part—under Iowa Code section 85.42(1)(a). Just as the husband in James Black 
Dry Goods Co. left the marital residence due to “serious financial difficulty” and 
traveled to find work, Heather left the Delhi residence that she shared with Roger 
and her son to find work. See James Black Dry Goods Co., 173 N.W. at 25. Like 
the husband and wife in James Black Dry Goods Co., Heather and Roger, too, 

 
13 
 
maintained contact and helped each other financially. See id. at 24–25. Although 
Roger engaged in a romantic relationship with another woman during this time, 
there is no exception under the statute precluding a surviving spouse from 
receiving workers’ compensation benefits for adultery. See Iowa Code § 85.42(1). 
Nor is it within our authority to create such an exception. See The Federalist 
No. 78, at 402 (Alexander Hamilton) (George W. Carey & James McClellan eds., 
Gideon ed. 2001) (“[Courts] may truly be said to have neither force nor will, but 
merely judgment.”). Significantly, Roger started this relationship months after 
Heather chose to leave the marital home and move to Clinton and then Cedar 
Rapids. 
Linnhaven argues this case is distinguishable because the couple in James 
Black Dry Goods Co. exchanged “a number of letters and postcards,” while Roger 
“was only able to produce a single page of messages from [Heather].” It also 
argues there is not substantial evidence that Roger gave Heather money. True, 
Roger only produced a single page of electronic messages from Heather. But 
unlike the husband and wife in the 1919 James Black Dry Goods Co. case, Roger 
and Heather had various means to interact beyond paper mailing—be it by 
phone, text message, social media updates, and the like. They also were able to 
travel to see each other by vehicle frequently and with relative ease, which was 
not the case in the early 1900s when the husband and wife in James Black Dry 
Goods Co. lived apart in different regions of the country. Anyway, Linnhaven’s 
criticism of Roger for not providing more documentation to support his claims 
about his relationship with Heather is misplaced because Roger has the 

 
14 
 
statutory benefit of being presumed wholly dependent upon Heather as her 
surviving spouse. See Iowa Code § 85.42(1)(a).  
Further, despite Linnhaven’s many attempts to cast doubt on the 
credibility of Roger’s testimony in its appellate brief, the deputy commissioner’s 
rehearing decision specifically addressed Roger’s credibility. As the decision 
summarized, 
Ultimately, given Roger’s consistent testimony throughout the 
entirety of the case, I find Roger’s behavior and outward manner to 
be forthcoming and straightforward. At no point on rehearing was I 
given the impression that he was attempting to conceal information. 
I therefore find him to be a generally credible witness and I find his 
demeanor reflects positively on his case. 
“It is the commissioner’s duty as the trier of fact to determine the credibility of 
the witnesses, weigh the evidence, and decide the facts in issue.” Arndt v. City of 
Le Claire, 728 N.W.2d 389, 394–95 (Iowa 2007). The deputy commissioner was 
certainly in a better position to judge Roger’s credibility by participating in the 
hearing and observing Roger’s testimony live than we are in our review of the 
transcript and record as a whole.  
Notably, Linnhaven did not argue in its appellate brief that we should 
apply a standard other than that set forth in James Black Dry Goods Co. to 
determine whether Roger deserted Heather under Iowa Code section 85.42(1)(a). 
Nor does it argue that the statutory spousal desertion exception allows for the 
deprivation of death benefits in cases of mutual abandonment between spouses. 
Instead, Linnhaven only sought to differentiate this case factually from James 
Black Dry Goods Co.  

 
15 
 
Now, Linnhaven tries to take a different route in its application for further 
review by arguing that “the Iowa Court of Appeals erred in finding the appellee 
did not abandon his spouse because the legal principles of spousal abandonment 
have changed since the James Black Dry Goods Co. case was issued during a 
time where at fault divorce was the legal standard in Iowa.” However, Linnhaven 
does not elaborate on this claim further. In any event, it is well established that 
“[w]e generally will not consider issues raised for the first time in a reply brief in 
an appeal, let alone in an application for further review.” State v. Warren, 
955 N.W.2d 848, 867 (Iowa 2021) (quoting State v. Shackford, 952 N.W.2d 141, 
147–48 (Iowa 2020)).  
Moreover, although our laws governing marriage have since changed, it 
still generally remains the case in workers’ compensation cases that “[m]ere 
separation of a husband and wife, by itself, has not affected the right of a 
surviving spouse to workers’ compensation benefits.” 82 Am. Jur. 2d Workers’ 
Compensation § 166, at 192–93 (2013). Many states continue to examine the 
same elements set forth in James Black Dry Goods Co. to determine whether the 
surviving spouse willfully deserted the decedent. See, e.g., Robinson Foundry, 
Inc. v. Moon, 503 So. 2d 863, 865 (Ala. Civ. App. 1987) (“If a wife is living apart 
from her husband and if this separation is a result of the husband’s deserting 
the wife, she may still be constructively living with him and entitled to benefits.”); 
Morrison ex rel. Bryant v. Indus. Comm’n, No. 1 CA–IC 09–0021, 2009 
WL 4547027, at *3 (Ariz. Ct. App. Dec. 3, 2009) (“Voluntary abandonment is 
based on the surviving wife’s state of mind and is a question of fact to be 

 
16 
 
determined by the ALJ from the wife’s ‘testimony coupled with the surrounding 
circumstances and past history of the parties.’ ” (quoting Clark v. Indus. Comm’n, 
460 P.2d 22, 25 (Ariz. Ct. App. 1969))); Midway Landfill, Inc. v. Indus. Comm’n, 
304 N.E.2d 607, 609 (Ill. 1973) (“Here, although the husband had knowledge of 
his wife’s adultery, nonetheless he visited her, had marital relations with her, 
referred to her as his wife, discussed reconciliation with her, corresponded with 
her, and at no time sought to institute divorce proceedings to terminate the 
marriage relationship. In addition, the [wife] had not secured a divorce, had not 
remarried and was not living with [her paramour] at the time of her husband’s 
death.”); In re Way v. J & J Log & Lumber Corp., 797 N.Y.S.2d 186, 186 (App. 
Div. 2005) (“[A]bandonment in th[e workers’ compensation] context requires 
proof that the separation was voluntary, unjustified, nonconsensual and 
intended to be permanent.”); Rogers v. Univ. Motor Inn, 405 S.E.2d 770, 773 
(N.C. Ct. App. 1991) (“By the time of his death, the deceased had not stopped 
drinking. It would defy justice to require that the appellant endlessly subject 
herself to her husband’s violent behavior and alcoholism in order to qualify as a 
widow under the Workers’ Compensation Act.”); Tatum v. Tatum, 736 P.2d 506, 
509 (Okla. 1982) (“Although [the wife] didn’t know why [her husband] left, she 
made it clear that he was always welcome home. . . . In the meantime, she 
maintained the home they previously occupied together and kept her job as a 
means of providing herself with a livelihood. She had not initiated a divorce suit 
nor, to her knowledge, had he brought one against her.”). 

 
17 
 
For example, the Oklahoma Supreme Court rejected claims that a wife lost 
her statutory status as the surviving spouse and thus could not receive her 
husband’s death benefits “because she failed either to pursue her husband with 
a view to bringing him back home or failed to follow him in his travels” after he 
left the marital home. Tatum, 736 P.2d at 508. Comparable to Heather’s moves 
to establish employment in this case, the husband in Tatum “revealed a 
predisposition to wandering, short-term employment, discontent with jobs and 
instability.” Id. Relevantly, the court observed, “The law would indeed be both 
[naïve] and unrealistic if it expected a wife to abandon her only precious 
possessions in a fruitless quest after an errant husband who had given no 
indication of his desire to return and stay.” Id. In holding the wife was entitled 
to the deceased husband’s death benefits as his statutory surviving spouse, the 
court cited facts similar to this case. Id. at 508–09.  
Like the contact between Heather and Roger, the husband in Tatum 
“communicated with [his wife] several times. He even returned to see her on 
several occasions, but never to stay.” Id. at 509. Likewise, neither of them ever 
sought a divorce. Id. Nevertheless, the husband entered into a relationship with 
another woman, Gloria, established a common household with Gloria and two of 
her children from another marriage, had a child with Gloria, and held himself 
out as Gloria’s husband despite no legal marriage. Id. at 507. Yet the court 
rejected Gloria’s claim that the wife was not entitled to the deceased husband’s 
death benefits as his surviving spouse and remarked that the wife’s “status as a 

 
18 
 
deserted spouse was not lost either by inaction or non-pursuit.” Id. at 508–09. 
That is also the case here. 
We acknowledge that much of the caselaw nationally analyzing the 
deserted spouse exception is based on an outdated view of marital relationships. 
By all appearances, Roger and Heather made a mutual decision to live apart and 
had an unconventional marriage at the time of Heather’s 2012 injury. But the 
statutory language of Iowa Code section 85.42(1)(a) is clear that the spousal 
desertion exception only applies if at the time of Heather’s injury, Roger had 
willfully deserted Heather without fault by Heather. This is where the dissent is 
misguided in accusing us of “go[ing] out of [our] way to defeat rather than uphold 
the agency’s decision.”  
The agency’s determination that Roger deserted Heather is not purely a 
factual finding in which we must only decide whether that decision was 
supported by substantial evidence. Rather, we must decide whether the agency 
correctly applied those facts to the law, which specifically asks whether Roger, 
as the surviving spouse, “willfully deserted [Heather] without fault of [Heather]” 
at the time of her injury. Iowa Code § 85.42(1)(a) (emphasis added). “When the 
agency exercises its discretion based on an erroneous interpretation of the law, 
we are not bound by those ‘legal conclusions but may correct misapplications of 
the law.’ ” Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 219 (quoting Stroup, 530 N.W.2d at 443). Here, 
the commissioner erroneously interpreted the law by conflating separation with 
desertion and ignoring Heather’s fault in that separation. It is our job to correct 
that misapplication of the law.  

 
19 
 
The district court aptly summarized how the statute operates, explaining, 
“If Heather deserted [Roger], [Roger] would still be eligible for survivor’s benefits. 
Likewise, if neither party deserted one another, [Roger] is eligible for survivor’s 
benefits. If both parties deserted the marriage, then it cannot be said Heather is 
without fault, so [Roger] would still collect.”  
Based on the facts before us, we cannot say that Roger intended to desert 
Heather or that Heather is without fault for their separation. This is especially 
so considering Heather initiated the separation through her choice to leave Roger 
and her son in their marital home in pursuit of work in a different part of the 
state. “The law would indeed be both [naïve] and unrealistic if it expected [Roger] 
to abandon” his employment and home to follow Heather through multiple cities 
in her quest for work. Tatum, 736 P.2d at 508. Other facts supporting our 
conclusion include Heather and Roger’s continued contact after Heather left, 
Roger’s 2011 and 2012 tax filings that list his marital status as “married filing 
separately,” and Roger’s continued financial support of Heather at the time of 
her injury.  
Accordingly, we agree with the district court that there is not substantial 
evidence to support the commissioner’s finding that Roger deserted Heather 
without fault by her under section 85.42(1)(a). Because the final agency ruling 
concluded that Roger was not entitled to benefits under Iowa Code section 
85.31(1)(a), it did not address Linnhaven’s claim that the willful injury exception 
under Iowa Code section 85.16 bars Roger’s recovery of the benefits. Thus, we 

 
20 
 
also agree with the district court’s determination that remand is appropriate for 
the commissioner to make the factual findings necessary to decide this issue.  
IV. Conclusion. 
We affirm the district court’s ruling and remand to the workers’ 
compensation commission to determine whether the willful injury exception 
applies. 
DECISION OF COURT OF APPEALS AND DISTRICT COURT JUDGMENT 
AFFIRMED. 
Waterman, Mansfield, and McDermott, JJ., join this opinion. McDonald, 
J., files a dissenting opinion, in which Oxley, J., joins. May, J., takes no part. 
 
 

 
21 
 
 
#21–1968, Blasdell v. Linnhaven, Inc. 
McDONALD, Justice (dissenting). 
Under the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act (IAPA), this court “must 
‘broadly and liberally’ apply the agency findings in order to uphold, rather than 
defeat, the agency’s decision.” Stephenson v. Furnas Elec. Co., 522 N.W.2d 828, 
831 (Iowa 1994) (quoting Ward v. Iowa Dep’t of Transp., 304 N.W.2d 236, 237 
(Iowa 1981)). Contrary to the IAPA and our longstanding precedents interpreting 
the same, the majority seeks to defeat rather than uphold the agency’s decision. 
The majority applies the incorrect standard of review and then compounds the 
error by incorrectly applying the incorrect standard of review. I respectfully 
dissent. I would vacate the decisions of the court of appeals and the district court 
and would affirm the agency’s decision. 
I. 
The majority’s first error is that it applies the wrong standard of review. 
See generally Ripperger v. Iowa Pub. Info. Bd., 967 N.W.2d 540, 555 (Iowa 2021) 
(Mansfield, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (dissenting on ground 
that “[t]he majority has applied the wrong standard of review”). The majority 
states that desertion is a mixed question of law and fact, but the majority cites 
no authority for that proposition. There is a good reason for the majority’s 
omission: the majority’s statement regarding the standard of review is directly 
contrary to controlling and persuasive authority holding that desertion is solely 
a question of fact left to the finder of fact.  

 
22 
 
In the controlling case of James Black Dry Goods Co. v. Iowa Industrial 
Com’r, which the majority discusses at length, this court stated desertion is a 
“question[] of fact.” 173 N.W. 23, 24 (Iowa 1919). James Black Dry Goods Co. 
went on to explain that in reviewing an administrative proceeding, this court 
does “not pass upon questions of fact,” and if “the commissioner could have 
found, under the evidence, even though there was a conflict therein,” desertion 
or no desertion, “then there is no question for this court to pass upon.” Id.  
The conclusion that desertion is a question of fact makes sense because 
desertion is a question of intent. “Desertion consists in the actual ceasing of 
cohabitation and the intent in the mind of the offending party to desert the 
other.” Nelson v. Nelson, 68 N.W.2d 746, 748 (Iowa 1955) (quoting Parker v. 
Parker, 55 N.W.2d 183, 185 (Iowa 1952)). Desertion can be shown by “intent to 
cease living with the other as spouse,” “abnegation of all duties of the marriage 
relation,” and an intent “not to return.” Parker, 55 N.W.2d at 185 (quoting 
Tipton v. Tipton, 151 N.W. 90, 92 (Iowa 1915)). As a question of intent, desertion 
“is a question of fact.” Conlin v. Conlin, 144 N.W. 1005, 1008 (Iowa 1914). 
James Black Dry Goods Co., Nelson, Parker, and Conlin are not outliers. 
Other courts also hold desertion is a question of fact left to the discretion of the 
agency or the finder of fact. See, e.g., Blache v. Blache, 160 P.2d 136, 144 (Cal. 
Dist. Ct. App. 1945) (stating desertion “is entirely a question of fact”); Casale v. 
Casale, 86 A.2d 568, 570 (Conn. 1952) (stating desertion is intent to cease 
cohabitation with no mind to renew and “the question of intent is always a 
question of fact” (quoting Bennett v. Bennett, 43 Conn. 313, 318 (1876))); Stark v. 

 
23 
 
State Indus. Acc. Comm’n, 204 P. 151, 158 (Or. 1922) (stating question of 
desertion for compensation benefits “was a question of fact”); Roanoke Belt, 
Inc. v. Mroczkowski, 455 S.E.2d 267, 271 (Va. Ct. App. 1995) (citing Kelly v. 
Pendleton Constr. Co., 28 S.E.2d 621, 623 (Va. 1944), for the proposition that 
“determination of wife’s desertion of marriage abrogating dependency . . . was 
question of fact”); Barker v. Dayton, 28 Wis. 367, 376 (1871) (stating desertion 
“was a question of fact”). 
Because desertion is a question of fact, the correct standard of review 
under the IAPA is substantial evidence review. The legislature has “vested the 
commissioner with the discretion to make factual determinations.” Mike Brooks, 
Inc. v. House, 843 N.W.2d 885, 889 (Iowa 2014). Courts are bound by these 
factual determinations “if they are supported by ‘substantial evidence in the 
record before the court when that record is viewed as a whole.’ ” Id. (quoting Iowa 
Code § 17A.19(10)(f) (2009)). Substantial evidence is “the quantity and quality of 
evidence that would be deemed sufficient by a neutral, detached, and reasonable 
person, to establish the fact at issue when the consequences resulting from the 
establishment of that fact are understood to be serious and of great importance.” 
Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f)(1) (2017). “Evidence is not insubstantial merely 
because different conclusions may be drawn from the evidence.” Cedar Rapids 
Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 845 (Iowa 2011). So long as there is 
some evidence to support the finding actually made, a reviewing court must 
affirm the agency’s finding of fact “even though [the court] may have drawn a 
different conclusion as fact finder.” Id.  

 
24 
 
The agency’s finding that Roger deserted Heather is supported by 
substantial evidence and should be affirmed. The agency found that Heather 
moved and Roger did not follow her. After Roger decided to not move with 
Heather, Roger began a relationship with another woman “that lasted at least 
five years and included several years of cohabitation.” Roger and Heather never 
had a sexual relationship after they ceased living together, and there is no 
evidence in the record of his intent to resume a marital relationship with 
Heather. It is well established that a person who ceases cohabitation with his or 
her spouse and cohabits with another has objectively demonstrated an intent to 
desert the marital relationship. See, e.g., Redditt v. McDonald’s Rest., 990 P.2d 
759, 762 (Kan. Ct. App. 1999) (“[C]ohabitation with another may be indicative of 
a changed character in the spousal relationship.” (quoting Tatum v. Tatum, 736 
P.2d 506, 509 (Okla. 1982))); Tatum, 736 P.2d at 509 (stating “cohabitation with 
another” is “outward recognition that the marriage relationship had come to an 
end”); In re Est. of Talerico, 137 A.3d 577, 582 (Pa. Super. Ct. 2016) (recognizing 
state supreme court had held wife’s cohabitation with another man constituted 
“open disregard” of marital relationship and thus constituted desertion) (quoting 
In re Crater’s Est., 93 A.2d 475, 477 (Pa. 1953)); Petachenko v. Petachenko, 350 
S.E.2d 600, 602 (Va. 1986) (discussing lack of cohabitation and desertion).   
II. 
The majority’s second error is that it incorrectly applies the incorrect 
standard of review. Even if desertion constituted an application of law to facts, 
as the majority contends, this court is still required to afford the agency great 

 
25 
 
deference in reviewing its application of law to facts. But the majority affords the 
agency no such deference here. 
“The legislature clearly vested the agency with the application of the law 
to the facts.” Drake Univ. v. Davis, 769 N.W.2d 176, 183 (Iowa 2009) (citing Iowa 
Code §§ 86.14–.24 (2003)). Our review of an agency’s application of law to facts 
is thus incredibly deferential. “We are required to give the agency appropriate 
deference.” Id. (citing Iowa Code § 17A.19(11)(c)). When a party “challenges the 
agency’s application of law to facts, we will not disrupt the agency’s decision 
unless it is ‘irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.’ ” Neal v. Annett Holdings, 
Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 526 (Iowa 2012) (quoting Larson Mfg. Co. v. Thorson, 763 
N.W.2d 842, 857 (Iowa 2009)).  
A decision is “irrational” when it is “not governed by or 
according to reason.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 
1195. A decision is “illogical” when it is “contrary to or devoid of 
logic.” Id. at 1127. A decision is “unjustifiable” when it has no 
foundation in fact or reason. See id. at 2502 (defining “unjustifiable” 
as “lacking in . . . justice”); id. at 1228 (defining “justice” as “the 
quality or characteristic of being just, impartial or fair”); id. (defining 
“just” as “conforming to fact and reason”). 
Sherwin-Williams Co. v. Iowa Dep’t of Revenue, 789 N.W.2d 417, 432 (Iowa 2010). 
The drafter and leading expert on the IAPA, Professor Bonfield, explained that 
this standard of review is essentially an arbitrary-and-capricious standard of 
review. Id.; cf. Iowa Farm Bureau v. Env’t Prot. Comm’n, 850 N.W.2d 403, 432 
(Iowa 2014) (discussing Professor Bonfield’s work in this area and describing him 
as the “leading authority on administrative procedure law”). 
The agency’s determination that Roger deserted Heather and was not 
entitled to death benefits was not wholly arbitrary and capricious. The limits of 

 
26 
 
reasoned judgment are determined by the purpose of the statute at issue. This 
statute was intended to provide death benefits to “dependents who were wholly 
dependent” upon the wage earner. Iowa Code § 85.31(1)(a) (2017). Included 
among these wholly dependent persons is the nondeserting “surviving spouse” 
of the wage earner. Iowa Code § 85.42(1)(a). The agency’s determination that 
Roger—a working man, who was in no way financially dependent on his spouse, 
who was not cohabiting with his spouse, and who was instead living with another 
woman—was not a wholly dependent spouse entitled to spousal death benefits 
is rational and reasonable. Indeed, the agency’s determination that a financially 
independent man who was living with another woman was not a wholly 
dependent spouse is better reasoned and better supported by the controlling and 
persuasive precedents than the majority’s contrary conclusion.   
III. 
“The administrative process presupposes judgment calls are to be left to 
the agency. Nearly all disputes are won or lost there.” Sellers v. Emp. Appeal Bd., 
531 N.W.2d 645, 646 (Iowa Ct. App. 1995) (citation omitted). This court is “not 
free to interfere with any agency finding where there is a conflict in the evidence 
or when reasonable minds might disagree about the inference to be drawn from 
the evidence, whether it is disputed or not.” Stephenson, 522 N.W.2d at 831. 
Instead, this court “must ‘broadly and liberally’ apply the agency findings in 
order to uphold, rather than defeat, the agency’s decision.” Id. (quoting Ward, 
304 N.W.2d at 237). The majority goes out of its way to defeat rather than uphold 

 
27 
 
the agency’s decision. The majority’s approach is contrary to statute, controlling 
precedents, and persuasive precedents. I respectfully dissent.   
Oxley, J., joins this dissent. 
 
