Case Number: 24008128.01
Case Title:  KLINEFELTER, STEVE V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Klinefelter Steve-24008128.01m.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
STEVE KLINEFELTER, 
No. 24008128.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, INC., 
ALTERNATE CARE DECISION 
 
 
 
HEAD NOTE: 2701 
 
Employer, 
INDEMNITY INS. CO. OF NORTH 
AMERICA, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
I.  
PR OC ED U R AL B AC K GR OU N D . 
On November 12, 2024, claimant Steve Klinefelter filed a petition concerning 
application for alternate care under Iowa Code section 85.27 and Iowa Administrative 
Code rule 876—4.48 that named employer Old Dominion Freight Line, Inc. (Old 
Dominion) and its workers’ compensation insurance carrier, Indemnity Insurance 
Company of North America (Indemnity), as defendants. The petition concerning 
application for alternate care is an agency form, on which Paragraph 1 includes a blank 
for the employer’s address and Paragraph 2 a blank for the insurance carrier’s address. 
Klinefelter filled in the address blank for each paragraph. Ashley Jones, paralegal to 
claimant’s counsel, completed the “Proof of Service” section of the form, averring that 
she mailed a copy of the completed petition by certified U.S. mail, return receipt 
requested, to the address for Old Dominion Freight Line provided in Paragraph 1. 
In addition to complying with the requirement to serve the employer, Klinefelter 
also sent the petition to the insurance carrier via certified U.S. Mail, return receipt 
requested. Klinefelter filed proof that the U.S. Postal Service completed service to both 
defendants successfully. Klinefelter filed a copy of the receipt for Old Dominion, dated 
November 15, 2024, and the same for Indemnity, dated November 21, 2024. 
The original notice portion of the agency form informs the named defendants that 
the claimant has filed a petition with the agency. It also states in pertinent part:  
You may file an answer, but it is not necessary due to time constraints. If 
no answer is filed, you will be required to provide a response at a hearing. 
Failure to participate may impact your rights and responsibilities under 
Iowa Code section 85.27. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Nov-22  15:36:21     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

KLINEFELTER V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, INC. 
Page 2 
 
The agency scheduled a telephone alternate care hearing and sent notice to the 
parties. The notice identified November 22, 2024, as the date of hearing and 10:30 a.m. 
central time as the hearing’s start time. The notice also states in pertinent part, “You 
must be prepared to present your case at the time of hearing. Failure to participate may 
impact your rights and responsibilities under Iowa workers’ compensation law.” It also 
warns that the parties must provide a phone number for the agency to call in order to 
participate in the hearing and failure to do so will result in the agency “will not be able to 
call you for the hearing if you do not provide a phone number.” Under “Information for 
Employer/Insurance Carrier,” the notice states, “If you do not file a written answer, you 
will be required to respond on the record to the allegations in the claimant’s petition.” 
With the enactment of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act, “‘It was the purpose 
of the legislature to create a tribunal to do rough justice—speedy, summary, informal, 
untechnical.’” Zomer v. West River Farms, Inc., 666 N.W.2d 130, 133 (Iowa 2003) 
(quoting Flint v. City of Eldon, 191 Iowa 845, 847, 183 N.W. 344, 345 (1921)). Under 
Iowa Code section 10A.302, the Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation (DWC) “is 
responsible for the administration of the laws of this state relating to workers’ 
compensation”. Iowa Code section 10A.310(1)(a) empowers the commissioner by 
expressly including in its list of duties the power to “adopt and enforce rules necessary 
to implement” Iowa’s workers’ compensation statutes, including Iowa Code chapter 85, 
which contains section 85.27.  
To that end, the commissioner promulgated rules governing contested case 
proceedings that are codified in chapter 876—4 of the Iowa Administrative Code. Rule 
876—4.35 states that the Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure (IRCP) “shall govern the 
contested case proceedings before the workers’ compensation commissioner unless 
the provisions are in conflict with” the administrative rules adopted by the commissioner 
or a provision of an Iowa workers’ compensation statute or the Iowa Administrative 
Procedure Act (IAPA), Iowa Code chapter 17A. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.6 identifies Form 100C, Original Notice 
and Petition Concerning Application for Alternate Care, as within its purview. Rule 
876—4.8(1) provides in pertinent part: 
No action shall be taken by the workers’ compensation commissioner on 
any contested case against an adverse party unless the adverse party has 
answered or unless it can be shown by proper proof that the adverse party 
has been properly served. The original notice and petition if required by 
876—4.6(85,86,17A) shall be accompanied by proof that the petitioner 
has deposited copies of such documents with the U.S. post office for 
delivery by certified mail, return receipt requested, upon the respondent or 
has submitted such copies to a proper person for delivery of personal 
service as in civil actions. 
In the current case, Klinefelter complied with the rule by using the agency form 
when initiating this case. The form includes a proof of service section, which Klinefelter 
completed before filing. The record before the agency shows Klinefelter complied with 

KLINEFELTER V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, INC. 
Page 3 
 
rules 876—4.6 and 4.8(1) with respect to use of the agency petition form, service of the 
petition, and proof of service. In addition to complying with agency rules, claimant’s 
counsel also emailed a copy of the petition to the claims adjuster with whom he was 
communicating regarding care. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.48(8) provides, “After being served with an 
application for alternate care, the employer shall file an appearance o[r] answer as soon 
as practicable before the time of the hearing.” Nobody appeared on behalf of the 
defendants in this case before the hearing. And the defendants did not file an answer 
either. Therefore, the defendants failed to comply with the requirements of rule 876— 
4.48(8). 
The failure to appear or file an answer, as required by rule 876—4.48(8), raises 
the question of whether entry of default would be appropriate in this case. The IRCP 
provisions governing default require notice of intent to file written application for default. 
See IRCP 1.972(2)–(3). A party may not serve such notice until after an adverse party 
has failed to file a motion or answer within a reasonable time of service of the petition. 
IRCP 1.972(1). Under the IRCP, a party may not apply for entry of default until after ten 
days have passed from the date of mailing notice of intent to file the written application 
for default. See id. 
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) requires the agency to issue a written decision on an 
application for alternate care within ten days of the filing of the petition if the agency 
holds a telephone hearing and within fourteen days if it holds an in-person hearing. And 
under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.48(8), the defendant(s) must file an 
appearance or answer “as soon as practicable before the time of the hearing.” The 
statutory requirement to issue a decision after the telephone hearing and within ten 
business days of the date on which the petition was filed combines with the agency rule 
giving the defendants until the scheduled hearing start time to file an answer generates 
a conflict with the IRCP provisions on default. It is practically impossible to give notice of 
intent to file written application for default after the other party fails to file a pleading if 
the other party has the right to do so up until the start time of the hearing. Further, it is 
impossible to file such notice, wait ten days, and then apply for entry of default before 
the statutory deadline by which the agency must issue a decision. Due to this conflict, 
the IRCP provisions on default do not govern in alternate care proceedings before the 
agency under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.35. 
The agency scheduled the case for a telephone alternate care hearing to be held 
on November 22, 2024, and issued notice on the Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) to Klinefelter and the defendants via U.S. Mail at the addresses 
identified in the petition. Because nobody appeared on behalf of the defendants and the 
defendants did not answer the petition, there was no representative identified or phone 
number to call for the defendants to participate in the hearing. The defendants made no 
other known attempt to contact the agency regarding the hearing. 

KLINEFELTER V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, INC. 
Page 4 
 
The defendants’ failure to comply with provisions of Iowa Administrative Code 
rules 876—4.48(8) and (12) arguably implicates rule 876—4.36, which governs 
compliance with agency rules and provides: 
If any party to a contested case or an attorney representing such party 
shall fail to comply with these rules or any order of a deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner or the workers’ compensation commissioner, 
the deputy workers’ compensation commissioner or workers’ 
compensation commissioner may impose sanctions which may include 
dismissing the action without prejudice, excluding or limiting evidence, 
assessing costs or expenses, and closing the record in whole or in part to 
further activity by the party. 
Despite the defendants’ failure to comply with two administrative rules, Klinefelter did 
not move for sanctions and this decision does not address sanctions. 
At the scheduled hearing time, the undersigned telephoned claimant’s counsel, 
who stated Klinefelter was prepared to proceed to hearing. However, because the 
defendants did not participate, Klinefelter elected to file a motion to waive the 
evidentiary hearing and submit the case on the written record, which was unresisted. 
The undersigned issued a ruling granting the motion, admitting claimant’s exhibits into 
evidence, and closing the record in this case. 
II.  
ISSU E . 
The issue under consideration is whether Klinefelter is entitled to alternate care 
in the form of an orthopedic evaluation of the right knee. 
III .  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T . 
The evidentiary record consists of Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 7. Klinefelter 
also filed proof of service with the agency. After careful consideration of the evidentiary 
and proof of service documents, the undersigned enters the following findings of fact. 
Klinefelter sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of his employment 
with Old Dominion on August 5, 2024. The defendants accepted liability for the work 
injury and furnished care under Iowa Code section 85.27 and directed care. On October 
4, 2024, claimant’s counsel sent a letter as an attachment to an email sent by Jones to 
Jaclyn Borek of Gallagher Bassett, the third-party administrator (TPA) adjusting the 
claim. (Ex. 1, p. 1; Ex. 2, p. 2) In the letter, claimant’s counsel requested authorization 
for care for multiple body parts, one of which was the right knee. (Ex. 1) Borek replied 
by email on October 7, 2024, stating, “Hmm, this treatment has been authorized. Sorry 
the message is not going through clearly. I’ll see what I can do.” (Ex. 2, p. 2) 
On October 11, 2024, Jones followed up in an email to Borek, stating in pertinent 
part: 

KLINEFELTER V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, INC. 
Page 5 
 
Mr. Klinefelter went to his appt at Concentra and they found his knee to be 
broken in three places. However, no orthopedic doctor has been referred. 
Could we get him set up for an appointment? 
He has preference to see Dr. Fish at Capital Orthopedics (515-440-2676) 
if that would be possible. 
Also to note, he has not been reached out to about his physical therapy 
appointment for his arm. 
(Ex. 3, p. 5) 
Borek replied on October 15, 2024, [sic] “Yes. This is fine . Thank you!” (Ex. 3, p. 
4) Eighteen minutes later, Jones followed up in an email, “Just to verify, should Mr. 
Klinefelter wait for Dr. Fish’s office to reach out to schedule or has the office been 
informed and he can call now?” (Ex. 3, p. 4) On October 17, 2024, after receiving no 
reply, Jones followed up on the request for clarification. (Ex. 3, p. 3) Neither Borek nor 
anybody else on behalf of the defendants provided the requested clarification, so Jones 
sent another email on October 21, 2024, stating: 
Following up on the request below. Capital Orthopedics has requested 
written authorization before Mr. Klinefelter can schedule an appointment 
for his broken knee. Please let me know when this is completed so he can 
be seen. 
(Ex. 3, p. 3)  
Nobody responded with information regarding what action the defendants had 
taken to allow Klinefelter to receive the authorized care by Dr. Fish at Capital 
Orthopedics or what he should do next. This inaction prompted claimant’s counsel to 
send a letter via email to Borek on October 25, 2024, stating: 
On October 11, 2024, we requested that you authorize orthopedic 
evaluation of the right knee for Steven L. Klinefelter. Repeat requests 
have been made since then to provide written authorization to Capital 
Orthopedics. Significant time has passed since we made that request and 
no effort has been made to authorize this treatment. Please consider this 
Steven Klinefelter’s notice that he is dissatisfied with the care and 
treatment provided by the Employer. If treatment is not authorized and 
scheduled immediately, we plan to file an application for alternate medical 
care on October 28, 2024. 
(Ex. 4, p. 6) 
Borek sent Jones an email on October 29, 2024, stating in pertinent part: 
Ashley, in follow up to the email I sent a moment ago, I have approved Mr. 
Klinefelter to be seen by Dr. Fish. No one has ever sent me a request for 

KLINEFELTER V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, INC. 
Page 6 
 
authorization, thus I kept looking for it, and it was nowhere to be found. 
When I spoke with Casey, and a moment ago, the RN on the file, some 
light was shed. Thus, I am approving this, have faxed a letter to Casey, 
and also left a voicemail for her. 
Hopefully things will go smoothly now that he is authorized. He is able to 
schedule his own appointment at a time that is convenient for him. I 
appreciate your patience, however, there were a few things I needed to 
clarify before just authorizing the treatment. He should be good to go. 
(Ex. 5, p. 7) 
Jones emailed Borek again on October 30, 2024, stating in pertinent part: 
Steve has [been] informed that his appointment is still pending for Capital 
Orthopedics. The ortho has received the authorization but still require(s) 
some other documentation before he can be seen. 
(Ex. 6, p. 8) Jones followed up on November 4, 2024, with another email to Borek in 
which she stated in pertinent part, “Following up on the request below as Mr. Klinefelter 
was informed that the provider is still awaiting documentation before an appointment 
can be scheduled. (Ex. 6, p. 8)  
Claimant’s counsel sent a letter by email to Borek dated November 7, 2024, 
stating: 
We previously sent a dissatisfaction of care letter on October 4, 2024. My 
office did not file an alternate care petition based on the representation 
that treatment was being authorized, including an evaluation for his knee 
injury. Specifically, on October 11, 2024, we requested that you authorize 
orthopedic evaluation of the right knee for Mr. Klinefelter. It was conveyed 
to my office on October 15, 2024, that this appointment was approved. 
However, no such authorization has been received by the provider. 
Repeat requests have been made since then to provide written 
authorization to Capital Orthopedics. Significant time has passed since we 
made that request and no effort has been made to authorize this 
treatment. Please consider this Steven Klinefelter’s notice that he is 
dissatisfied with the care and treatment provided by the Employer. If 
treatment is not authorized and scheduled immediately, we plan to file an 
application for alternate medical care on November 11, 2024. 
(Ex. 7, p. 9) 
Nobody responded to the letter from claimant’s counsel with additional 
information for Klinefelter. Nor did they fulfill the requirements Capital Orthopedics 
imposes for patients who are workers’ compensation claimants. As a result, Klinefelter 

KLINEFELTER V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, INC. 
Page 7 
 
filed the petition that initiated this contested case proceeding before the commissioner 
on November 12, 2024. Jones sent Borek a courtesy copy of the petition and notice of 
hearing by email on November 14, 2024. 
The evidence shows that the defendants made misrepresentations regarding the 
status of authorization of care for Klinefelter’s injured knee over several weeks. As of 
the date of hearing, the defendants had failed to take the necessary action to allow 
Klinefelter to receive care at Capital Orthopedics with Dr. Fish. In response to follow-up 
correspondence from claimant’s counsel and his paralegal, the defendants have ceased 
all communication. This has included ignoring the petition and notice of hearing in this 
case. The weight of the evidence shows that the defendants have unreasonably 
abandoned care for Klinefelter’s knee. 
IV.  
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW. 
Iowa Code section 85.27 requires an employer to furnish care related to an 
employee’s a work injury. Such care “must be offered promptly and be reasonably 
suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.” Iowa Code 
§ 85.27(4). The legislature saw fit to pair this responsibility with the right to choose care. 
Id.; see also Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 436 (Iowa 1997). 
“If the employer chooses the care, the employer shall hold the employee harmless for 
the cost of care until the employer notifies the employee that the employer is no longer 
authorizing all or any part of the care and the reason for the change in authorization.” 
Id.; Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, 771 (Iowa 2016). 
However, an employer’s right to choose care is not absolute under the statute. 
See id.; Ramirez-Trujillo, 878 N.W.2d at 769. An employee dissatisfied with employer-
furnished care (or lack thereof) has the right to seek an alternative. See id.; see also 
Iowa Admin. Code r. 876—4.48. A dissatisfied employee must first share the 
employee’s discontent with the employer. Id.; Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. 
Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 204 (Iowa 2010). If the parties cannot reach an agreement on 
care, the employee may apply to the commissioner for alternate care. Id.; see also Iowa 
Admin. Code r. 876—4.48. And after an informal hearing, “the commissioner may, upon 
. . . reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care.” Id. 
The dispositive question in an alternate care case is whether the employer-
furnished care is reasonable. Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 124 (Iowa 
1995). “Reasonableness, of course, is a question of fact.” Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d at 436 
(citing Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123). As the party seeking relief in the form of alternate 
care, the employee bears the burden of proving that the authorized care in question is 
unreasonable. Id. Because “the employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the 
question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” an injured employee’s dissatisfaction 
with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough to satisfy the employee’s 
burden of proof. Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124. 
As found above, Klinefelter has satisfied his burden of proof in this case. The 
evidence shows it is more likely than not that the defendants have abandoned care for 

KLINEFELTER V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, INC. 
Page 8 
 
his injured knee by refusing to take the necessary steps to allow him to receive care at 
Capital Orthopedics with Dr. Fish. The defendants’ abandonment of care constitutes a 
failure to promptly offer care that is reasonably suited to treat Klinefelter’s injury. The 
defendants have therefore surrendered their right to control care for Klinefelter’s right 
knee under Iowa Code section 85.27. Klinefelter is free to choose providers to treat his 
injured knee and the defendants must hold him harmless for any and all reasonable 
care relating to the work injury to his knee. 
V. 
OR D ER . 
Under the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) The applications for alternate care is GRANTED. 
 
2) Klinefelter may pursue reasonable care for the work injury to his knee with 
providers of his choosing. 
 
3) The defendants shall promptly take any and all action necessary for 
Klinefelter to promptly receive care with his chosen providers and hold 
Klinefelter harmless for the costs of such reasonable care. 
 
4) Failure to comply with this decision may result in sanctions under Iowa 
Administrative Code 876—4.36. 
The Iowa workers’ compensation commissioner issued an order delegating 
authority to deputy workers’ compensation commissioners, such as the undersigned, to 
issue final agency decisions on applications for alternate care. That order is attached to 
the notice of hearing issued in this case. Due to the order of delegation, there is no 
intra-agency appeal of this decision to the commissioner, only judicial review in an 
appropriate district court under the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Iowa Code 
chapter 17A.  
Signed and filed this 22nd day of November, 2024. 
 
 
 
BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
Served via the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES): 
Dillon Besser, Attorney for Claimant 

KLINEFELTER V. OLD DOMINION FREIGHT LINE, INC. 
Page 9 
 
Served via certified U.S. Mail, return receipt requested: 
Old Dominion Freight Line, Inc. 
500 Old Dominion Way 
Thomasville, NC 27360 
 
Indemnity Ins. Co. of N. America 
PO Box 1000 
Philadelphia, PA 19106 
 
 
