Case Number: 19700082.01
Case Title:  HADZALIC, HUSE V. ALLEN MEMORIAL HOSPITAL
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Hadzalic Huse-19700082.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
HUSE HADZALIC, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
File No. 19700082.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                ARBITRATION DECISION           
UNITYPOINT HEALTH-ALLEN 
  : 
 
 
MEMORIAL, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
  : 
 
Defendant. 
  :                    Head Note No.  1108 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Huse Hadzalic, filed a petition for arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from UnityPoint Health – Allen Memorial, a self-insured 
employer.  The claimant was represented by Chandler Surrency.  The defendant was 
represented by Jennifer Clendenin. 
The matter came on for hearing on October 21, 2020, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joe Walsh via Court Call videoconferencing system.  The 
record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 10, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 
9 and Defense Exhibits A through K.  The claimant testified under oath at hearing, in 
addition to claimant’s spouse, Hasnija Hadzalic.  Debra Hoadley served as the court 
reporter.  The matter was fully submitted on December 16, 2020, after helpful briefing 
by the parties. 
The parties submitted an additional stipulation on March 1, 2021, which was 
accepted by the agency. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Claimant alleges he sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course 
of his employment on January 31, 2018.  The defendant disputes there was 
any injury at work on this date and further disputes that the alleged injury is a 
cause of any temporary or permanent disability. 
2. The claimant is seeking healing period payments from January 31, 2018, 
through April 2, 2019.  The defendant disputes responsibility for these 
payments. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Jun-25  10:38:17     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HADZALIC V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-ALLEN MEMORIAL 
Page 2 
 
3. The claimant is seeking permanent disability payments commencing on April 
3, 2019.  The defendant disputes it is responsible for any permanent disability 
benefits. 
4. The defendant has asserted an affirmative defense under Section 85.33(3). 
5. The claimant is seeking medical expenses as outlined in Claimant’s Exhibit 5.  
Defendant contends claimant is not entitled to any of these expenses. 
STIPULATIONS 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
1. The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
2. If the claimant is entitled to any permanent disability benefits, the disability is 
industrial. 
3. The weekly rate of compensation is $359.30. 
4. Affirmative defenses have been waived with the exception as set forth above. 
5. There is no issue of credit.  No benefits have been paid. 
6. With regard to the medical expenses listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 5, those 
expenses are causally connected to the medical conditions on which the 
claim of injury is based, with the exception of two dates of service:  
September 10, 2018 and August 21, 2019. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant, Huse Hadzalic, was 53 years old as of the date of hearing. He was 
born in Bosnia and came to the United States in 1999.  He was well-educated in Bosnia, 
including two years of college.  Since being in the United States, he has learned to 
speak, read, and write English.  He is relatively fluent and speaks with an accent.  He 
became a U.S. citizen in 2006.  He is married to his wife Hasnija (goes by “Hana”) and 
has a total of five children.  Mr. Hadzalic testified that he has PTSD from the Bosnian 
War.  (Transcript, pages 45-46) 
Prior to working for the employer in this case, Mr. Hadzalic had worked for 17 
years for the Waterloo Community School District (WCSD).  This was his primary 
employment in the United States since immigrating.  He briefly performed some work in 
furniture manufacturing and meatpacking.  He began this work as a custodian in 2000.  
The work ended in June 2017.  Mr. Hadzalic had several work injuries or work injury 
claims against WCSD, all of which were settled around the time of his separation from 
employment.  (Defendant’s Exhibit E)  None of these injury claims were for a low back 
injury.  Rather he settled claims on a contested basis for his neck, shoulders, respiratory 
conditions, as well as his left knee and hip.  Specifically, he alleged an injury to his left 

HADZALIC V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-ALLEN MEMORIAL 
Page 3 
 
knee and hip which occurred on February 6, 2017.  In July 2017, he underwent surgery 
on his left knee by Benjamin Torrez, D.O.  After this surgery, he was in a period of 
recuperation for several months. 
In August 2017, Mr. Hadzalic was reporting numbness and tingling in his left hip 
radiating down below his left knee without any actual low back pain.  (Joint Exhibit 6, 
page 87)  In September 2017, he received an injection in his left knee but underwent no 
treatment or diagnosis for the low back.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 103)  Dr. Torrez did provide an 
opinion letter regarding this condition, stating that it was likely “neuralgia paresthetica, 
which is compression of the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve . . .”  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 101)  Dr. 
Torrez opined that since Mr. Hadzalic was overweight, he likely was having nerve 
compression associated with the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve.  He did not diagnose 
or opine, in any way, that Mr. Hadzalic suffered from a low back condition at this time. 
Other than these symptoms in 2017, Mr. Hadzalic has had other back strains 
and/or low back (or left leg) symptoms prior to this alleged work injury primarily between 
May 2011 and December 2015.  (See Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 2-14)  The medical documentation 
in the file documents various low back strains with some intermittent sciatica resulting in 
conservative care including medications and activity limitations.  The records document 
that at times his low back pain was severe.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 10)  For his part, Mr. Hadzalic 
testified these were temporary and relatively minor or brief periods of treatment.  He 
testified that he had no treatment at all for any type of low back symptoms between 
December 2015 and his work injury in January 2018.  The medical file supports this. 
After recuperating from his left knee surgery, Mr. Hadzalic felt well enough to 
reenter the workforce in January 2018.  He was hired by UnityPoint Health-Allen 
Memorial, the employer herein (hereafter Allen).  His wife, Hana, worked for Allen in the 
housekeeping department.  As part of the application, Mr. Hadzalic completed a 
physical assessment form which included answering several broad questions about 
past medical conditions.  (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 63-65)  Therein, he denied any prior back pain, 
spasms, strains, or injuries.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 63)  Some of his answers were not accurate, 
since he had clearly undergone documented treatment for various back strains and 
symptoms between 2011 and 2015, in addition to his shoulder and neck complaints.  He 
denied several other health conditions but admitted his conditions of emphysema and 
his knee injury.  (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 64-65)  He specifically denied he had any ongoing 
problems regarding his previous knee injury.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 67) 
On cross-examination, Mr. Hadzalic was asked why he did not identify his prior 
back issues on the application form.  “I didn’t think it’s really important, everything that it 
was happen in the past.”  (Tr., p. 85) 
Q. You signed off on the bottom of this that this was true and accurate; correct? 
A. Yes. 
Q. But I think your testimony is you just didn’t think that was important; correct? 

HADZALIC V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-ALLEN MEMORIAL 
Page 4 
 
A. Right. 
Q. Because your answers weren’t true and accurate.  You just didn’t think it was 
important enough to tell Allen; is that correct? 
A. Not just Allen.  I think it’s not important like past, 10, 15 years ago. 
(Tr., p. 85)  On redirect, he testified that he understood the questions to be asking him 
about conditions he was suffering from presently.  (Tr., p. 136) 
Allen hired Mr. Hadzalic and he began working on January 29, 2018.  His first 
two days he only performed orientation-type work on the computer.  On January 31, 
2018, he first began performing physical duties in the housekeeping department.  He 
was scheduled Monday to Friday from 3 p.m. to 11 p.m.  He testified to the following 
regarding his alleged injury. 
I didn’t work for seven and a half months between school and Allen, 
so I work with a guy named Jeff.  He’s kind of heavyset guy, really big guy.  
And I tried to help more, you know, so I kind of pulling more for him, you 
know, taking the garbage.  You know, it’s just respect. 
So we are taking so much garbage outside almost all night here for 
eight hour, like garbage from the offices and after surgeries and stuff like 
that.  I speak with Jeff.  I said – we are outside, and I just dump the 
garbage; and I mention him, I said, I feel so sore.  And he say he feel the 
same way like I do, you know.  And I start feeling like sharp pain in my 
lower back. 
(Tr., p. 22)  It does not appear that he is claiming there was one particular instance of 
lifting garbage that brought on his symptoms, rather, at the end of the night, his back felt 
sore.  He testified that other than mentioning the pain to Jeff, he did not report the injury 
to anyone else.  The co-worker named “Jeff” did not testify at hearing. 
The following day, February 1, 2018, Mr. Hadzalic testified that he was at home, 
down on the floor playing with his daughter.  When he tried to stand up, he had a really 
sharp pain in his low back and was unable to get up normally.  (Tr., p. 22)  He visited a 
clinic which documented the following:  “Patient came in for evaluation of back pain.  He 
was lifting his daughter earlier today and felt a pull in the lower back.  He has got pain in 
the right SI joint area.”  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 16)  Mr. Hadzalic testified this note is in error.  The 
physician diagnosed muscular lower back pain and provided a Toradol shot.  There is 
no mention in this note of a work injury.  Mr. Hadzalic called in to work on February 1, 
2018 and left a message that he could not make it because he got a shot.  (Tr., p. 93)  
He was not scheduled to work on February 2, 3, or 4.  He reported back to work on 
February 5, 2018 and worked his regular shift on February 5 and 6.  He did not report 
any work injury at that time or otherwise seek medical care. 
On February 7, 2018, Mr. Hadzalic reported to work for his normal shift.  After 

HADZALIC V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-ALLEN MEMORIAL 
Page 5 
 
completing final paperwork to finish his training/orientation, he began walking with a co-
worker, Ashlie Schindler, to his normal work area when his left leg started shaking and 
went numb.  Ms. Schindler provided a contemporaneous written statement indicating 
that Mr. Hadzalic told her he had a prior knee surgery and that he was having so much 
pain he needed to go to the emergency room.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 16) 
Mr. Hadzalic went to the emergency room at Allen at a little after 4 p.m.  (Jt. Ex. 
2, p. 26)  The following is documented:  “Patient reports that he was doing ‘okay’ till 
around 3-4 PM when he started feeling left lower extremity numbness, he reports he 
has been dealing few months with just lateral superior thigh numbness but today the 
numbness was in the whole lower extremity.”  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 39)  A stroke workup was 
completed among other testing and he was admitted to the hospital.  The MRI of the 
brain was normal.  An MRI was ordered for his thoracic and lumbar spine as well.  (Jt. 
Ex. 2, p. 35)  Julio Chirinos Lazarte, M.D. assumed care that evening.  After reviewing 
the MRIs, Dr. Chirinos Lazarte provided the following assessment:  A host of medical 
symptoms and conditions were noted.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 43) 
“Patient with complete absence sensation from upper mid thigh and below.  Also 
2/5 weakness in the same left lower extremity with questionable positive Hoover’s sign.  
Concerning for possible conversion disorder.”  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 43)  He ordered consultation 
with Neurology.  On February 8, 2018, while still hospitalized, he was evaluated in 
Neurology by Brian O’Shaughnessy, M.D.  Dr. O’Shaughnessy documented the 
following:  “He says it was a lack of feeling and weakness so that it was difficult to walk                         
. . . On Friday he has some low back pain but no radicular pain.  A few days ago he 
started working for housekeeping.”  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 44)  Dr. O’Shaughnessy opined Mr. 
Hadzalic “has done physical work and complained of some back pain on Friday” and 
recommended an MRI “to see if there are issues here that would cause the difficulty.”  
He recommended a physical therapy consultation.  Mr. Hadzalic was released from the 
hospital with a return to work slip for February 13, 2018. 
Mr. Hadzalic started physical therapy on February 9, 2018.  The therapy outlined 
his previous knee surgery and the complications from that.  “Knee surgery July 11th.  
Got infection of knee with lung emboli.  Immediately post surgery L anterior-lateral leg 
numb. Started work Wednesday of this week and entire L leg numb, continuously.  Allen 
did back MRI, says pinched nerve.”  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 61)  Nothing is documented in this 
record regarding the alleged work injury. 
Mr. Hadzalic reported the alleged work injury to Allen shortly after his hospital 
stay.  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 15)  Allen directed Mr. Hadzalic to Occupational Health on February 
12, 2018.  Based upon the history received, Mr. Hadzalic was diagnosed with an acute 
lumbar strain.  He was prescribed medications and physical therapy and work 
restrictions.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 73)  He gave a recorded statement regarding the alleged work 
injury on February 23, 2018.  He denied any history of low back issues and failed to 
disclose his ongoing left knee, leg, and hip claim.  (Def. Ex. D, pp. 24-25) 
Mr. Hadzalic returned to Occupational Health on February 26, 2018, and was 
examined by Jonathon Fields, M.D.  Dr. Fields penned an opinion letter to Iowa Case 

HADZALIC V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-ALLEN MEMORIAL 
Page 6 
 
Management. 
     I evaluated Mr. Huse Hadzalic in clinic on February 26, 2018.  He had 
previously been seen in occupational health by Dr. Olsen and was 
undergoing physical therapy and had work restrictions.  Mr. Hadzalic had 
reportedly started work at UnityPoint on Monday, January 29, had 
orientation on January 30, and worked 1 day on January 31 where he 
claims to have experienced an injury to his lower back (while he was lifting 
some garbage). . . . 
     When I interviewed Mr. Hadzalic regarding his back pain, he said he 
had 8/10 pain which was constant in his bilateral low back and legs.  He 
said that his left leg was numb.  He does endorse having a previous 
history on July 11, 2017, of a left leg surgery with Dr. Torrez and says 
since that time, he has constant numbness in his left thigh which has 
never resolved.  He said he developed subsequent blood clots after the 
surgery.  He denies discussing this numbness with Dr. Torrez.  I asked Mr. 
Hadzalic several times if he had any history of low back pain for which he 
replied he had not.  He says he had undergone physical therapy 5 times at 
Covenant which was not helping his low back pain.  He says his condition 
has not been improving since the incident on January 31, 2017.  On exam, 
Mr. Hadzalic appeared to walk into the clinic with a normal gait, but on 
examination he had pain to palpation reportedly with his bilateral lumbar 
musculature.  He reported radicular type symptoms down his left leg.  He 
was unwilling to perform range of motion beyond very minimal forward 
flexion, backwards extension, left and right lateral extension for which he 
said there was pain.  He did walk on his heels and toes without issues.  
He had a negative straight leg raise.  Notably, he was unwilling to raise his 
left leg from a seated position to extend, from what he said, due to pain.  
However, when the examiner went to take off Mr. Hadzalic’s shoe, I fully 
extended his leg for which he reported no pain.  Deep tendon reflexes 
were symmetric and normal in the left and right patellar and left and right 
Achilles.  Sensory exam was performed on the left for which he denied 
any pinprick sensation from his foot on the left all the way up to his thigh.  
Despite the fact the examiner moved his leg several inches back during 
the exam, he denied any feeling of movement. . . .  
     I discussed with Mr. Hadzalic how his MRI findings were essentially 
normal and that I had no concerns about any spinal nerve involvement 
and that the appearance of his strain was myofascial in nature.  I advised 
him to continue his ibuprofen over the counter, continue his muscle relaxer 
as prescribed, and change his physical therapy to Allen Physical therapy.  
. . .  
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 80) 
Mr. Hadzalic continued with the authorized treatment regimen.  He testified he 

HADZALIC V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-ALLEN MEMORIAL 
Page 7 
 
was terminated on March 7, 2018, for providing false information on his employment 
application.  He testified he was denied unemployment compensation.  The termination 
letter is not in evidence.  March 7, 2018 was also his final visit with Dr. Fields.  Dr. 
Fields released him with no impairment and no restrictions and did not recommend any 
further treatment.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 85)  At this time, Mr. Hadzalic requested a surgical 
evaluation, indicating he was unable to walk any distance.  He testified his workers’ 
compensation claim was denied as well.  The denial letter is not in evidence. 
After his termination, Mr. Hadzalic testified he was too disabled to work and did 
not seek any employment.  On March 16, 2018, he sought medical treatment with Vinko 
Bogdanic, M.D., his primary provider.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 88)  He next saw Arnold Delbridge, 
M.D., in June 2018.  On the same day Dr. Delbridge examined him for his back, Dr. 
Delbridge prepared an opinion letter related to the litigation for his left knee.  (Jt. Ex. 8, 
pp. 112-113)  Dr. Delbridge did not mention or discuss the leg numbness so there is no 
indication whether the numbness is related to the low back or the knee condition.  (Jt. 
Ex. 8, pp. 112-114)  Mr. Hadzalic was examined at Northern Iowa Pain Management on 
August 30, 2018 and received an epidural steroid injection (ESI).  (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 131) 
Mr. Hadzalic’s right knee/leg/hip claim was settled on a compromise basis on 
September 18, 2018.  (Def. Ex. E, pp. 31-34) 
He then followed up with Dr. Delbridge who rendered the following opinions 
regarding his low back in October 2018.  “My conclusion is that he probably had some 
spinal stenosis and some subarticular stenosis and then obtained a job which required 
considerable twisting and lifting and throwing large bags which put him in jeopardy 
virtually immediately.”  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 116)  He opined it was “probable that unless there 
are some previous issues of which I do not know, that this is as a result of his work at 
Allen Hospital.”  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 116)  He ordered a new MRI. 
The November 2018, MRI showed a disc herniation, among other findings, at L4-
L5 and L5-S1.  This was a new finding from the previous MRI.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 120)  In 
January 2019, Dr. Delbridge advised Mr. Hadzalic to consider surgery.  “He has 2 
herniated discs, pain down his leg, he can’t stand long, and can’t sit long.  He will not 
get better unless he does something about this.  (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 121)  Russell Buchanan, 
M.D., performed a surgical evaluation in February 2019.  “No surgical intervention 
suggested, he has no evidence of cord or nerve compression.  I suggest that he 
continue with injections from the pain clinic.”  (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 94)  He also recommended 
an exercise regimen. 
Following his termination from Allen, Mr. Hadzalic applied for Social Security 
Disability and was denied in June 2019.  In his reconsideration request to Social 
Security in August 2019, Mr. Hadzalic indicated he was essentially homebound.  (Def. 
Ex. F, pp. 54-58)  Social Security placed surveillance on Mr. Hadzalic in August 2019 
which found him shopping on his own, attending a sporting event and caring for his 
young children.  (Def. Ex. F, pp. 58-60)  Further surveillance was performed in 
September 2019, which showed him walking a dog and pushing a stroller for an 
extended period of time.  (Def. Ex. G, surveillance video, p. 66; Def. Ex. G, pp. 67-68)  
On video, he appears to walk, while pushing a baby stroller and managing a dog on a 

HADZALIC V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-ALLEN MEMORIAL 
Page 8 
 
leash, without an altered gait, bend and lift without discomfort.  (Def. Ex. G, surveillance 
video)  An administrative law judge for Social Security formally denied his claim again in 
August 2020.  (Def. Ex. F, pp. 60-65) 
Both parties retained expert medical reports prior to hearing.  Claimant retained 
reports containing expert opinions from treating physician, Dr. Delbridge.  Dr. Delbridge 
is an orthopedic surgeon.  In October 2018, Dr. Delbridge opined Mr. Hadzalic had 
sustained an injury at Allen to his low back which caused his ongoing low back and right 
leg problems.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 2)  In April 2019, Dr. Delbridge supplemented his opinions. 
     Of interest is that he had an MRI on February 8, 2018, right after his 
injury which was not read as an acute herniation by the radiologist.  He 
began having lower extremity symptoms, however, and when I repeated 
his MRI later on 11-12-18, there was a definite new herniation compared 
to the earlier MRI.  It is not improbable that the disc was starting to 
herniate at the time he had the symptoms and then progressed even more 
as time went on. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 3)  On June 3, 2019, Dr. Delbridge penned a final report after receiving a 
letter from claimant’s counsel.  (Def. Ex. K)  Dr. Delbridge set forth a history of the 
events and opined that “Mr. Hadzalic’s injuries are as a result of his work at Allen 
Hospital.”  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 6)  He assigned an 8 percent whole body impairment rating and 
recommended severe permanent restrictions of sedentary work and no lifting more than 
5 pounds. 
Defendant retained Trevor Schmitz, M.D., an orthopedic surgeon.  (Def. Ex. A, 
pp. 9-10)  In August 2019, Dr. Schmitz examined Mr. Hadzalic and reviewed a number 
of appropriate medical records.  Dr. Schmitz provided the following diagnosis. 
      My diagnosis for Mr. Hadzalic at this time is low back pain along with 
left leg numbness and tingling.  He has been dealing with low back issues 
for several years stemming all the way back to at least 2011.  On MRI, he 
does have multilevel degenerative changes in his lumbar spine.  He has 
disc degeneration and facet arthropathy at virtually every lumbar level. 
(Def. Ex. A, p. 7)  Using the correct legal standard, he opined this condition was not 
related to any injury sustained while working for Allen.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 7) 
Defendant also obtained a report from Dr. Fields, who treated Mr. Hadzalic in 
February and March 2018.  Dr. Fields is an occupational medicine physician.  Dr. Fields 
responded to several questions in a “check box” format.  He refused to causally connect 
Mr. Hadzalic’s low back condition to the alleged work injury at Allen.  (Def. Ex. B, p. 12)  
Defendant then posed a question asking Dr. Fields to opine that Mr. Hadzalic did not 
sustain any type of temporary injury to his low back.  Dr. Fields checked the box that he 
agreed, however, he added the following language in handwritten notes.  “He may have 
experienced a temporary exacerbation of pain symptomatology, however I noted his 
clinical exam was inconsistent.”  (Def. Ex. B, p. 13)  Like Dr. Schmitz, Dr. Fields did not 

HADZALIC V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-ALLEN MEMORIAL 
Page 9 
 
believe he had sustained any permanent impairment or restrictions as a result of the 
alleged work injury. 
At hearing, Mr. Hadzalic testified live and under oath.  He testified that he is not 
able to do much at the present time, although he admitted he cares for his children and 
his pets and takes short trips to the store.  (Tr., p. 47)  He testified he would rather be 
working.  Having listened to claimant’s testimony live and having reviewed all of the 
records, I cannot find his testimony to be entirely credible.  There was nothing 
specifically about his demeanor which caused me any concern.  This finding is purely 
based upon a comparison of the record with his actual sworn testimony.  There are 
simply too many unexplained inconsistencies.  A comparison of his sworn hearing 
testimony with his sworn deposition testimony, his sworn answers to interrogatories and 
his recorded statement reveals a number of inconsistencies.  At a minimum, Mr. 
Hadzalic is not the best historian and appears to be prone to exaggeration at times.  It 
would be difficult to rely upon his testimony to sustain his claim. 
Hasnija “Hana” Hadzalic also testified live and under oath.  She testified that Mr. 
Hadzalic returned from work on January 31, 2018 and reported that he complained of 
back pain.  “And I just told him, you know, probably you haven’t been working for last 
seven, eight months.  You probably just strained something.”  (Tr., pp. 139-140)  She 
testified she gave him medicine that evening and he was no better in the morning.  She 
testified that he called her during the day on February 1, 2018 and told her he needed to 
see a doctor.  “And he called me, and he said how he was playing on the floor with our 
daughter and wasn’t able to get up.  So I left the school to come home to take care of 
the daughter so he can go to the hospital.”  (Tr., p. 140)  I find her testimony believable. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first question submitted is whether claimant sustained an injury which arose 
out of and in the course of his employment. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 

HADZALIC V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-ALLEN MEMORIAL 
Page 10 
 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 
440 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 
1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985).  An 
occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically excluded from the definition 
of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4)(b); Iowa Code section 85A.8; Iowa Code 
section 85A.14. 
It is the claimant’s burden to prove that he sustained an injury which arose out of 
and in the course of his employment.  Having reviewed all of the evidence in the file, I 
find the claimant failed to meet his burden.  There are simply too many unexplained 
inconsistencies in the record to rely upon his testimony as a basis to find that he 
sustained an injury. 
I find that Mr. Hadzalic probably did have a minor knee injury when his knee 
popped while walking down the steps on January 31, 2018.  This is what he reported to 
his supervisor.  This appears to be nothing more than a brief temporary aggravation of 
his preexisting knee condition.  As far as the back is concerned, I find that while it is 
likely that claimant felt some pain when he came home from work on January 31, 2018, 
his first day performing physical labor at his new job after a long layoff due to disability, 
it is not likely that this resulted in a compensable low back injury as defined by Iowa law.  
Even if his limited work for the employer did constitute an “injury” under Iowa law, he 
has failed to prove medical causation, that is that his alleged injury substantially 
contributed to or materially aggravated his condition. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 

HADZALIC V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-ALLEN MEMORIAL 
Page 11 
 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
As stated, there are a number of unexplained inconsistencies in this record.  A 
number of the inconsistencies are minor and explainable.  For purposes of proving 
medical causation, the most challenging inconsistency is the fact that Mr. Hadzalic has 
had left hip/leg numbness going down to his knee since his knee injury.  This symptom 
was originally part of his knee injury claim against Waterloo School District, however, 
after he settled the knee claim and experienced the alleged work injury at Allen, it 
became a symptom in the back claim against Allen.  No physician (nor the claimant 
himself) has adequately explained this inconsistency.  This is a significant impediment 
in the claimant’s efforts to prove medical causation. 
In addition, when reviewing the entire file as a whole, I find the opinions of Dr. 
Schmitz and Dr. Fields to be more reliable than the opinion of Dr. Delbridge. 
For these reasons, I find that claimant has failed to meet his burden of proof 
either that he sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of his 
employment or that the alleged injury is a cause of any temporary or permanent 
disability.  The other issues are moot. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings. 
Each party shall pay their own costs. 
Signed and filed this ___25th ___ day of June, 2021. 
 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 

HADZALIC V. UNITYPOINT HEALTH-ALLEN MEMORIAL 
Page 12 
 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Chandler Surrency (via WCES) 
 
Robin Maxon (via WCES) 
 
Jennifer Clendenin (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
