Case Number: 5058326.01
Case Title:  STONE, PENELOPE V. SECOND INJURY FUND ONLY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Stone Penelope-5058326.01R.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
PENELOPE STONE, 
  : 
 
 File No. 5058326.01 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
 
 
  : 
 
REVIEW-REOPENING 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
        DECISION 
 
 
  :                  
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
 
  :         Head Note Nos.: 1402.40, 2905, 2907                 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Penelope Stone, claimant, filed a petition for review-reopening against the 
Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  This case came before the undersigned for a review-
reopening hearing on April 2, 2024, via Zoom. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing. On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 4, and Defendant’s 
Exhibits AA through II.  All exhibits were received without objection.  Claimant testified 
on her own behalf.  No other witnesses were called to testify. 
The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the review-reopening hearing.  
All parties served their post-hearing briefs on May 13, 2024, at which time this case was 
deemed fully submitted to the undersigned. 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained a substantial change in condition since the 
arbitration hearing that would justify a change in the underlying arbitration 
award; and 
 
2. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any. 
 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Oct-31  12:29:02     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

STONE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
The claimant at the center of this review-reopening proceeding, Penelope 
“Penny” Stone, is a 53-year-old former industrial electrician. (Hearing Transcript, page 
13)  On February 21, 2017, Ms. Stone filed a petition in arbitration alleging she 
sustained injuries to her left hand, left wrist, and left elbow while working for Van Ert 
Electric Co., Inc. on October 14, 2016.  In the petition, Ms. Stone also named the 
Second Injury Fund of Iowa.   
Ms. Stone sustained a first qualifying loss to her right knee on March 15, 2015, 
while helping a friend tag a newborn calf. In the process of tagging the calf, a cow ran 
her over.  Paul Peterson, M.D. assessed Ms. Stone with tears of the anterior cruciate 
ligament and lateral meniscus and recommended surgery.  Dr. Peterson performed an 
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction and a lateral meniscus repair on April 16, 
2015.   
 
Ms. Stone injured her left wrist on October 14, 2016, while working as an 
industrial electrician for Van Ert Electric Company.  She was diagnosed with a triangular 
fibrocartilage complex tear and treated conservatively.  Jessica Childe, D.O. released 
Ms. Stone to return to work without restrictions on September 25, 2017.  Shortly 
thereafter, a functional capacity evaluation (“FCE”) found Ms. Stone was capable of 
working in the medium physical demand category of work.  The physical therapist who 
conducted the FCE reported that Ms. Stone could lift 50 pounds occasionally, 30 
pounds from floor-to-waist, and carry up to 50 pounds waist-to-shoulder.  The FCE did 
not recommend any restrictions specific to the right knee.    
 
Sunil Bansal, M.D. conducted an independent medical examination for Stone on 
February 22, 2018.  He assigned six percent (6%) upper extremity impairment for the 
left wrist injury and two percent (2%) lower extremity impairment for the lateral 
meniscectomy.  In terms of permanent restrictions, Dr. Bansal agreed with the 
recommendations provided in the previously discussed FCE report. 
 
At the time of the March 29, 2018, arbitration hearing, Ms. Stone did not have 
any restrictions for her right knee; however, she testified that it “popped” and locked into 
place at times. (Defendant’s Exhibit HH, Hr. Tr., p. 29; Claimant’s Exhibit 4, p. 9)  She 
further testified that she often walked on uneven terrain at work, and she had difficulty 
with her balance when her knee would lock up, which in turn would cause her to trip and 
experience pain. (Ex. HH, Hr. Tr. p. 54; Ex. 4, pp. 9-10)  She further testified that she 
fell a couple times per week. (Ex. HH, Hr. Tr., pp. 54-55; Ex. 4, p. 10) 
 
As for the left wrist, Ms. Stone reported difficulties grasping various objects and 
opening bottles and jars. (Id.)  She further testified that she had lost tools off towers 
because she could not hold onto the tools. (Ex. HH, Hr. Tr. p. 58; Ex. 4, p. 10)  

STONE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
The Workers' Compensation Commissioner approved an agreement for 
settlement between Stone, Van Ert Electric Company, and its insurer on April 3, 2018.  
The agreement for settlement determined Ms. Stone sustained a permanent partial 
disability of six percent to the left upper extremity, resulting in fifteen weeks of 
compensation under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(m), commencing on February 16, 
2017.   
 
The claim against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa proceeded to hearing.  The 
initial arbitration hearing occurred on March 29, 2018.  On July 12, 2018, Deputy 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner Heather Palmer issued a decision finding Ms. 
Stone established a compensable claim against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa and 
awarding 60 percent industrial disability.  The commencement date for Fund benefits 
was May 31, 2017. (Ex. 4, p. 20) 
 
In the instant matter, Ms. Stone is requesting that the undersigned find she 
sustained a change in condition that warrants an increase of the compensation awarded 
in the July 12, 2018, decision.  Specifically, Ms. Stone asserts she is now permanently 
and totally disabled. 
 
The grounds for the July 12, 2018, arbitration decision will serve as the basis for 
determining whether a change of condition has occurred.  As such, a brief overview of 
Ms. Stone’s condition at the time of the March 29, 2018, hearing is warranted.   
 
As mentioned, Ms. Stone is a 53-year-old former industrial electrician with 
approximately 20 years of experience. (Hearing Transcript, page 13)   For the majority 
of her career, Ms. Stone maintained a membership with the International Brotherhood of 
Electrical Workers Local Union 584 (“IBEW”).  Members of the IBEW may work for a 
single employer for a day or up to several years.  It is common for electricians to work 
many different jobs for many different employers. 
 
At the time of her October 14, 2016, work injury, Ms. Stone had been working for 
Van Ert Electric Company for approximately four months.  She worked up to twelve 
hours per day for six to seven days per week.  Van Ert terminated Ms. Stone’s 
employment on January 24, 2017, when there was no light duty work available. 
 
By July 17, 2017, Ms. Stone’s left wrist range of motion was equal to her right 
wrist, and she reported minimal tenderness.  She was released to return to work without 
restrictions on September 25, 2017. (Ex. 4, p. 7)   
In October 2017, Stone worked one day for Oklahoma Electric Supply Company 
and four days for Brent Electric Company, Inc.  In both instances, Stone worked ten to 
twelve hour days as a journeyman electrician.  Stone did not receive any 
accommodations for either position and performed her normal job duties, including 
lifting between 50 and 75 pounds. (Ex. 4, p. 8)  
Unfortunately, there were no jobs available to Ms. Stone between November and 
December 2017. (Id.) 

STONE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
From January 11, 2018, through January 31, 2018, Stone worked as a 
journeyman electrician for Oklahoma Electric Supply Company (“OESC”).  She did not 
receive any accommodations while working for OESC. 
In January 2018, Stone attended a functional capacity evaluation.  The physical 
therapist determined Stone could occasionally lift up to fifty pounds, lift thirty pounds 
floor to waist, carry up to fifty pounds waist to shoulder, push 58.2 pounds of force, and 
pull 105.03 pounds of force. The physical therapist further found Stone was capable of 
engaging in work in the medium physical demand level. (Id.) 
According to Stone, OESC let her go once they received the results of the 
functional capacity evaluation; OESC would not allow her to work for them without a full 
duty release.   
Between February 1, 2018, and the initial hearing date of March 29, 2018, Ms. 
Stone consistently called IBEW for work; however, she was not qualified for any of the 
available jobs based on the results of the functional capacity evaluation.  Ms. Stone 
testified that Allison-Smith had work available; however, the employer required 
applicants to complete a fit test prior to job acceptance.  Ms. Stone remarked that she 
had never seen such a requirement before. (Ex. HH, Hr. Tr., p. 52)  Ms. Stone also 
looked for work outside of her union contract, including work in a nursing home, at a 
bank, and at a casino; however, all three positions required the ability to lift 50 pounds 
or more. 
In other words, at the time of the March 29, 2018, hearing, Ms. Stone was willing 
to work; however, at least one employer was not willing to bring her on without a full 
duty release, and she did not meet the lifting requirements for several other positions. 
(See Hr. Tr., p. 17)  Given Ms. Stone’s ability to work in a full duty capacity in the weeks 
and months leading up to her functional capacity evaluation, it could reasonably be 
argued that the FCE report did not accurately reflect Ms. Stone’s functional ability. 
Following the March 29, 2018, arbitration hearing, Ms. Stone returned to full duty 
work, lifting between 50 and 75 pounds, for OESC.  Ms. Stone testified that she had to 
stand, walk, kneel, and squat throughout her workdays at OESC. (Ex. II, Depo. p. 12)  It 
is unclear why OESC reversed its decision and allowed Ms. Stone to return to full duty 
work despite the results of the functional capacity evaluation.  In any event, Ms. Stone 
consistently worked in a full duty capacity for two years following the March 29, 2018, 
arbitration hearing.   
Ms. Stone testified that she did not request any accommodations out of fear that 
doing so would discourage employers from hiring her for jobs. (Hr. Tr., pp. 37-38)  She 
testified, “I know that if I can grin and bear it and get through the fitness test that I have 
a tight network of union brothers and sisters, and we generally help each other out.” 
(Id.) 
After a reduction of force occurred with OESC, Ms. Stone found work as a 
journeyman electrician and forklift operator for P1 Group. (Ex. II, Depo. p. 13)  To obtain 

STONE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
this job, Ms. Stone had to pass a fitness test proving she could lift between 50 and 75 
pounds.  Despite testifying at the March 29, 2018, hearing that she had never heard of 
an employer requiring a pre-employment fit test, Ms. Stone testified at her January 2024 
deposition, “It’s typical in any of these jobs you have to pass a fitness test, and that’s 
between 50 and 75 pounds.” (Ex. II, Depo. p. 14)  Ms. Stone worked in a full duty 
capacity and did not request any accommodations at P1 Group.  Her employment with 
P1 Group ended once the job she was working on was completed.   
Ms. Stone next worked as a journeyman electrician for Angler Electric.  Again, 
Ms. Stone worked in a full duty capacity and did not request any accommodations.  Ms. 
Stone testified that Angler Electric let her go because she could not perform her work 
fast enough. 
Lastly, Ms. Stone worked as an electrician and foreman for Allison-Smith 
Company from approximately March to October 2020. (See Hr. Tr., p. 21)  She worked 
12 to 19 hour days, six days per week, in a full duty capacity.  According to Ms. Stone, 
she started out working as a journeyman electrician; however, she briefly accepted the 
position of foreman. (Hr. Tr., pp. 21-22)  Ms. Stone asserts she was offered the position 
of foreman due to safety concerns after she started dropping tools from her lift. (Id.)  Her 
work as a foreman was short-lived, as she could not keep up with the workload 
assigned to her.  Ms. Stone asserts that she had a difficult time walking around and 
checking in with her journeymen as they were scattered throughout a large building.  
After two separate write-ups, Allison-Smith Company demoted Ms. Stone back to the 
position of journeyman electrician. (Hr. Tr., p. 22)   
Ultimately, Ms. Stone was laid off from Allison-Smith Company in October 2020.  
Ms. Stone asserts she was offered a layoff during the Covid-19 pandemic, and she 
accepted the same in hopes that she could return to work following a period of rest. (Hr. 
Tr., pp. 23-24)  Ms. Stone asserts that she accepted the offer of a layoff to avoid 
termination; however, defendant disputes the legitimacy of such an assertion. (Hr. Tr., 
p. 24) 
Ms. Stone has not applied for any jobs since she was laid off in October 2020.  
She allowed her professional journeyman electrician license to lapse in 2023 as she has 
no plans to return to the workforce. (Hr. Tr., p. 9; Ex. II, Depo. p. 23) 
The evidentiary record is not well-developed with respect to Ms. Stone’s 
condition or activity level between October 2020 and April 2022.  The limited medical 
records in evidence show that Ms. Stone had bunionectomies on her feet at some point 
in 2020, due to foot pain. (See Ex. II, Depo. p. 35; Ex. FF, p. 4)  The records also show 
that Ms. Stone was diagnosed with a flat back deformity, lumbar kyphosis, and lumbar 
stenosis with radiculopathy around the same time. (See Ex. DD, p. 1)  On August 26, 
2021, Mohamad Bydon, M.D. performed an L4-5 diskectomy, left L4-5 osteotomy, L4-5 
arthrodesis, and a transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion. (Ex. DD, pp. 1-2)  Ms. Stone 
spent November and December 2021 in Cuba visiting her husband and recovering from 
surgery. (Hr. Tr., pp. 29-30; Ex. II, Depo. p. 8)  In February or March of 2022, Ms. Stone 
traveled to Guyana to assist her husband with immigration matters. (Hr. Tr., p. 30) 

STONE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
 
Since the March 29, 2018, arbitration hearing, Ms. Stone has not requested or 
sought any additional medical care for her right knee or left wrist conditions.  However, 
she has experienced a significant medical issue unrelated to the March 15, 2015, and 
October 14, 2016, injuries.   
In April 2022, Ms. Stone’s primary care physician referred her to Jeremy Salas, 
M.D. for a neurological consultation. (Ex. EE, p. 2)  Dr. Salas conducted an initial 
consultation with Ms. Stone on April 19, 2022. (Id.)  Ms. Stone reported chronic left leg 
weakness that began in her teenage years.  She also reported chronic severe fatigue, 
concentration difficulties, dragging leg, urinary and bowel incontinence, and emotional 
lability since at least 2017.  Dr. Salas suspected Ms. Stone had multiple sclerosis and 
opined that the demyelinating lesions on her brain and cervical spine MRIs could 
explain her chronic symptoms. (Ex. EE, p. 2)  Dr. Salas prescribed Rebif and discussed 
the potential for neuropsych testing with Ms. Stone. (Id.) 
In a June 3, 2022, medical report, Dr. Salas opined, “She has ongoing chronic 
fatigue, leg weakness, pain, concentration difficulties and I do support her request for 
disability as she has been unable to maintain employment in her construction field due 
to symptoms.” (Ex. EE, p. 1)  Dr. Salas’ June 3, 2022, report does not mention the 
March 15, 2015, and October 14, 2016, injuries. 
Dr. Salas referred Ms. Stone to Chelsea Berkley, M.D. of the Oklahoma Medical 
Research Foundation - Multiple Sclerosis Center of Excellence. (See Ex. FF, p. 1)  Ms. 
Stone first presented to Dr. Berkley on December 14, 2022. (Ex. FF, p. 1)  During the 
evaluation, Ms. Stone described a history of her symptoms that can be associated with 
multiple sclerosis. (Ex. FF, pp. 1-2)   
According to the medical notes, Ms. Stone developed left knee pain between 10 
and 12 years of age.  The pain was intermittent, and she considered it to be “growing 
pains.”  When she was a teenager, she experienced generalized twitches and left leg 
weakness when she got tired. (Id.)  Ms. Stone relayed that she was always the slowest 
at sports and she tripped when she ran due to her left leg weakness. (Ex. FF, p. 2)  Ms. 
Stone next reported that she experienced worsening left leg weakness between 2012 
and 2014. (Id.)  According to the record, she was “stumbling more” and felt as though 
her leg was “heavy.” (Id.)  Lastly, Ms. Stone reported increases in left leg weakness, 
falling, and cognitive issues at the time she was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis in 
April 2022.  (Ex. FF, p. 2)  The medical summary provided by Dr. Berkley does not 
mention the October 2016 left wrist injury. (See Ex. FF, pp. 1-5) 
Dr. Berkley opined that although Ms. Stone was first diagnosed with multiple 
sclerosis in April 2022, it was likely she had been experiencing symptoms since she 
was a teenager. (Ex. FF, p. 5)  Indeed, Ms. Stone’s primary care physician listed 
multiple sclerosis as an active diagnosis in a medical report from October 18, 2018. (Ex. 
CC, p. 2) 
Ms. Stone applied for Social Security Disability benefits shortly after her multiple 
sclerosis diagnosis in April 2022. (Hr. Tr., p. 24)  The application was approved in 

STONE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
December 2022 and retroactively dated back to her last date of employment in October 
2020. (Ex. AA, p. 2)   
Sunil Bansal, M.D. conducted an updated independent medical evaluation of Ms. 
Stone on January 10, 2024. (Exhibit 1)  Dr. Bansal performed an updated medical 
records review and physically examined Ms. Stone.  Given the lack of medical treatment 
since his February 2018 IME, the medical records summary consists only of Ms. 
Stone’s April 2022 EMG and nerve conduction studies, as well as two medical records 
from the Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation – Multiple Sclerosis Center of 
Excellence. (See Ex. 1, pp. 2-3)   
During the examination, Ms. Stone reported that her right knee had worsened 
since the February 2018 IME appointment. (Ex. 1, p. 4)  The record provides, “As a 
result of her multiple sclerosis, she has weakness of her left side.  She now has to rely 
more heavily on her right side, which has increased her right knee pain.” (Id.)  The 
record continues, “After a recent medication infusion for her multiple sclerosis, when he 
[sic] stood up she had a new sort of pain in her knee.  It was more of a sharp pain.” (Id.)  
Dr. Bansal’s report provides that Ms. Stone “needs to walk with a cane” because of her 
right knee injury; however, I note Ms. Stone holds the cane with her left hand, which 
would indicate that the cane compensates for her left knee weakness, not the right knee 
injury. (See id.) 
Notably, it does not appear as though Dr. Bansal was aware of Ms. Stone’s 
recent employment history.  Under the “Job Duties” section of the report, Dr. Bansal 
provided, “Ms. Stone was employed by Van Ert Electric until 2020, when she was let go.  
She finally applied for Social Security Disability, and was approved.” (Id.)   
Ultimately, Dr. Bansal assigned nine percent (9%) upper extremity impairment for 
the left wrist injury and two percent (2%) lower extremity impairment for the right knee 
injury. (Ex. 1, p. 6)  With respect to the left upper extremity, Dr. Bansal observed a 
worsening of left wrist flexion by 5 degrees, extension by 4 degrees, radial deviation by 
1 degree, and ulnar deviation by 5 degrees.  In terms of permanent restrictions, Dr. 
Bansal recommended no lifting greater than 10 pounds with the left hand occasionally, 
or 5 pounds frequently.  He further recommended no forceful turning or twisting with the 
left hand, and no prolonged gripping. (Ex. 1, p. 7)  With respect to the right knee 
condition, Dr. Bansal recommended Ms. Stone avoid multiple stairs or climbing, no 
prolonged standing or walking greater than 20 minutes at a time, and no frequent 
kneeling or squatting. (Id.)  Dr. Bansal’s opinion that claimant’s condition required more 
limiting restrictions is undercut by the fact claimant worked her full duty job, without 
requesting accommodations, for over two years following the 2018 hearing. 
Dr. Bansal was not asked to address whether a change in condition had 
occurred; rather, he was simply asked to provide updated impairment ratings and 
restrictions.  Dr. Bansal’s February 26, 2024, report does not address what impact, if 
any, the multiple sclerosis diagnosis had on Ms. Stone’s conditions.  Considering 
claimant’s ability to return to full duty work for over two years and considering her 

STONE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
unrelated and significant personal health conditions, it is difficult to understand why Dr. 
Bansal does not address their significance or effect on her overall condition. 
In response, defendant obtained an updated records review from Joseph Chen, 
M.D. (Exhibit AA)  After reviewing Dr. Bansal’s impairment assessment, Dr. Chen 
opined that the alleged change in Ms. Stone’s left wrist range of motion is subtle and 
would lead to negligible additional functional impairment. (Ex. AA, p. 5)  Additionally, he 
questioned the accuracy of Dr. Bansal’s range of motion findings.  Dr. Chen explained 
that a change of less than 5 degrees of range of motion in small joints of the hands and 
wrists would be technically difficult to observe. (Ex. AA, pp. 4-5)  In any event, Dr. Chen 
opined the additional loss in left wrist range of motion would be unrelated to the October 
14, 2016, work injury.  He explained there is no valid physiologic mechanism for 
ongoing range of motion loss due to a triangular fibrocartilage complex injury.  He 
believed the better medical explanation for the loss of range of motion was Ms. Stone’s 
multiple sclerosis and “the combined effects of demyelinating lesions within her brain 
and/or cervical spinal cord.” (Ex. AA, p. 5)   
Dr. Chen’s report provides, 
It is my medical opinion that Ms. Stone’s neurological function has 
worsened as a result of her diagnosis of multiple sclerosis and the natural 
progression of this neurological disease despite use of appropriate neuro-
immunologic medications. These records indicate that Ms. Stone has 
developed worsening central nervous system findings with weakness and 
spasticity in her bilateral legs, ataxia with gait, neurogenic bowel and 
bladder, and upper extremity weakness and incoordination, vision and 
cognitive difficulties. 
(Ex. AA, p. 6)  Dr. Chen concluded that Ms. Stone’s current functional limitations are not 
related to the 2015 right knee injury or the 2016 left wrist TFCC tear. (Ex. AA, p. 6)  He 
further concluded that Ms. Stone does not require any permanent restrictions or 
additional medical care for her October 14, 2016, left wrist injury. (Id.) 
Ms. Stone provided a copy of Dr. Chen’s report to Dr. Bansal for comment. (Ex. 
1, pp. 8-9)  Dr. Bansal disagreed with Dr. Chen’s analysis and stood by the opinions he 
expressed in his February 26, 2024, report. (Ex. 1, p. 8)  He opined, “While Ms. Stone’s 
later diagnosis of multiple sclerosis has undoubtedly influenced the severity of her 
symptoms and her experience of the wrist condition, the primary and direct cause of the 
current state of her wrist is the original TFCC tear.” (Ex. 1, p. 9)  He further opined, “The 
multiple sclerosis diagnosis has likely contributed to a faster progression and 
exacerbation of symptoms related to the wrist injury.  However, without the initial injury 
in October 2016, the extent of the wrist’s debilitation would likely be substantially less.” 
(Id.) 
According to Ms. Stone, walking remains the biggest impediment to her return to 
work.  She testified, “I have – I have pain, and I – I don’t have some sensations in my 
left leg, which I – I put more weight on my right leg just to maintain walking.  And that’s – 

STONE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
it causes me a lot of pain.” (Ex. II, Depo. p. 24)  Ms. Stone will occasionally use a cane 
to compensate for the pain and weakness in her left leg. (See id.)  She also reported 
cognitive issues, anxiety, and “heat issues” but acknowledged these symptoms stem 
from the multiple sclerosis diagnosis. (Id.) 
In January 2024, Ms. Stone testified that she has not experienced a severe 
decline in the condition of her right knee. Rather, Ms. Stone asserts that she is “just 
moving slower” and is “less able to keep up.” (Ex. II, Depo. p. 30)  She described the 
decline in her right knee as “gradual.” (Id.)  She attributed the decline to her right knee 
having to compensate for the workload that her left leg cannot handle. (Ex. II, Depo. pp. 
30-31) 
Similarly, Ms. Stone asserts that the symptoms in her left arm have gradually 
worsened; however, she described the same or similar symptoms to what she was 
reporting in March 2018. (Ex. II, Depo. pp. 31-32)  She testified that she is not able to 
grip and hold onto various items. (Ex. II, Depo. p. 31)  Ms. Stone clarified that she can 
hold things, but she has to really focus on what she is holding. (Id.) 
The initial issue to be resolved is whether Ms. Stone has sustained a change of 
condition since the arbitration decision that would entitle her to additional permanent 
partial disability benefits.  Importantly, not every change of circumstances warrants 
changing an award. The change must be both substantial and unexpected. Any 
person’s condition or circumstances are expected to change somewhat over time. 
Change of some degree is nearly a certainty.  For a change of condition to be 
substantial, it must be more than a mild change that is within the range of change 
individuals normally experience with the passage of time. 
Ms. Stone asserts her condition has substantially changed from both a physical 
and economic standpoint.  The Fund asserts that Ms. Stone has had no demonstrable 
change to her right knee or left arm since the March 29, 2018, arbitration hearing.  
Indeed, there is little to no objective evidence to support a physical change in condition 
has occurred.  Following the March 29, 2018, hearing, Ms. Stone returned to full-duty 
work as an industrial electrician and continued in this line of work for four different 
employers over a two-year span.  Ms. Stone conceded that she did not operate under 
any restrictions, and she did not ask her employers for accommodations.   
Since the March 29, 2018, arbitration hearing, Ms. Stone has not requested or 
sought any additional medical care for her right knee or left wrist conditions.  She has 
not obtained any diagnostic imaging to demonstrate an objective worsening in her 
condition, and the only medications Ms. Stone takes for her conditions are over-the-
counter Tylenol and a self-prescribed CBD oil. 
Ms. Stone is currently unemployed, and she has no intention of returning to work 
in any capacity.  After two years of full duty work, Ms. Stone was laid off due to the 
economic effects of the Covid-19 pandemic.  Ms. Stone asserts it is likely she would 
have been terminated if she did not accept the layoff offer due to her slow pace. (Hr. Tr., 

STONE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 10 
 
pp. 23-24)  Notably, Ms. Stone’s concerns regarding her slow work pace were present 
at the time of the March 29, 2018, arbitration hearing. (See Ex. HH, Hr. Tr., p. 80) 
When considering whether claimant has carried her burden of proof to establish 
a compensable review-reopening claim, the undersigned notes that following the March 
29, 2018, hearing, Ms. Stone returned to full-duty work as an industrial electrician and 
continued in this line of work for four different employers over a two-year span.  She did 
not operate under any restrictions, and she did not ask her employers for 
accommodations.  Since the March 29, 2018, hearing, Ms. Stone has not requested or 
sought any additional medical care for her right knee or left wrist conditions; however, 
she has had a significant amount of treatment for other, unrelated conditions.   
Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating for the right knee is attributable to the surgical 
procedure she underwent prior to the original arbitration decision.  The increased 
impairment rating he assigned for the left wrist is based solely on left wrist range of 
motion.  The changes to claimant’s range of motion appear to be slight and within the 
range of change individuals normally experience with the passage of time.  Such a 
finding is supported by the expert opinion of Dr. Chen.  Dr. Chen’s opinions appear 
most consistent with the facts of this case.  Therefore, when I weigh the competing 
opinions offered by Dr. Bansal and Dr. Chen, I find the opinions of Dr. Chen to be more 
convincing in this case.  Therefore, I find claimant failed to prove she sustained a 
physical worsening of her conditions. 
Ms. Stone also asserts an economic worsening of condition.  To establish a 
change in her earning capacity, Ms. Stone relies on the expert report of Phil Davis, M.S.  
Mr. Davis conducted a vocational analysis for Ms. Stone on February 26, 2024. (Exhibit 
2)  As part of his evaluation, Mr. Davis reviewed medical records, a job description, Ms. 
Stone’s Answers to Interrogatories, and educational records.  He also conducted a 
telephone interview with Ms. Stone.  Based on the permanent restrictions 
recommended by Dr. Bansal, Mr. Davis concluded that Ms. Stone is 100 percent unable 
to physically perform the job duties of an electrician. (Ex. 2, p. 6)   
Mr. Davis’ report contains a number of errors.  Most notably, Mr. Davis 
consistently reports that Ms. Stone did not return to employment as an electrician after 
her 2016 left wrist injury.  The report provides,  
Ms. Stone is 100% precluded in her ability to physically perform the 
essential functions necessary to return to the profession of an Electrician. 
This opinion is supported in the fact that her employer, when presented with 
physician restrictions, was unable to accommodate her return back to her 
employment. 
(Ex. 2, p. 6)  It appears Mr. Davis was wholly unaware of the fact Ms. Stone was able to 
return to full duty work for more than two years after the March 29, 2018, hearing.  This 
lack of information significantly undercuts the credibility and usefulness of Mr. Davis’ 
opinion.  I am not convinced that Ms. Stone lost 100 percent of her access to the labor 

STONE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 11 
 
market as a result of her injuries.  Ms. Stone was able to return to her regular job duties 
and only left the profession after being laid off as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic.   
Defendant retained Jessica Miller, MA, CRC, to perform an Employability 
Analysis for Ms. Stone.  Like Mr. Davis, Ms. Miller evaluated Stone’s ability to return to 
work as an electrician, but also evaluated her employability based upon the restrictions 
and recommendations of both Dr. Bansal and Dr. Chen.  Utilizing Dr. Chen’s 
recommendations, Ms. Miller concluded that Ms. Stone could continue to perform work 
as an electrician without restrictions. (Ex. BB, p. 4)  Importantly, this recommendation 
does not consider the impact of other medical conditions which may impact Ms. Stone’s 
employability.  Utilizing Dr. Bansal’s restrictions and recommendations, Ms. Miller 
concluded several viable job options existed in her area. (Ex. BB, pp. 4-6) 
In the July 12, 2018, arbitration decision, the deputy commissioner assessed Ms. 
Stone’s industrial disability with the understanding that she could not return to work for 
Oklahoma Electric Supply Company due to the findings of her functional capacity 
evaluation. (Ex. 4, p. 17)  The deputy commissioner also operated under the belief that 
her job duties as an industrial electrician did not fall within Ms. Stone’s restrictions.  It 
can reasonably be said that the deputy commissioner considered Ms. Stone 
unemployed, with little chance of returning to the work she was accustomed to 
performing, when assessing her industrial disability. 
Following the March 29, 2018, hearing, Ms. Stone returned to her normal job 
duties for Oklahoma Electric Supply Company and continued to work as an industrial 
electrician for more than two years.  Ms. Stone was laid off due to the Covid-19 
pandemic in October 2020.  Since October 2020, Ms. Stone has not looked for or 
applied for any alternative employment.  She has not tested her ability to return to work 
in any capacity.  Following the layoff, Ms. Stone underwent bunionectomies on her feet. 
(See Ex. II, Depo. p. 35; Ex. FF, p. 4)  She subsequently received medical treatment for 
her low back, which culminated in a surgical procedure in August 2021.  She spent 
November and December 2021 recovering from back surgery in Cuba and visiting her 
husband. (Hr. Tr., p. 30)  She then went to Guyana in early 2022 to assist her husband 
with immigration matters. (Id.)  Then, in April 2022, Ms. Stone was diagnosed with 
multiple sclerosis.  Shortly thereafter, she filed for Social Security Disability benefits.  At 
hearing, she testified that her inability to work was related to her left leg weakness, 
“sensation” issues, cognitive issues, heat issues, and other “stuff that comes with MS.” 
(Ex. II, Depo. p. 24) 
Deputy Palmer assessed Ms. Stone’s industrial disability with the understanding 
that she was unemployed, with little chance of returning to work as an industrial 
electrician.  At the time of the April 2, 2024, review-reopening hearing, Ms. Stone was 
similarly unemployed.  However, the credible evidence presented supports a finding that 
Ms. Stone’s employment status is unrelated to the right knee and left wrist conditions.  
In consideration of the above and all other appropriate factors, I find that Ms. Stone 
failed to carry her burden of proving she sustained an economic change in condition 
causally related to the original work injury.  She is not entitled to a review-reopening of 

STONE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 12 
 
the extent of industrial disability previously established by the July 2018 arbitration 
decision.   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Ms. Stone seeks review and reopening of the July 12, 2018, arbitration decision. 
Specifically, she seeks an increase in her permanent disability award.  
Upon review-reopening, claimant has the burden to show a change in condition 
related to the original injury since the original award or settlement was made. The 
change may be either economic or physical. Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 
N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Henderson v. Iles, 250 Iowa 787, 96 N.W.2d 321 (1959).  
A mere difference of opinion of experts as to the percentage of disability arising 
from an original injury is not sufficient to justify a different determination on a petition for 
review- reopening. Rather, claimant's condition must have worsened or deteriorated 
since the arbitration hearing. Bousfield v. Sisters of Mercy, 249 Iowa 64, 86 N.W.2d 109 
(1957). A failure of a condition to improve to the extent anticipated originally may also 
constitute a change of condition. Meyers v. Holiday Inn of Cedar Falls, Iowa, 272 
N.W.2d 24 (Iowa App. 1978).  
Any substantial change in condition related to the initial work injury is sufficient to 
justify an increase in a permanent disability award. The change needs to have been 
unforeseen or unexpected at the time of the arbitration hearing. Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, 
Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387 (Iowa 2009). 
Ms. Stone asserts that her right knee and left arm conditions have substantially 
changed since the arbitration hearing justifying an increase in her permanent disability 
award. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke's Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 

STONE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 13 
 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
With respect to the right knee and left wrist conditions, the only identifiable 
differences in this case when comparing claimant’s condition at the time of the March 
29, 2018, arbitration hearing and the hearing on the petition for review-reopening are 
the slight adjustments in claimant’s loss of range of motion, and the imposition of 
additional permanent restrictions.  There is no objective evidence that claimant’s right 
knee condition has substantially changed.  There is no objective evidence that 
claimant’s left wrist condition has substantially changed.  Although Dr. Bansal assigned 
new permanent restrictions, he failed to adequately explain how the same were causally 
related to the right knee and left wrist conditions as opposed to her other, significant 
personal health conditions.  I did not find his opinions or recommendations persuasive.  
From a physical standpoint, I conclude that Ms. Stone failed to carry her burden 
of proving she sustained a change of condition that warrants an increase of her 
industrial disability as set forth in the July 12, 2018, arbitration decision.  I similarly 
conclude Ms. Stone failed to carry her burden of proving she sustained an economical 
change of condition that warrants an increase of her industrial disability as set forth in 
the July 12, 2018, arbitration decision.  While it is true that Ms. Stone has been 
unemployed since October 2020, there is little evidence to support a finding that her 
employment status is causally related to the right knee and/or left wrist injuries.  Rather, 
the evidentiary record demonstrates Ms. Stone’s disability stems from complications 
associated with her multiple sclerosis diagnosis. 
The final disputed issue is whether costs should be assessed against either 
party. Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency. Iowa Code section 10A.328. 
In this case, claimant was unsuccessful in her attempt to recover additional permanent 
disability benefits. Exercising the agency's discretion, I conclude that each party shall 
bear their own costs. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant takes nothing further. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
 
 

STONE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 14 
 
Signed and filed this __31st __ day of October, 2024. 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Randall Schueller (via WCES) 
Jennifer Beckman (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
