Case Number: 22007001.01
Case Title:  PEREZ, MARIA V. HERCULES TOPCO, LLC D/B/A QSI SANITATION
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Perez Maria-22007001.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MARIA PEREZ, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
   File No. 22007001.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 
HERCULES TOPCO, LLC d/b/a QSI 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
SANITATION, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INS. CO. OF N.A., 
  : 
       Head Note Nos: 1402.30, 1402.40 
 
 
  : 
1402.60, 1802, 2206, 3000 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Maria Perez, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from employer Hercules Topco, LLC d/b/a QSI Sanitation 
(hereinafter “QSI”) and its insurer Indemnity Insurance Company of North America.  
This matter came before the undersigned for hearing on May 3, 2023, via Zoom. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing. On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 9, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 7, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through F.  All exhibits were received without 
objection. 
Claimant testified on her own behalf.  Ms. Perez testified using the services of a 
Spanish to English interpreter.  Ashlee Snakenberg testified on behalf of the 
defendants.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.  
All parties filed their post-hearing briefs on June 13, 2023, at which time this case was 
deemed fully submitted to the undersigned. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Feb-16  08:11:27     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

PEREZ V. HERCULES TOPCO, LLC d/b/a QSI SANITATION 
Page 2 
 
 
1. Whether the claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the 
course of employment, on December 10, 2021; 
 
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery; 
 
3. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability and, if so, the 
nature and extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability 
benefits; 
 
4. The proper commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any are awarded;  
 
5. Claimant’s gross earnings and corresponding workers’ compensation rate;  
 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of the medical expenses in 
Exhibit 5; 
 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an independent medical 
examination under Iowa Code section 85.39; 
 
8. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care under Iowa Code 
section 85.27; 
 
9. Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits for an unreasonable delay or 
denial of weekly benefits; and  
 
10. Whether costs should be assessed against either party. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
The instant case revolves around an alleged injury occurring on or about 
December 10, 2021.  The claimant at the center of this case is Maria Perez.  Her 
reported injuries pertain to her right shoulder and low back.  At the time of the 
evidentiary hearing that brought forth these claims, Ms. Perez was 59 years old.  Born 
in Mexico, Ms. Perez moved to the United States at the age of 14.  She has taken 
English courses some 30 years ago; however, her primary language is Spanish.  While 
she can engage in spoken English in the workplace, challenges arise when it comes to 
written communication and complete comprehension of the English language.   
Ms. Perez’s employment history largely consists of manual labor positions.  She 
has previously worked on assembly lines at Iowa Premium Beef and JBS Foods. 

PEREZ V. HERCULES TOPCO, LLC d/b/a QSI SANITATION 
Page 3 
 
Additionally, she has held the role of a restaurant manager, where she was responsible 
for both cooking and bartending.  
Claimant’s tenure with QSI Sanitation commenced on October 6, 2021. (Hearing 
Transcript, page 24)  QSI provides industrial cleaning services to facilities that process 
or produce food products.  The alleged injury occurred while claimant was providing 
cleaning services to an Iowa Premium Beef facility in Tama, Iowa. (See Hr. Tr., p. 73) 
At QSI, claimant worked as a sanitation team member. (Hr. Tr., p. 96)  She was 
responsible for cleaning a break room, a cafeteria, and the facility’s bathrooms.  In 
December 2021, claimant was reassigned to a different area of Iowa Premium Beef’s 
facility. (Hr. Tr., pp. 29-30)  In this role, claimant removed trays of discarded bones and 
meat from an assembly line and emptied them into a barrel. (Hr. Tr., p. 25)  She 
estimated that the trays weighed up to 40 pounds and she had to lift them at shoulder 
level. (Hr. Tr., p. 26)  Once the barrel was full, claimant would then have to empty the 
barrel. (Hr. Tr., p. 28) 
Ms. Perez started noticing pain in her right shoulder and low back after the 
change in her job duties. (Hr. Tr., p. 30)  After two to three weeks of increasing pain, 
claimant reported her symptoms and requested medical treatment from “Deborah.” (Hr. 
Tr., pp. 32-33)  Claimant believed that Deborah was her day-shift supervisor.  Deborah 
was not a supervisor; however, she had a “leadership role.” (Hr. Tr., p. 83)  Deborah 
allegedly discussed claimant’s request with the night shift manager and told Ms. Perez 
to make a doctor’s appointment. (Hr. Tr., p. 33)   
Ms. Perez elected to be seen by her primary care physician, Jerry Wille, M.D. Dr. 
Wille first evaluated Ms. Perez on December 10, 2021. (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 36)  Ms. 
Perez reported constant right shoulder pain that was gradually worsening. (Id.)  The 
medical record provides, “She has a new position and since then her right shoulder is 
causing issues.” (Id.)  On examination, claimant demonstrated swelling, decreased 
range of motion and decreased strength in the right shoulder. (JE1, p. 37)  Dr. Wille 
assessed claimant with impingement syndrome of the right shoulder and recommended 
she return to her old cleaning duties at work. (JE1, pp. 37-39) 
When Ms. Perez returned to work, she provided Dr. Wille’s note to Deborah, who 
left it on the desk of claimant’s supervisor. (Hr. Tr., pp. 34-35)  The defendant employer 
subsequently moved claimant to a job where she had to squeegee the blood off the 
floor and pick up animal heads that had fallen to the floor. (Hr. Tr., p. 35)  Claimant 
asserted that this position caused pain in both arms and hands. (Hr. Tr., p. 36)  She 
reported her pain to Deborah. (Hr. Tr., pp. 36-37) 
Ashlee Snakenberg testified on defendants’ behalf.  Ms. Snakenberg is a human 
resources area manager for the defendant employer. (Hr. Tr., p. 73)  At some point in 
December 2021, Ms. Snakenberg was notified by claimant’s supervisor, Joe Trevino, 
that claimant had missed some work and would be bringing in a doctor’s note. (Hr. Tr., 
p. 75)  Ms. Snakenberg subsequently called claimant and reminded her of the need to 
bring in a doctor’s note for the days she had missed. (Id.)  According to Ms. 
Snakenberg, claimant texted her photographs of her off-work slips. (Hr. Tr., p. 76)  Ms. 

PEREZ V. HERCULES TOPCO, LLC d/b/a QSI SANITATION 
Page 4 
 
Snakenberg acknowledged receiving an off-work slip from Dr. Wille on December 10, 
2021. (Hr. Tr., p. 78)  The off-work slip provides, in part: 
It is my medical opinion that Maria S Perez WOULD LIKE TO GO BACK TO 
HER CLEANING JOB AT WORK… AS HER NEW POSITION IS CAUSING 
HER SHOULDER ISSUES.. PLEASE RETURN TO DESIGNATED 
POSITION.  CHECK HER BP AT WORK TO MAKE SURE IT IS DOWN. 
(JE1, p. 39)  Ms. Snakenberg testified to a number of conversations with claimant that 
occurred throughout December 2021.  According to Ms. Snakenberg, claimant never 
mentioned that she sustained an injury at work. (Hr. Tr., p. 81)   
Shortly after her appointment with Dr. Wille, claimant presented to Christa Slagle, 
DNP, to address her uncontrolled, chronic hypertension. (JE1, pp. 40-48)  Following the 
December 11, 2021, appointment, Ms. Slagle provided claimant with a work release, 
noting she was excused from work from December 11, 2021, through December 13, 
2021, due to her high blood pressure. (JE1, p. 48)  The work excuse further provided 
that claimant’s return to work status would be reevaluated on December 13, 2021. (Id.)  
Following the December 13, 2021, appointment, Ms. Slagle provided claimant with a 
work release, noting she could return to work without restrictions. (JE1, p. 53)  I find this 
release only applied to claimant’s chronic hypertension, the condition being treated by 
Ms. Slagle.    
According to the medical records in evidence, Ms. Perez returned to Ms. Slagle 
on January 21, 2022, reporting right shoulder pain and low back pain without sciatica. 
(JE1, pp. 55, 57)  The record notes that claimant performed heavy lifting at work. (JE1, 
p. 55)  An x-ray of claimant’s low back revealed mild degenerative disc disease at L1-2 
and L3-4, as well as severe bilateral facet arthropathy at L5-S1. (Id.)  An x-ray of the 
right shoulder revealed moderate osteoarthritis of the AC joint and moderate calcific 
tendinosis of the distal supraspinatus tendon. (JE1, p. 58) 
Claimant started physical therapy for her low back on February 3, 2022. (JE2, p. 
78)  It was recommended that claimant attend physical therapy two times per week for 4 
weeks. (JE2, p. 83)  Unfortunately, claimant did not follow the initial recommendation.  
She did not return to physical therapy until after she was diagnosed with a torn rotator 
cuff. (See JE2, p. 85)   
An MRI of the right shoulder showed a large full-thickness tear of the 
supraspinatus tendon. (JE3, p. 110)  After reviewing the diagnostic imaging, Ms. Slagle 
referred claimant for an orthopedic consultation. (JE1, p. 69)   
Kyle Switzer, M.D. performed an orthopedic evaluation of claimant on February 
22, 2022. (JE5, p. 150)  An interpreter was present for the evaluation. (Id.)  Claimant 
reported that she had injured her shoulder at work when she was moved from her 
cleaning job and was having to lift heavier type of oil. (Id.)  She testified at hearing that 
she believes Dr. Switzer was confused on the translation as she was not lifting oil, but 
fat or grease in the discarded material. (Hr. Tr., p. 50)  Dr. Switzer assessed a 
nontraumatic complete tear of the right rotator cuff and shoulder weakness. (JE5, p. 
151)  Dr. Switzer encouraged claimant to speak with her employer regarding workers’ 

PEREZ V. HERCULES TOPCO, LLC d/b/a QSI SANITATION 
Page 5 
 
compensation. (Id.)  He then referred her to physical therapy, noting that surgery would 
be considered if she did not see improvement. (Id.)  Claimant was returned to work with 
a 10-pound lifting restriction. (JE5, p. 152) 
Ms. Perez provided the defendant employer with the work restrictions assigned 
by Dr. Switzer.  She further relayed the possibility of surgery to Deborah or “Jesenia,” a 
secretary. (Hr. Tr., p. 38)  Claimant was told to return to work when she was “100%.” 
(Id.) 
When claimant returned to physical therapy for her right shoulder and low back 
on February 28, 2022, she reported difficulty with several daily activities, including lifting 
various items, brushing her hair, and bathing. (JE2, p. 85)   
Ms. Perez returned to Dr. Switzer on April 26, 2022, for an evaluation of her right 
shoulder and low back pain. (JE5, p. 155)  She reported ongoing pain and weakness in 
her right shoulder. (Id.)  She further reported that physical therapy did not seem to help 
her condition. (Id.)  According to Dr. Switzer’s notes, the majority of the appointment 
was spent discussing her situation as it related to workers’ compensation. (See JE5, p. 
156)  Claimant reported that her employer was not willing to accommodate her 
restrictions. (JE5, p. 156)  Dr. Switzer recommended surgery; however, he noted that 
claimant would be out of work for quite some time following the same. (Id.) 
Ms. Perez was discharged from physical therapy for non-compliance on May 10, 
2022. (JE2, p. 108)  There is a significant gap in claimant’s medical treatment between 
May 2022 and December 2022. 
Ms. Perez sought an independent medical examination to be performed by John 
Kuhnlein, D.O.  The examination occurred on December 1, 2022. (Claimant’s Exhibit 1, 
p. 1)  An interpreter was present throughout the examination. (Id.)  Dr. Kuhnlein 
diagnosed a right shoulder rotator cuff tear and probable adhesive capsulitis. (Ex. 1, p. 
7)  He also diagnosed musculoskeletal nonradicular low back pain. (Id.)  With respect to 
causation, Dr. Kuhnlein opined that the reported mechanism of injury is consistent with 
a right rotator cuff tear.  He further opined that the adhesive capsulitis would have 
developed as a sequela related to a lack of definitive care and decreased use of the 
right shoulder following the work injury. (Ex. 1, p. 8)  With respect to the low back 
condition, Dr. Kuhnlein opined that the reported mechanism of injury – throwing heavy 
grease containers – is consistent with a low back injury. (Id.)  Dr. Kuhnlein 
recommended claimant return to Dr. Switzer for her right shoulder issues, and another 
physician of her choosing for her low back pain. (Id.)  On the issue of maximum medical 
improvement (“MMI”), Dr. Kuhnlein opined that absent additional treatment, claimant 
would have reached MMI on April 26, 2022. (Id.) 
Using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, 
Dr. Kuhnlein placed claimant in DRE Lumbar Category II and assigned 5 percent whole 
person impairment to the low back. (Id.)  After comparing the range of motion in 
claimant’s bilateral shoulders, Dr. Kuhnlein assigned 7 percent upper extremity 
impairment for deficits in range of motion, and 1 percent upper extremity impairment for 
motor deficits. (Id.)  Using the Combined Values Chart on page 604, Dr. Kuhnlein 
assigned 10 percent whole person impairment. (Id.) 

PEREZ V. HERCULES TOPCO, LLC d/b/a QSI SANITATION 
Page 6 
 
Dr. Kuhnlein's recommended restrictions for the claimant include limiting lifting to 
20 pounds occasionally from floor to waist, and 20 pounds occasionally from waist to 
shoulder, with a specific directive to avoid any tasks involving lifting above shoulder 
level. (Ex. 1, p. 9) 
After nearly 10 months without medical treatment, Ms. Perez returned to Dr. 
Switzer’s office on February 9, 2023, reporting continued pain and weakness in her right 
shoulder. (JE9, p. 196)  The record provides, “Again the patient was lifting 45 pound 
totes at work and tried to throw these into a container when she felt sudden pain in her 
shoulder.” (Id.)  Claimant expressed a desire to proceed with surgical intervention and 
Dr. Switzer felt this was a reasonable option under the circumstances. (JE9, p. 197)   
Unfortunately, Ms. Perez fell in her home and dislocated her right shoulder on or 
about February 19, 2023. (JE4, p. 149; see JE4, p. 133)  The right shoulder was 
successfully reduced and claimant was provided a sling for pain. (JE4, p. 149)  Ms. 
Perez presented to the emergency department and was evaluated by John Hamilton, 
M.D. (JE4, p. 133)  Ms. Perez provided Dr. Hamilton with an oral history of her right 
shoulder condition, noting that she had planned to undergo a rotator cuff repair when 
physical therapy did not improve her condition; however, it did not work out logistically, 
and she had been dealing with the pain ever since. (Id.)  Dr. Hamilton assessed 
claimant with a right shoulder rotator cuff tear, biceps tendinopathy, and recent shoulder 
instability. (Id.)  Similar to Dr. Switzer, Dr. Hamilton recommended a right shoulder 
arthroscopic rotator cuff repair, biceps tenodesis, subacromial decompression with 
possible Bankart repair. (Id.) 
In response, defendants scheduled claimant for an independent medical 
examination with Steven Aviles, M.D. (Defendants’ Exhibit A, pp. 1-2)  The examination 
occurred on March 1, 2023. (Ex. A, p. 3)  Dr. Aviles noted the recent shoulder 
dislocation and opined the accuracy of his physical examination findings would be 
decreased as a result. (Ex. A, p. 9)  He further noted that claimant “outright refused to 
answer questions or was evasive with questioning.” (Ex. A, p. 8)  With respect to 
causation, Dr. Aviles opined claimant did not work in her new position long enough to 
cause a cumulative injury to the right shoulder. (Ex. A, p. 11)  He further opined the 
rotator cuff tear on the MRI is not consistent with an acute injury. (Id.)  He opined the 
rotator cuff tear was more likely than not related to a pre-existing and chronic condition. 
(Id.)  Dr. Aviles further opined it is “quite likely” claimant had a tear in her rotator cuff 
when she started her employment with QSI. (Id.)  Despite his causation opinion, Dr. 
Aviles agreed that Dr. Switzer’s recommendation for surgery was accurate, reasonable, 
and appropriate. (Ex. A, p. 12) 
Dr. Switzer performed surgery on April 14, 2023. (JE9, pp. 198-199)  His post-op 
diagnosis was full thickness rotator cuff tear, impingement, adhesive capsulitis, and 
labral tearing with chondral defect inferior glenoid. (JE9, p. 198) 
Following surgery, claimant submitted additional medical records to Dr. Kuhnlein 
for review. (See Ex. 1, p. 12)  In a letter dated May 1, 2023, Dr. Kuhnlein expressly 
opined that the supplementary medical records had no effect on the opinions he had 
initially outlined in his report. (Ex. 1, p. 12)  Dr. Kuhnlein then produced a supplemental 

PEREZ V. HERCULES TOPCO, LLC d/b/a QSI SANITATION 
Page 7 
 
report summarizing the additional medical records and addressing Dr. Aviles’ report on 
May 16, 2023. (Ex. 1, pp. 14-16)  The report provides,  
I still believe that the rotator cuff tear was directly and causally related to 
her employment based on the mechanism of the injury she described to me, 
as I stated in my March 23, 2023, report.  However, even if the rotator cuff 
tear predated her employment and was symptomatic, based on her 
statements, it worsened after this injury, and the treatment pattern changed 
after the injury date, so even if, as Dr. Aviles states, the rotator cuff tear 
predated her employment, it was not significant enough to cause her to seek 
medical care as she did in December 2021. 
(Ex. 1, p. 15)  He further opined the pathology addressed during surgery would be 
consistent with the rotator cuff tear known before the right anterior shoulder dislocation. 
(Ex. 1, p. 16) 
At the time of the evidentiary hearing, Ms. Perez was still on restrictions for her 
right shoulder. (Hr. Tr., p. 42)  Ms. Perez presented to one follow-up appointment and 
two physical therapy sessions prior to the evidentiary hearing. (Hr. Tr., p. 41)  She could 
not say whether the surgery improved her condition as she was still recovering and 
experiencing a significant amount of pain. (Id.)  As for her low back, Ms. Perez testified 
she continues to experience pain; however, she had noticed some improvement since 
she is no longer lifting heavy items at work. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 43-44) 
The first issue that needs to be addressed is whether claimant sustained a right 
shoulder injury arising out of and in the course of her employment on or about 
December 10, 2021.  Defendants contend claimant’s right shoulder condition pre-
existed the alleged December 10, 2021, work injury. 
Claimant's medical history shows that on January 26, 2017, she sought medical 
attention for neck pain that had persisted for approximately two weeks. Claimant was 
prescribed Flexeril and advised to return if her symptoms did not improve. There is no 
documentation indicating that the claimant returned for additional treatment. (JE 1, pp. 
5-10) 
A few years later, on July 20, 2020, the claimant presented to Ms. Slagle and 
reported a one-year history of right shoulder pain without any reported trauma. During 
this visit, Ms. Slagle diagnosed the claimant with chronic right shoulder pain and 
referred her to physical therapy.  There is no evidence to suggest that the claimant 
pursued additional treatment following the appointment on July 20, 2020, and there is 
no indication that she ever initiated physical therapy. (JE 1, pp. 11-15) 
These medical records, while indicating previous medical concerns, do not 
provide conclusive evidence that the claimant's right shoulder condition pre-existed the 
specific work-related injury that occurred on or about December 10, 2021. 
The evidentiary record is void of any complaints of right shoulder pain between 
July 21, 2020, and October 6, 2021, the day Ms. Perez started working for the 
defendant employer.  There are similarly no records showing claimant had right 

PEREZ V. HERCULES TOPCO, LLC d/b/a QSI SANITATION 
Page 8 
 
shoulder complaints while she was cleaning the breakroom, cafeteria, and bathrooms 
for the defendant employer.  Her prior complaints did not lead to any significant 
treatment or missed work.   
Ms. Perez started noticing pain in her right shoulder and low back following a 
change in her job duties. (Hr. Tr., p. 30)  After two to three weeks of increasing pain, 
Ms. Perez sought medical treatment.  Ms. Perez reported constant right shoulder pain 
that had gradually worsened after starting a new position at work. (JE1, p. 36)  She 
described the pain as aching and burning. (Id.)  On examination, claimant demonstrated 
swelling, tenderness, decreased range of motion and decreased strength. (JE1, p. 37)  
Dr. Wille assessed claimant with impingement syndrome of the right shoulder and 
recommended she return to her old cleaning duties. (JE1, pp. 37-39)   
Despite moving to a different position at work, claimant’s right shoulder pain 
persisted. (Hr. Tr., pp. 36-37; JE1, p. 57)  An MRI later revealed a large full-thickness 
tear of the supraspinatus tendon, with about 1.5 cm medial retraction, subscapularis 
tendinosis, subcentimeter calcification within the subdeltoid bursa along the lateral 
margin of the infraspinatus tendon insertion and mild osteoarthritis of the 
acromioclavicular joint. (JE1, p. 65)  When physical therapy failed to improve claimant’s 
condition, Dr. Switzer recommended surgery. 
Throughout the course of her medical treatment, claimant consistently reported 
that she experienced right shoulder issues after working in a new position for the 
defendant employer. (JE1, pp. 36, 39; JE5, p. 150)  One of the work activities she 
consistently described involved removing trays weighing up to 40 pounds from an 
assembly line at shoulder level.  (Hr. Tr., p. 26)  It appears Dr. Kuhnlein or the 
interpreter present during the IME misunderstood claimant’s description of this work 
activity as a description of the alleged work injury. (See Ex. 1, pp. 1-2) 
While Dr. Kuhnlein’s initial causation opinion is based on reports of an acute 
injury, he subsequently opined that even if the rotator cuff tear was not directly caused 
by claimant’s work duties, it was materially aggravated by her work activities and 
caused the need for the surgery performed by Dr. Switzer. (Ex. 1, pp. 15-16)  In 
comparison, Dr. Aviles opined that the tear seen on claimant’s MRI is more likely than 
not a pre-existing and chronic condition; however, he did not address whether 
claimant’s work activities could have materially aggravated, accelerated, or lit up said 
pre-existing condition.  While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for a preexisting 
injury, the fact the claimant has a preexisting injury at the time of a subsequent injury is 
not a defense. 
With respect to the alleged right shoulder injury, I find Dr. Kuhnlein’s explanation 
and causation opinion complies most closely with the evidence in the medical records 
and the testimony of Ms. Perez.  I therefore find his opinion persuasive.   
Ms. Perez’s medical history is also relevant for the alleged low back pain.  She 
underwent a lap sleeve gastrectomy in January 2021, to reduce her weight and improve 
her chronic high blood pressure. (Hr. Tr., p. 63)  The procedure resulted in a moderately 
sized pannus that extended well below the mons pubis. (JE7, p. 166)  On March 9, 
2022, claimant reported that the pannus impeded her activities of daily living and 

PEREZ V. HERCULES TOPCO, LLC d/b/a QSI SANITATION 
Page 9 
 
caused low back pain. (JE7, pp. 166, 171)  Lynn Moorman, ARNP assessed chronic 
midline low back pain without sciatica and recommended claimant consider a 
panniculectomy. (JE7, p. 166)  Discussions regarding the recommended 
panniculectomy continued through at least July 1, 2022. (See JE7, p. 185) 
Dr. Kuhnlein is the only physician to address causation and impairment with 
respect to the alleged low back injury.  Dr. Kuhnlein diagnosed claimant with 
musculoskeletal nonradicular low back pain and assigned 5 percent whole person 
impairment pursuant to the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.  While likely a scrivener’s error, it 
is worth noting Dr. Kuhnlein referenced Table 15-5 on page 392 when assigning 
claimant’s permanent impairment.  Table 15-5 on page 392 is titled, “Criteria for Rating 
Impairment Due to Cervical Disorders.”  Table 15-3 on page 382 outlines the criteria for 
rating impairment due to lumbar spine injuries.  
Unfortunately, Dr. Kuhnlein does not provide any analysis with respect to the 5 
percent whole person impairment rating he assigned for claimant’s lumbar spine injury.  
He also does not refer to the pannus that was affecting claimant’s activities of daily 
living and causing low back pain.  Such an analysis would have been helpful in this 
case as there are limited medical records pertaining to the alleged low back injury.  
Although the opinion is unrebutted, I find Dr. Kuhnlein provided insufficient analysis with 
respect to the alleged low back injury.  I do not find his opinions regarding the same to 
be persuasive.  While I find it likely that claimant sustained an injury to her low back as 
a result of her work activities, given the limited record before me, I cannot conclude that 
claimant carried her burden of proving the injury was permanent.   
The next issue to be addressed is claimant’s entitlement to temporary disability 
benefits.  More specifically, Ms. Perez is seeking a running award of healing period 
benefits commencing on February 4, 2022.  The parties stipulate that claimant was off 
work during this period of time. 
On December 10, 2021, Dr. Wille assessed claimant with impingement syndrome 
of the right shoulder and recommended she return to her old cleaning duties at work. 
(JE1, pp. 37-39)  Two months later, an MRI revealed a large full-thickness tear in 
claimant’s rotator cuff. (JE1, p. 65)  Dr. Switzer performed an orthopedic evaluation and 
assigned a 10-pound lifting restriction. (JE5, p. 152)  Dr. Switzer opined that claimant 
would need restrictions until after surgery could be performed. (JE5, p. 156)  Claimant’s 
care was denied under the workers’ compensation system.  Due to financial constraints, 
her care has been limited and she was not immediately able to pursue surgery.  
Claimant did not undergo surgery until April 14, 2023. (JE9, p. 201)  At the time of the 
evidentiary hearing, Ms. Perez was still on restrictions for her right shoulder. (Hr. Tr., p. 
42) 
According to the medical evidence I have accepted as most convincing in this 
record, claimant had not yet achieved MMI prior to the evidentiary hearing and she was 
not medically capable of returning to substantially similar work.  Claimant has not 
returned to work for Kwik Star.  I conclude claimant is entitled to a running award of 
temporary disability benefits from February 4, 2022, through the present.   

PEREZ V. HERCULES TOPCO, LLC d/b/a QSI SANITATION 
Page 10 
 
There is a dispute about the rate at which Ms. Perez's weekly benefits should be 
paid. The defendant employer's rate calculation results in an average weekly rate of 
$838.00, and a weekly workers' compensation benefit rate of $566.04. (Ex. D, p. 30) 
Ms. Perez’s rate calculation results in an average weekly rate of $862.46, and a weekly 
workers' compensation benefit rate of $581.01. (Ex. 4, p. 24) 
Review of the parties' respective positions on this issue reveals the primary 
dispute is whether the wages from the pay period ending November 27, 2021, which 
includes holiday hours, should be considered representative of Ms. Perez’s typical 
earnings, and therefore included in the calculation of average weekly wages.   
Ms. Perez’s wage records are contained in Exhibit D.  Review of the wage 
records reveals that claimant’s workweek typically included between 51 and 54 hours of 
work.  However, there were two weeks where claimant worked 61.5 and 65.5 hours.  
Claimant worked one less day than normal the week ending November 27, 2021, due to 
the Thanksgiving holiday. (Ex. C, p. 19)  The wage records do not indicate that claimant 
received any holiday pay for the week ending November 27, 2021. (Ex. D, p. 38)  As 
such, I find the pay period ending November 27, 2021, is not representative for 
purposes of calculating claimant’s weekly rate of compensation.   
Claimant requests alternate medical care.  Claimant’s request for the 
authorization of Dr. Switzer as a treating physician is reasonable.  Claimant’s request 
that defendants be ordered to authorize a physician to treat her low back injury is 
similarly reasonable.   
Claimant asserts a claim for reimbursement of medical expenses she paid out-of-
pocket, as well as a request for award of past outstanding medical expenses and an 
award that requires defendants to satisfy and hold claimant harmless from such past 
medical expenses.  Having found in favor of claimant on the issue of causation, I further 
find the medical treatment claimant received following defendants’ denial was 
reasonable and necessary to treat her work-related condition. I similarly find that the 
associated medical expenses in Claimant’s Exhibit 5 are causally related to the 
December 10, 2021, work injury and represent reasonable charges for the reasonable 
and necessary medical treatment. 
Claimant seeks payment of Dr. Kuhnlein's IME report.  Because the defendant 
employer did not subject claimant to an evaluation for permanent impairment prior to Dr. 
Kuhnlein's examination, I find claimant is not entitled to reimbursement of Dr. Kuhnlein's 
IME fees. I do, however, find the fees associated with Dr. Kuhnlein's report are taxable 
to defendants as a cost. 
The last issue to be decided is whether defendants should be assessed with 
penalties.  Claimant asserts penalty benefits are appropriate because defendants 
denied her claim and have not established they conducted a timely and reasonable 
investigation, that their basis for denial was reasonable, or that they contemporaneously 
conveyed the basis for their denial to claimant. 

PEREZ V. HERCULES TOPCO, LLC d/b/a QSI SANITATION 
Page 11 
 
Claimant established that defendants denied liability and have paid no weekly 
benefits in this claim.  Therefore, I find that claimant has proven a delay or denial of 
weekly benefits has occurred. 
Defendants contend they were aware that claimant had missed work for some 
medical issues in December 2021; however, they were unaware that she was claiming 
the medical issues were work-related until they received a letter from claimant’s counsel 
on or about February 28, 2022.  Nevertheless, there is no evidence defendants 
conducted an investigation of Ms. Perez’s claim following receipt of claimant’s counsel’s 
February 28, 2022, letter.  Based on claimant’s failure to report a work injury to Mr. 
Trevino or during any of her conversations with Ms. Snakenberg in December 2021, 
defendants contend that it was reasonable for them to conclude that claimant did not 
injure her shoulder while working for the defendant employer. 
 
I find defendants did not establish that a timely and reasonable investigation 
occurred after claimant's report of injury.  Claimant reported the injury in December 
2021.  Claimant’s counsel also notified defendants of the alleged work injury in February 
2022.  Defendants did not have a reasonable basis for denial of the claim until after 
receipt of Dr. Aviles’ medical report dated March 6, 2023.  The length of this delay is 
clearly unreasonable under the facts of this case.  Ms. Perez’s claim for benefits was 
denied for over a year without a medical causation opinion and there is no evidence a 
denial letter was ever issued.  I identify no evidence in the record demonstrating the 
defendants contemporaneously conveyed a basis for their denial of benefits to Ms. 
Perez.  Therefore, I find defendants did not provide a contemporaneous conveyance of 
the basis for delay or denial.  
Costs will be addressed in the conclusions of law section. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue in this case is whether claimant sustained an injury to her right 
shoulder and low back on December 10, 2021, which arose out of and in the course of 
her employment with the defendant employer. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995). An 
injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the injury 
and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309. The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment. Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309. An injury occurs “in the course of employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 

PEREZ V. HERCULES TOPCO, LLC d/b/a QSI SANITATION 
Page 12 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke's Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
When the injury develops gradually over time, the cumulative injury rule applies. 
The date of injury for cumulative injury purposes is the date on which the disability 
manifests. Manifestation is best characterized as that date on which both the fact of 
injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant's employment would be 
plainly apparent to a reasonable person. The date of manifestation inherently is a fact-
based determination. The fact-finder is entitled to substantial latitude in making this 
determination and may consider a variety of factors, none of which is necessarily 
dispositive in establishing a manifestation date. Among others, the factors may include 
missing work when the condition prevents performing the job, or receiving significant 
medical care for the condition. Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284 (Iowa 2001); Oscar 
Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 483 N.W.2d 824 (Iowa 1992); McKeever Custom 
Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense. 
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956). If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover. Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961). 
In this case, I found the causation opinion of Dr. Kuhnlein to be more persuasive 
than the opinion of Dr. Aviles on the issue of whether claimant sustained a permanent 
aggravation of her underlying right shoulder condition. I similarly found Dr. Kuhnlein’s 
unrebutted causation opinion with respect to the low back to be persuasive.   Therefore, 

PEREZ V. HERCULES TOPCO, LLC d/b/a QSI SANITATION 
Page 13 
 
I conclude that claimant proved she sustained work-related injuries to her right shoulder 
and low back on or about December 10, 2021. 
Claimant is seeking a running award of temporary disability benefits.  
According to the medical evidence I have accepted as most convincing in this 
record, claimant had not yet achieved MMI prior to the evidentiary hearing.   
The Iowa Supreme Court has described MMI as “stabilization of the condition or 
at least a finding that the condition is ‘not likely to remit in the future despite medical 
treatment.’” Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 200 (Iowa 
2010) (citation omitted). 
On the date of hearing, the claimant was less than one month out from surgery 
on her right shoulder.  There is no indication from Dr. Switzer that claimant had reached 
MMI prior to the evidentiary hearing.  Therefore, I find that claimant had not yet reached 
MMI at the time of the hearing. 
The Iowa Supreme Court has specifically noted that a claimant's healing period 
terminates whenever the first of three factors in Iowa Code section 85.34(1) is met.  
Evenson v. Winnebago Industries. Inc., 881 N.W.2d 360 (Iowa 2016).  The factors are 
whether (1) the employee has returned to work, (2) it is medically indicated that 
significant improvement from the injury is not anticipated (MMI), or (3) the employee is 
medically capable of returning to employment substantially similar to the employment in 
which the employee was engaged at the time of injury.  Iowa Code § 85.34(1). 
Claimant was off work from February 4, 2022, until she started working part-time 
at Kwik Star in approximately November 2022. (See Ex. E, Depo. p. 18)  Claimant was 
not medically capable of performing substantially similar employment from February 4, 
2022, through the date of the evidentiary hearing.  I found claimant had not yet reached 
MMI at the time of the evidentiary hearing.  Therefore, I conclude claimant satisfied her 
burden to show she is entitled to a running award of temporary disability benefits. 
The next issue to be decided is claimant’s workers’ compensation rate.  The 
primary dispute is whether the wages from the pay period ending November 27, 2021, 
which includes holiday hours, should be considered representative of Ms. Perez’s 
typical earnings, and therefore included in the calculation of average weekly wages.   
This agency does not automatically exclude weeks of vacation or holiday pay as 
unrepresentative. Gall v. Maytag Corp., File No. 5013691 (App. Dec. May 26, 2006); 
See Gaylord v. Quaker Oats, File No. 5010059 (Arb. Dec. June 3, 2005) 
Review of the wage records reveals that claimant’s workweek typically included 
between 51 and 54 hours of work.  However, there were two weeks where claimant 
worked 61.5 and 65.5 hours.  Claimant worked one less day than normal the week 
ending November 27, 2021, due to the Thanksgiving holiday. (Ex. C, p. 19)  The wage 
records do not indicate that claimant received any holiday pay for the week ending 
November 27, 2021. (Ex. D, p. 38)  As such, I found the pay period ending November 
27, 2021, is not representative for purposes of calculating claimant’s weekly rate of 
compensation.   

PEREZ V. HERCULES TOPCO, LLC d/b/a QSI SANITATION 
Page 14 
 
I accept claimant’s average weekly wage calculation and find claimant’s workers’ 
compensation rate for the December 10, 2021, work injury to be $580.41.  Claimant’s 
rate is based on an average weekly rate of $862.46, and an exemption status of S-5. 
Claimant next seeks an order for the payment of past medical expenses 
contained in Exhibit 5.   
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert 
v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
All medical expenses appear to be for the treatment of claimant’s right shoulder 
and low back conditions.  Defendants denied compensability of both conditions.  I find 
the medical treatment claimant received was reasonable, necessary, and causally 
related to the December 10, 2021, work injury.   
When the employer abandons care through the denial of compensability of an 
injury the injured employee may select his own medical care. If the injury is deemed to 
be compensable then the claimant may recover the costs of the reasonable medical 
care. See Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193 (Iowa 
2010). 
Because I found that claimant’s treatment up to the date of the arbitration hearing 
was reasonable and causally related to the work injury, I conclude defendants are 
responsible for payment and/or reimbursement of the causally related medical 
expenses set forth in Claimant's Exhibit 5.   
Claimant seeks an order for alternate medical care and specifically requests that 
Dr. Switzer be assigned as claimant’s authorized treating physician.   
“[T]he employer has no right to choose the medical care when compensability is 
contested.” Bell Bros Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 204 
(Iowa 2010). “The statute contemplates that an injured employee may select his or her 
own medical care when the employer abandons the injured employee through the 
denial of compensability of the injury.” (Id.) Therefore, given defendants' denial of 
liability, I conclude that the defendant employer has no right to assert the authorization 
defense or challenge claimant’s assertion of a claim for alternate medical care.   
In this case, defendants have not provided any medical care for claimant’s 
conditions.  Defendants’ lack of care is not reasonable nor compliant with Iowa Code 
section 85.27. Claimant's request for alternate medical care will be granted and 
defendants will be ordered to provide and pay for causally related future medical care 
as recommended by Dr. Switzer. 

PEREZ V. HERCULES TOPCO, LLC d/b/a QSI SANITATION 
Page 15 
 
The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement 
for an independent medical evaluation under Iowa Code section 85.39.  Section 85.39 
permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent examination by a physician of 
the employee's choice where an employer-retained physician has previously evaluated 
“permanent disability” and the employee believes that the initial evaluation is too low.   
The Iowa Supreme Court provided a literal interpretation of the plain-language 
of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section 85.39 only allows the employee to 
obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer's expense if dissatisfied with 
the evaluation arranged by the employer.  Des Moines Area Reg'l Transit Auth. v. 
Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015).  Under the Young decision, an employee can 
only obtain an IME at the employer's expense if an evaluation of permanent disability 
has been made by an employer-retained physician. 
No employer-retained physician conducted an impairment assessment prior to 
Dr. Kuhnlein.  As such, defendants are not liable for reimbursing Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME 
under section 85.39.  However, the cost of obtaining a medical report in lieu of 
testimony by a medical expert is a taxable cost pursuant to Iowa Code section 86.40 
[10A.328] and 876 IAC 4.33(6).  Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015). 
The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to penalty 
benefits under Iowa Code section 86.13 [10A.315] and, if so, how much. 
Iowa Code section 86.13(4) [10A.315(4)] provides a specific standard that must 
be met for purposes of avoiding a penalty.  Iowa Code section 86.13(4) 
[10A.315(4)] provides: 
a. If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs 
without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or 
insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits, the workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or chapter 85, 
85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, 
delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 
b. The workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits under 
this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following facts: 
(1) The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in payment, or 
termination in benefits. 
(2) The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or probable cause or 
excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits. 
c. In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or excuse 
under paragraph “b”, an excuse shall satisfy all of the following criteria: 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable investigation and 
evaluation by the employer or insurance carrier into whether benefits were 
owed to the employee. 

PEREZ V. HERCULES TOPCO, LLC d/b/a QSI SANITATION 
Page 16 
 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and evaluation were the 
actual basis upon which the employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits. 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously conveyed the 
basis for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits to the 
employee at the time of the denial, delay, or termination of benefits. 
In Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 (Iowa 1996), and 
Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996), the supreme court 
said: 
      Based on the plain language of section 86.13 [10A.315]1, we hold an 
employee is entitled to penalty benefits if there has been a delay in 
payment unless the employer proves a reasonable cause or excuse. A 
reasonable cause or excuse exists if either (1) the delay was necessary 
for the insurer to investigate the claim or (2) the employer had a 
reasonable basis to contest the employee's entitlement to benefits. A 
“reasonable basis” for denial of the claim exists if the claim is “fairly 
debatable.” Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 
An issue of law is fairly debatable if viable arguments exist in favor of each party. 
Covia v. Robinson, 507 N.W.2d 411 (Iowa 1993). An issue of fact is fairly debatable if 
substantial evidence exists which would support a finding favorable to the employer. 
Gilbert v. USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001). 
An employer's bare assertion that a claim is fairly debatable is insufficient to 
avoid imposition of a penalty. The employer must assert facts upon which the 
commissioner could reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.” Meyers v. 
Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996). 
The employer's failure to communicate the reason for the delay or denial to the 
employee contemporaneously with the delay or denial is not an independent ground for 
imposition of a penalty. Keystone Nursing Care Center v. Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 299 
(Iowa 2005). 
If the employer fails to show reasonable cause or excuse for the delay or denial, 
the commissioner shall impose a penalty in an amount up to 50 percent of the amount 
unreasonably delayed or denied. Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 
(Iowa 1996). The factors to be considered in determining the amount of the penalty 
include the length of the delay, the number of delays, the information available to the 
employer and the employer's past record of penalties. Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 238. 
In this instance, I found defendants did not establish that a timely and reasonable 
investigation occurred after claimant's report of injury.  I further found defendants did not 
                                                 
1 Iowa Code section 10A.315(4) was previously codified as Iowa code section 86.13(4).  No substantive 
changes were made to the statute when transferred from section 86.13 to section 10A.315.  References 
to the current location of this statute are substituted to avoid confusion. 

PEREZ V. HERCULES TOPCO, LLC d/b/a QSI SANITATION 
Page 17 
 
have any medical causation opinion or basis for that denial between the date of injury 
and March 6, 2023. 
The Iowa Supreme Court has held that an employer has a reasonable amount of 
time to investigate a claim before a delay or denial is considered to be unreasonable. 
Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 (Iowa 1996).  However, having 
found that a 13-month delay is not reasonable under the circumstances of this case, I 
conclude defendants’ denial was not reasonable between December 2021 and March 
2023.  Therefore, I conclude that claimant has established entitlement to penalty 
benefits in some amount for the period of December 2021, through March 6, 2023. 
The undersigned determines that for the period from February 4, 2022, through 
March 1, 2023, benefits were delayed, and defendants failed to carry their burden of 
proving a reasonable basis for the delay. This is a period of fifty-five weeks and six 
days.  Fifty-five point eighty-six (55.86) weeks multiplied by the rate of $580.41, 
produces a total of $32,421.70. 
The purpose of Iowa Code section 86.13 [10A.315]  is both punishment for 
unreasonable conduct but also deterrence for future cases. Robbennolt v. Snap-On 
Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229, 236-37 (Iowa 1996). In this regard, the Commission is 
given discretion to determine the amount of the penalty imposed with a maximum 
penalty of 50 percent of the amount of the delayed, or denied, benefits. Christensen v. 
Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 261 (Iowa 1996). 
Based upon the factors identified in Robbennolt for determining the amount of 
penalty the undersigned concludes that a penalty of ten thousand and 00/100 dollars 
($10,000.00) is appropriate. This takes into consideration the significant length of the 
delay and defendants’ failure to convey the reason for the delay or denial to claimant.   
The last issue to be addressed is costs.  Claimant seeks an assessment of the 
costs for her filing fee and Dr. Kuhnlein’s report.  Assessment of costs is a discretionary 
function of the agency.  Iowa Code § 86.40 [10A.328].  Because claimant was 
successful in her claim, I conclude it is appropriate to assess claimant’s costs in some 
amount. 
Claimant’s filing fee of $103.00 shall be assessed pursuant to rule 876 IAC 
4.33(7). 
In this case, Dr. Kuhnlein has provided a breakdown of his expenses related to 
his IME.  Dr. Kuhnlein’s report breaks his charges into two categories, “IME Evaluation” 
and “IME Exam.”  There is not a category for the IME report.  As such, I cannot award 
costs for obtaining a medical report in lieu of testimony.  I decline to assess any portion 
of the costs associated with Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME against the defendants. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 

PEREZ V. HERCULES TOPCO, LLC d/b/a QSI SANITATION 
Page 18 
 
Defendants shall pay temporary partial disability benefits based on a weekly 
benefit rate of five hundred eighty-one and 41/100 dollars ($580.41) commencing 
February 4, 2022, and continuing until such time as Iowa Code section 85.33 is met.   
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. 
Defendants shall pay directly to the medical provider, reimburse claimant for any 
out-of-pocket expenses, and hold claimant harmless for all medical expenses contained 
in Claimant’s Exhibit 5. 
Defendants shall provide claimant ongoing medical care of her right shoulder and 
low back conditions. 
Defendants shall authorize Dr. Switzer as claimant’s authorized treating 
physician. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of one hundred three 
and 00/100 dollars ($103.00). 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this __16th __ day of February, 2024. 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Nick Platt (via WCES) 
Stephanie Techau (via WCES) 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision .  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday.  
