Case Number: 5049542
Case Title:  PRESSON, MARK V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE & TO
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Presson Mark-5049542D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MARK PRESSON, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                      File No. 5049542 
FREIBURGER CONCRETE & TOPSOIL, : 
INC.,  
  : 
 
 
  :                        ARBITRATION  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           DECISION 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
IOWA MUTUAL INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :          Head Note Nos.:  1108, 1402.40, 1801 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Mark Presson, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Freiburger Concrete & Topsoil, Inc., employer, and Iowa 
Mutual Insurance Company, insurance carrier, both as defendants, as a result of a 
stipulated injury sustained on May 19, 2014.  This matter came on for hearing before 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner Erica J. Fitch.  The record in this case 
consists of: joint exhibits 1 through 111, 13 through 272, and 31 through 43; claimant’s 
exhibits 1 and 3 through 123; defendants’ exhibits A through E; and the testimony of the 
claimant, Mary Presson, and Sylvia Reyes.  The parties submitted post-hearing briefs. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary disability benefits from April 23, 
2015, through August 24, 2015;   
                                                                 
1 Joint exhibit 12 is marked as withdrawn in the supplied joint exhibits table of contents and was 
not filed. 
2 Joint exhibits 28 through 30 were marked as withdrawn in the supplied joint exhibits table of 
contents and were not filed. 
3 Although noted in claimant’s hearing exhibit table of contents, no claimant’s exhibit 3 was 
offered into evidence.  Claimant’s exhibits as offered at hearing and filed via WCES skip from claimant’s 
exhibit 2, page 24 to claimant’s exhibit 4, page 26. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Mar-17  15:33:20     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 2 
 
2. Whether the injury is a cause of permanent disability;  
3. The extent of permanent disability, including whether claimant is permanently 
and totally disabled under an industrial disability analysis or the odd-lot 
doctrine;  
4. The commencement date for permanent disability benefits, if awarded;  
5. Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits under Iowa Code section 
86.13 and, if so, how much; and 
6. Specific taxation of costs. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant was 41 years of age at the time of hearing.  He attended high school 
until age 15, when he was expelled sophomore year for assault.  That same year, 
claimant made a Drano bomb and placed it on a doorstep; he was charged with 
terrorism.  After his expulsion from high school, claimant was sent to Eldora State 
Training School (Eldora).  He remained in Eldora for 6 to 9 months, during which time 
he obtained his GED and participated in auto body coursework.  (Claimant's testimony; 
JE10, p. 199)  Claimant estimated he earned his GED in approximately 1993 or 1994.  
(CE1, p. 2; DEB, p. 3)  Claimant married in 2006.  The former spouses separated and 
began living apart in fall 2013; the two divorced effective December 31, 2014.  
(Claimant's testimony; Ms. Presson’s testimony; CE1, p. 2; DEB, p. 3)  The former 
spouses share two minor children.  (Claimant's testimony) 
Claimant has been convicted or pleaded guilty to charges involving alcohol, drug 
possession, and physical altercations, including domestic assault, aggravated battery, 
assault resulting in injury, sexual abuse, and disorderly conduct.  (DEA, p. 2)  In 2014, 
claimant lost his driver’s license due to multiple operating while intoxicated charges.  As 
of the date of hearing, his license was no longer suspended.  Although he went to the 
Department of Motor Vehicles shortly prior to hearing, he became upset when he was 
advised he did not have the correct information and was forced to leave.  (Claimant's 
testimony)   
Claimant’s work history consists of fast food and similar miscellaneous jobs prior 
to beginning concrete work in 1997.  From 1997 to 2007, claimant worked at Diercks 
Ltd.  At Diercks Ltd, claimant typically worked year-round.  In 2007, claimant began 
work at defendant-employer.  He performed concrete finishing work and became a 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 3 
 
working foreman within one year of his hire.  Defendant-employer performed concrete 
work seasonally, typically from March through November.  During winter months, 
defendant-employer provided claimant with snow removal work.  As of the date of his 
stipulated work injury, claimant earned $18.50 per hour.  (Claimant's testimony; JE31, p. 
437; CE1, p. 2; DEB, p. 3) 
Claimant’s medical history is positive for relevant headaches, substance abuse, 
and mental health symptoms.   
In June 1998, claimant presented to his primary care physician, Michael Gimbel, 
M.D., with complaints of daily right-sided headaches.  A brain CT yielded normal results.  
Dr. Gimbel instituted a medication regimen.  (JE39, pp. 525, 527)  Dr. Gimbel also 
recommended neurological evaluation.  In July 1998, claimant returned to Dr. Gimbel in 
follow up.  Dr. Gimbel noted claimant did not follow through with the recommended 
neurological evaluation and used Relafen on an as needed basis instead of daily, as 
recommended.  Claimant reported some improvement in headaches, which were 
located primarily in the right-sided occipital and neck regions, with occasional radiation 
to the right shoulder and upper extremity.  The headaches occurred once or twice daily, 
lasting 20 to 30 minutes.  Dr. Gimbel assessed: headache of questionable etiology, with 
previous normal brain CT; and right posterolateral neck pain with episodic radiculopathy 
and paresthesias to the right upper extremity.   Dr. Gimbel ordered a cervical MRI to 
rule out disc injury and herniation, prescribed daily Relafen, and directed claimant to 
follow through with the neurological evaluation.  (JE1, p. 1)  Claimant returned to Dr. 
Gimbel in August 1998 and reported significant improvement with only a few minor 
headaches.  Dr. Gimbel opined claimant’s MRI and brain CT were normal.  He 
assessed headaches of a suspected musculoskeletal tension variety and situational 
anxiety; he again recommended neurological evaluation.  (JE1, p. 2)   
In May 2000, claimant was evaluated with a head CT following an assault.  The 
results were negative.  (JE39, p. 529) 
At the referral of Dr. Gimbel, on September 15, 2002, claimant presented to 
board certified neurologist, Rodney Short, M.D., for evaluation of headaches.  Claimant 
reported his headaches began in 1997, but were intermittent in nature, sometimes 
removed by a period of months.  However, headaches had worsened over recent 
months, occurring daily or at least 2 to 3 times weekly.  Claimant described the 
headaches as commencing about the right shoulder muscle, radiating up the neck and 
into the entire right side of the head.  Accompanying symptoms could include swollen 
and burning sensations of the eye, watering of the eye, drooping of the eyelid, nasal 
discharge, and nausea.  Claimant reported the pain as the worst he had ever 
experienced, lasting as long as 1 hour and 45 minutes.  Following the headache, he 
experienced tightness of the neck and shoulder, as well as tingling of the right upper 
extremity.  Following history and examination, Dr. Gimbel assessed mixed 
migraine/cluster headaches.  He issued prescriptions for propranolol and Midrin.  (JE3, 
pp. 44-45) 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 4 
 
At the referral of his substance abuse counselor, on February 2, 2006, claimant 
presented to Ronee Aaron, D.O., for psychiatric evaluation to consider possible medical 
management for depression symptoms.  Dr. Aaron assessed: depressive disorder, not 
otherwise specified, major depressive disorder versus dysthymia versus adjustment 
disorder, with depressed and anxious mood; antisocial personality disorder; and 
migraines versus cluster headaches.  Dr. Aaron began a course of Lexapro.  (JE4, pp. 
81-82) 
On July 21, 2007, claimant presented to the emergency room for a cluster 
headache and received a morphine injection.  (JE2, pp. 3-4) 
On August 8, 2007, claimant returned to Dr. Short for evaluation of cluster 
headaches.  Dr. Short noted a history of right-sided headaches dating to 1997.  
Headaches were described as starting about the neck and radiating forward into the 
head, and lasting almost exactly two hours.  Headaches occasionally were 
accompanied by nausea and vomiting.  Symptoms also included some slight 
photophobia and phonophobia, as well as redness, drooping, and tearing of the right 
eye.  Such headaches had occurred on a near-daily basis for the preceding two months 
and the headache sensation was described as feeling “as if a hammer is hitting his 
head.”  (JE3, p. 46)  Following examination, Dr. Short assessed cluster headaches and 
began a course of medications to address preventative and symptomatic concerns.  
(JE3, p. 47)  On September 10, 2007, claimant returned to Dr. Short in follow up of 
cluster headaches and reported some improvement.  Dr. Short adjusted claimant’s 
medication regimen.  (JE3, p. 49)  
On December 16, 2007, claimant presented to the emergency room for 
headache complaints.  The provider noted a history of cluster headaches and 
complaints of right facial headache.  Claimant received morphine and Vistaril injections.  
(JE2, pp. 5-6) 
On October 23, 2008, claimant returned to Dr. Short.  Dr. Short noted he had not 
examined claimant in nearly one year; claimant had lost health insurance and was 
unable to attend appointments or obtain his medications.  Although claimant had seen 
improvement on his medication regimen, claimant reported headaches had returned 
and were occurring 2 to 4 times per week.  The headaches were right-sided in nature 
and lasted almost exactly 2 hours.  Following examination, Dr. Short assessed cluster 
headaches and reinstituted a treatment regimen.  (JE3, p. 50) 
On December 27, 2008, claimant presented to the emergency room with a 
cluster headache over the right eye.  He received morphine and Vistaril injections.  
(JE2, pp. 7-9) 
On January 14, 2009, claimant returned to Dr. Short and reported generally less 
intense cluster headaches.  Dr. Short adjusted claimant’s medication regimen.  (JE3, p. 
51) 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 5 
 
On September 20, 2012, claimant presented to the emergency room and was 
examined by Steven Gorsch, M.D.  Dr. Gorsch noted claimant began taking Percocet 
three years prior for cluster headaches.  When Percocet later failed to relieve pain, 
claimant began taking methadone and OxyContin he purchased on the street.  Claimant 
indicated he wanted treatment for addiction and to stop use of narcotics.  (JE2, p. 10)  
Claimant testified he underwent a treatment program.  (Claimant's testimony) 
On May 19, 2014, claimant was working for defendant-employer, tasked with 
finishing concrete at a baseball park.  During the course of his work, he was struck on 
the right side of the back of his head with a baseball.  Claimant did not lose 
consciousness or fall to the ground, but experienced pain and swelling at the impact 
site.  He became angry and his boss, Jay Freiburger, told him to go calm down.  
Claimant testified the crew left the jobsite shortly thereafter.  (Claimant's testimony) 
After dropping off coworkers, claimant went to pick up a pizza for his family.  At 
evidentiary hearing, claimant testified he ran into an acquaintance at the pizza 
restaurant.  He testified she was a nurse and told him to seek medical care.  Claimant 
said she later informed him that he was not making sense and was slurring his words.  
(Claimant's testimony)   
Following the injurious event, claimant continued to work for defendant-employer.  
Approximately one week later, claimant testified his symptoms worsened.  He described 
crying at work, inability to sleep or eat, headaches, and his wife informed him he was 
not making sense and slurring his words.  After what he described as a bad day at work, 
he chose to seek medical care.  (Claimant's testimony)   
At a deposition on August 18, 2016, claimant described immediate complaints of 
headache and swelling following the incident.  (JE22, Depo. Tr. pp. 74-75)  He testified 
the following week, his condition was “out of control,” with stuttering, yelling, and 
nonsensical speech.  (JE22, Depo. Tr. p. 76) 
At a deposition on February 10, 2017, claimant testified on the day of the 
accident, he suffered from a headache.  Claimant did not report immediate complaints 
of slurred speech.  (JE24, Depo. Tr. pp. 68-69)  Rather, claimant testified the stuttering 
and slurring began approximately one week later, around the time he chose to seek 
medical attention.  (JE24, Depo. Tr. pp. 16-17) 
On May 28, 2014, claimant presented to the emergency room and was examined 
by Rick Garrels, M.D.  Claimant reported being struck in the head by a thrown baseball 
one week prior and described symptoms of head pain and swelling, as well as vomiting.  
No loss of consciousness was reported.  A head CT was undergone, yielding normal 
results.  Dr. Garrels assessed concussion with no loss of consciousness and a scalp 
contusion.  Medications were prescribed and claimant was advised to follow up with 
Michael Gimbel III, M.D.  (JE2, pp. 13-15; JE5, p. 84) 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 6 
 
Defendant-insurance carrier referred claimant to CorVel for medical case 
management services.  Bridget McBride, RN, was assigned to provide these services, 
beginning June 6, 2014.  (JE13, p. 224)   
On June 10, 2014, claimant presented to Dr. Garrels at Genesis Occupational 
Health.  Claimant indicated that during the first week after the incident, he had multiple 
daily episodes of severe headaches and vomiting.  Since that time, claimant reported 
daily headaches, with accompanying vomiting upon exacerbation of bending over.  
Claimant also reported poor recollection of the events in the week following the incident, 
as well as personality changes such as angry outbursts and crying.  Following 
examination, Dr. Garrels assessed post-concussive syndrome; headache; and 
depression.  He performed a Toradol injection, ordered a brain MRI, referred to Dr. Kent 
for psychological evaluation, recommended attendance at a neurological evaluation with 
Dr. Short, ordered commencement of the LIFT therapy program, and issued 
prescriptions for Imitrex, Xanax, and sertraline.  Claimant was removed from work 
pending further evaluation.  (JE8, pp. 155-157)  
On June 11, 2014, claimant underwent a brain MRI.  Joseph Phelan, M.D. read 
the results as revealing minimal small white matter foci appearing punctate bilaterally 
with an otherwise normal exam.  (JE5, p. 85) 
On June 18, 2014, claimant commenced the LIFT therapy program, focusing on 
group occupational and speech therapy.  (JE9, pp. 166-167) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Garrels on June 19, 2014.  Claimant reported continued 
emotional issues, including notable crying throughout the day.  Dr. Garrels referred 
claimant to Gonchigari Narayana, M.D. for psychiatric complaints.  He noted claimant 
had appointments scheduled with neurologist, Dr. Short, on July 3, 2014, and 
psychologist, Dr. Kent, on July 15, 2014.  Dr. Garrels added topiramate to claimant’s 
medication regimen and increased the sertraline dosage.  Dr. Garrels also ordered 
continued participation in the LIFT program.  (JE8, p. 159) 
Ms. McBride issued her first case management report on June 25, 2014.  
Claimant’s subjective medical status included: daily migraine pain lasting approximately 
45 minutes to 2 hours; nausea and a feeling of “fluid” in the front of his head when 
bending forward; and an inability to control outbursts of anger.  In terms of treatment, 
Ms. McBride encouraged claimant to: visit the emergency room for urgent care; attend 
the LIFT program for evaluation and treatment of post-concussive syndrome; continue 
medications per Dr. Garrels; and follow up with Dr. Narayana for medication 
management, Dr. Short for neurological care, and Dr. Kent for talk therapy.  (JE13, p. 
225) 
On June 25, 2014, claimant returned to the emergency room and was evaluated 
by Jennifer Wilson, PA-C.  Claimant reported a history of head injury, with intermittent 
severe right-sided headaches that could be accompanied by vomiting.  Claimant 
reported personality changes, anger issues, and notable crying.  (JE2, p. 16)  Ms. 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 7 
 
Wilson informed claimant he was experiencing post-concussive symptoms and the 
personality changes may continue for some time.  She prescribed a Medrol Dosepak 
and Flexeril for the headache, and noted claimant was scheduled for neurological 
evaluation as well as physical therapy and the LIFT program, designed to treat post 
brain injury.  (JE2, pp. 18-19) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Short on July 3, 2014, at the referral of Dr. Garrels.  Dr. 
Short noted claimant was struck in the head with a baseball on May 19, 2014, at which 
time he felt some mild pain and was angry.  There was no loss of consciousness or 
obvious deficits noted.  Within a few days, severe right-sided headaches began, with a 
constant dull ache over the right side of the head and occasional right-sided tingling, as 
well as a daily excruciating headache lasting approximately 45 minutes.  Additional 
symptoms included significant mood issues, difficulty sleeping, and stuttering.  Dr. Short 
noted he last saw claimant in 2009 for cluster headaches; claimant reported being 
headache-free since that time.  (JE3, p. 52)  Following examination, Dr. Short assessed 
posttraumatic cluster headaches with a component of occipital neuralgia.  Dr. Short 
performed an occipital nerve block and prescribed verapamil, amitriptyline, and 
sumatriptan nasal spray.  He also ordered a course of speech therapy for speech 
disturbance and removed claimant from work pending follow up.  (JE3, pp. 53-54) 
On July 21, 2014, claimant presented to the emergency room with complaints of 
bilateral wrist and knee pain, onset two days prior, as well as post-concussive 
symptoms.  At the time of evaluation, claimant was under arrest and accompanied by 
police, who transported claimant for evaluation due to his complaints.  X-rays of the 
wrists were negative.  Following x-rays and physical examination, claimant was 
discharged with the police.  (JE2, pp. 20-23) 
That same date, July 21, 2014, claimant’s mother, Mary Presson, completed an 
application for order of involuntary hospitalization alleging claimant suffered from 
serious mental impairment.  Ms. Presson indicated claimant was suicidal, angry, 
nervous, slurring words, and stuttering.  She further indicated claimant would disappear 
for periods of time and had a history of drug use.  (JE32, pp. 440-441)  Maribeth Chase 
completed an affidavit in support of Ms. Presson’s application.  She described claimant 
as depressed and angry.  Ms. Chase also noted claimant threatened suicide, would 
disappear for periods of time, and had a history of drug use.  (JE32, p. 442)  Ms. 
Presson also filed an accompanying application alleging a substance-related disorder; 
her application was again supported by an affidavit of Ms. Chase.  (JE32, pp. 443-444)  
Later that same date, July 21, 2014, claimant was brought to the emergency 
room due to applications for commitment for mental illness and substance abuse.  
(JE38, p. 519)  Rickey Wilson, M.D. admitted claimant to the hospital with diagnoses of 
anxiety disorder, depression, suicidal risk, and substance abuse.  (JE38, p. 521)  On 
July 22, 2014, Dr. Wilson noted impressions including: depressive disorder not 
otherwise specified, cocaine abuse and alcohol abuse by history; recent head injury, 
possible post-concussion syndrome; and cluster headaches.  (JE38, p. 523)  On July 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 8 
 
24, 2014, Dr. Wilson completed a physician’s report regarding the commitment 
applications.  Thereby, he opined claimant was mentally ill, with diagnoses of 
depression and post-concussive syndrome.  He opined claimant was not capable of 
making responsible decisions and his insight was somewhat impaired.  (JE32, p. 445)  
Dr. Wilson also opined claimant had a substance-related disorder, noting claimant’s 
history of opiate abuse and recent cocaine use.  (JE32, p. 447)  Claimant was 
discharged from the hospital on July 26, 2014.  Ghada Hamdan-Allen, M.D. noted chief 
complaints of depression, agitation, and substance use.  (JE2, p. 27; JE38, p. 517)  
Claimant was discharged to follow up voluntarily on an outpatient basis.  (JE38, p. 518)  
On agreement of the parties involved, the magistrate in the commitment 
proceedings entered an order continuing hearing, as claimant voluntarily agreed to 
follow Dr. Wilson’s treatment recommendations.  The magistrate indicated the case 
would be dismissed on September 24, 2014, unless one of the parties made a request 
for hearing due to claimant’s noncompliance.  (JE32, p. 449)  No hearing request was 
made, and the applications were dismissed as scheduled.  (JE32, p. 456) 
 
At the referral of Dr. Garrels, claimant underwent psychological evaluation with 
Phillip Kent, Psy.D.  Dr. Kent interviewed and tested claimant on July 15, July 18, and 
July 28, 2014.  He authored his evaluation report on July 28, 2014.  (JE10, p. 198)  Dr. 
Kent opined claimant did not present with symptoms of post-concussion syndrome, 
beyond headaches.  He found claimant’s memory intact, no signs of psychosis, and no 
complaints of neuropsychological problems aside from a short attention span.  Dr. Kent 
opined claimant’s attention difficulties were probably related to headaches; in light of 
claimant’s history, he opined the attention problems did not appear new.  (JE10, p. 200) 
 
Dr. Kent described the findings of claimant’s psychological testing.  In review of 
claimant’s Million Clinical Multiaxial Inventory-III (MCMI-III), Dr. Kent opined claimant 
displayed a tendency to respond in a manner likely to somewhat exaggerate his 
problems.  He opined claimant’s profile was suggestive of a person with an underlying 
mood disorder.  He also opined claimant was experiencing high levels of anxiety, some 
depression, and likely some manic symptoms.  Dr. Kent noted prominent dependent 
and antisocial traits.  He opined claimant’s interpersonal relationships were likely 
intense and chaotic, with claimant undoubtedly seen by others as somewhat negativistic 
and manipulative.  In review of claimant’s MMPI-2 testing, Dr. Kent opined claimant’s 
responses suggested chronic problems with depression and alienation, as well as 
unusual thought patterns and a likely affective disorder.  Results also indicated strong 
addictive tendencies in claimant.  (JE10, p. 201)    
 
Following multiple interviews and psychological testing, Dr. Kent noted the 
following suggested diagnoses: mood disorder, not otherwise specified; attention 
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, by history; alcohol abuse, by history; opiate abuse, by 
history; personality disorder, not otherwise specified, with prominent antisocial, 
dependent, and borderline traits; and history of concussion and headaches.  (JE10, p. 
201)  Treatment recommendations included: continued participation in the LIFT 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 9 
 
program; outpatient chemical dependency treatment; Alcoholics Anonymous; and care 
with psychiatrist, Dr. Narayana.  (JE10, p. 200-201)  Dr. Kent opined claimant did not 
appear to be a candidate for psychotherapy and did not recommend neuropsychological 
evaluation.  (JE10, p. 201-202)  Dr. Kent opined claimant’s concussion symptoms would 
likely remit within the next 2 to 4 months.  (JE10, p. 201)   
On August 1, 2014, claimant returned to Dr. Short for evaluation.  Dr. Short noted 
clear improvement in claimant’s cluster headaches, down to approximately two 
headaches per week.  Headaches were noted to respond well to sumatriptan nasal 
spray, with complete relief within 15 minutes.  Claimant identified possible triggers of 
heat and/or sunlight.  Dr. Short noted claimant’s recent psychiatric hospitalization 
“because of apparent anger management issues.”  Following examination, Dr. Short 
assessed posttraumatic cluster headaches and left claimant’s medication regimen 
intact.  He released claimant to return to work part-time, 4 hours per day.  (JE3, p. 55) 
On August 12, 2014, LIFT program personnel recommended discharge from the 
program, but continued individual speech therapy.  Claimant informed his case manager 
he desired to discontinue the LIFT program as it made him anxious.  LIFT program staff 
noted poor attendance and commented claimant could have made increased progress 
with more frequent attendance and increased effort.  (JE9, pp. 189-190)   
At evidentiary hearing, claimant testified the LIFT program “scared” him, as the 
group included patients who were crying and could barely function.  (Claimant's 
testimony) 
On August 20, 2014, claimant presented to psychiatrist, Dr. Narayana.  Following 
interview, Dr. Narayana diagnosed a mood disorder and traumatic brain injury and 
instituted a medication regimen.  (JE11, p. 204) 
On August 21, 2014, Ms. Presson again filed commitment applications alleging 
serious mental impairment and substance-related disorders.  Ms. Presson represented 
claimant was unstable, incoherent, and paranoid.  She noted claimant’s history of drug 
use and indicated claimant had worsened to a degree he was out of control.  (JE32, pp. 
450-451, 453)  Jen Wouters filed affidavits in support of Ms. Presson’s applications.  
(JE32, pp. 452, 454) 
That same date, August 21, 2014, claimant was transported to the hospital and 
examined by Christopher Posey, D.O.  A history reveals claimant was brought in by 
EMS and police as a court committal after being found running down the street with a 
bat, claiming he found his wife having an affair and was fearful he would be attacked.  
Police described claimant as agitated and claimant was handcuffed.  (JE2, p. 26)  
Following evaluation and lab studies, as well as receipt of court committal papers, 
claimant was admitted to the behavioral health department.  (JE2, p. 28) 
On August 22, 2014, claimant was discharged from Genesis Medical Center by 
Jeffrey Weyeneth, M.D.  Dr. Weyeneth authored a physician’s report opining claimant 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 10 
 
did not meet the criteria for involuntary inpatient treatment and requested both 
applications be dropped.  (JE32, p. 455)  In his discharge records, Dr. Weyeneth noted 
claimant had been referred the day prior by the emergency department on mental 
health and substance abuse petitions filed by claimant’s mother and friend.  He noted 
claimant had previously been admitted for 5 days and discharged 3 weeks prior, 
following petitions.  Following that admission, claimant had been advised to begin 
outpatient mental health and substance abuse treatment.  While he had begun mental 
health treatment, he had yet to begin substance abuse treatment.  (JE2, p. 24) 
Dr. Weyeneth indicated it was unclear why the family refiled the petitions, as the 
petitions described a number of events that occurred prior to the first admission and his 
current drug screen was negative.  Claimant’s alcohol level was zero.  Dr. Weyeneth 
described claimant as calm, pleasant, cooperative, and appropriate during his current 
admission, without evidence of acute mania or psychosis.  He noted claimant had a 
history of head injury and tended to be irritable at times, but this condition was chronic 
in nature.  Dr. Weyeneth noted diagnoses of: major depressive disorder, recurrent; 
history of cocaine abuse; history of alcohol abuse; and history of closed-head 
injury/traumatic brain injury.  Dr. Weyeneth opined claimant did not meet the criteria for 
admission and discharged claimant to home under the previous treatment regimen of 
medications and outpatient treatment.  He authored a letter to the court resulting in both 
petitions being dropped.  (JE2, pp. 24-25)  
On August 27, 2014, claimant presented to the emergency department for mental 
health evaluation.  Celeste Nelson, ARNP, noted primary symptoms of dysphoric mood, 
hallucinations, and bizarre behavior.  She noted claimant recently violated a protective 
order from his wife.  Her history notes claimant was hit in the head by a “bat” in a May 
work injury.  Claimant reported his behavior changed after the event and he cannot 
always remember what he has done.  Claimant indicated when his stress level rose, he 
“hears voices and sees things.”  She noted claimant had been jailed several times since 
the head injury, including for violation of the protection order, but no incarcerations prior 
to the head injury.  She noted claimant’s wife had filed for divorce the prior week.  Ms. 
Nelson indicated claimant recently began a course of care and medication with Dr. 
Narayana.  (JE7, p. 90)  Ms. Nelson assessed depression, stress, anxiety, and 
behavioral disturbance.  She medically cleared claimant for further psychiatric 
evaluation.  (JE7, p. 93)  Claimant was admitted for psychiatric care.  (JE7, pp. 94-95) 
On September 1, 2014, Dr. Narayana discharged claimant from the psychiatric 
hospitalization under diagnoses including: bipolar disorder, not otherwise specified; 
history of traumatic event, brain injury; and moderate psychosocial stressors: divorce, 
recent trauma, and marital distress.  (JE7, pp. 94-95)  By history, Dr. Narayana noted 
this as claimant’s first psychiatric hospitalization at Trinity Medical Center.  Dr. 
Narayana noted claimant had been under his care since August 20, 2014, pursuant to a 
workers’ compensation referral following being struck by a baseball, with negative 
neurological workup.  Nevertheless, claimant had experienced anger, rage, distress,  

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 11 
 
inappropriate behavior toward family, and property damage.  Claimant obtained 
significant relief with use of Tegretol.  His wife recently requested a divorce and 
obtained a restraining order.  According to his mother, claimant was found very 
disorganized and delusionally preoccupied, complaining about 30 people following him.  
Police took claimant into custody and after a brief period in jail, claimant had been 
brought in for psychiatric evaluation and treatment.  (JE7, pp. 95, 97-98) 
While admitted, claimant did not experience any delusions or hallucinations.  Dr. 
Narayana noted that despite claimant’s explanations, it was possible he suffered some 
psychotic episodes.  During the course of his hospitalization, claimant’s medication 
regimen was adjusted.  (JE7, p. 95)  Claimant continued to demonstrate some intensity 
of emotion, volatile anger, irritability, lack of insight, and questionable judgment.  
Claimant’s mother informed Dr. Narayana that during the event preceding his 
hospitalization, claimant became preoccupied with the idea that “30 little people [were] 
chasing him around the town” and he had accumulated a number of knives and even 
sought police assistance.  While the events were “real” to claimant, his mother believed 
the events were delusions.  (JE7, p. 96)  On September 1, 2014, claimant was 
discharged from the hospital under a medication regimen and advised to follow up with 
Dr. Narayana.  (JE7, pp. 95, 102) 
Claimant presented to Dr. Narayana in follow up on September 18, 2014.  Dr. 
Narayana adjusted claimant’s medication regimen.  (JE11, 206) 
On September 25, 2014, Ms. Presson again filed an application for order of 
involuntary hospitalization alleging serious mental impairment.  On this occasion, she 
did not file an accompanying application alleging substance-related disorder.  Ms. 
Presson represented claimant was suicidal, depressed, and potentially using drugs.  
(JE32, pp. 457-458)  Ms. Presson described claimant as “totally messed up” and in 
need of long-term care, not simply care for a few hours or days.  (JE32, p. 458)  The 
application was supported by affidavit of Jen Wouters.  (JE32, p. 459) 
On September 25, 2014, claimant was again transported to the emergency room 
under court committal.  He was admitted to the behavioral health unit.  (JE2, pp. 35-37)  
Dr. Weyeneth took a history, noting this as claimant’s third commitment in 2 months.  
He noted claimant was only present on a mental health petition on this occasion, as 
opposed to an additional substance abuse petition.  Dr. Weyeneth noted claimant 
posted suicidal thoughts online and continued to use alcohol and drugs.  However, he 
found claimant lacked suicidal intention and rather, acted impulsively when upset.  
Claimant was admitted under diagnoses of: major depressive disorder, recurrent; 
alcohol dependence; and cocaine abuse.  (JE2, pp. 37-38; JE6, pp. 86-88)  
On September 30, 2014, Dr. Weyeneth completed a physician’s report in the 
committal action.  Thereby, he opined claimant was mentally ill, with a diagnosis of 
major depressive disorder.  (JE32, p. 460)  Dr. Weyeneth also opined claimant was 
stable and capable of continuing with outpatient treatment.  (JE32, p. 461)  The 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 12 
 
commitment action was dismissed shortly thereafter on agreement of the parties, as 
claimant agreed to voluntarily participate in treatment.  (JE32, p. 462) 
On November 4, 2014, police transported claimant to the emergency department 
for mental health evaluation.  That evening, claimant was at his mother’s home when he 
claimed friends of his ex-wife were in the woods harassing him.  Claimant filled glass 
bottles with gasoline, homemade Molotov cocktails, to throw at these individuals.  
Claimant’s mother called the police.  The officer-completed petition noted no individuals 
were present in the area.  (JE7, pp. 120-121, 130)  Emergency room providers 
assessed acute psychosis and methamphetamine use.  (JE7, p. 125) 
Claimant was admitted for psychiatric hospitalization and remained hospitalized 
until discharged on November 10, 2014.  Dr. Narayana noted discharge diagnoses 
including: bipolar disorder, manic with psychotic features; polysubstance abuse, positive 
for methamphetamine; antisocial personality traits; and status post head injury and 
chronic headaches.  Dr. Narayana described the pre-hospitalization event as claimant 
responding to active hallucination and expressing hostile remarks.  He noted claimant 
was also recently released from jail and had been using amphetamines and cocaine.  
Claimant, however, denied drug use despite laboratory results.  (JE7, pp. 130, 132)  Dr. 
Narayana noted claimant’s history of “minor” head injury at work, with no neurological 
sequelae and negative neurological workup.  (JE7, p. 130)   
During claimant’s hospitalization, a counselor met with claimant’s mother and 
aunt prior to a family session.  The two expressed great concern regarding claimant’s 
paranoia and unpredictable, dangerous behavior.  They described incidents of claimant 
holding down his wife while stabbing the floor with a knife, as well as his insistence that 
he video recorded his wife’s infidelity despite no such recording existing.  Claimant’s 
mother noted she had been informed that claimant had been using the drugs “shrimp 
and ice.”  During the family session, Dr. Narayana informed claimant and his family 
members that he was experiencing paranoia and delusions as a combined result of use 
of illegal drugs and severe bipolar disorder.  Claimant was noted as making delusional 
statements during the session and he became angry when his mother attempted to 
identify his delusions.  (JE7, p. 136)  
Dr. Narayana also indicated claimant had a long-standing, life-long history of 
unaddressed mood disorder.  (JE7, pp. 130, 132).  He described claimant as “in denial” 
regarding this underlying mood disorder.  (JE7, p. 131)  Dr. Narayana described 
claimant as having been “cycling up and down” with the “consistent… mood problem of 
bipolar disorder.”  (JE7, p. 132)  He noted claimant’s risky behavior of drug abuse often 
led to inappropriate behavior, delusional thoughts, and active hallucinations.  Dr. 
Narayana noted claimant had “dropped off” of treatment with Dr. Narayana and was 
noncompliant with medication, despite prior improvement.  At the time of admission, 
claimant was agitated and insistent “nothing [was] wrong.”  After a course of treatment 
and medication, claimant was discharged under the continued care of Dr. Narayana.  
(JE7, p. 131)   

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 13 
 
Claimant’s estranged wife obtained a no-contact order against claimant.  
Claimant admitted to violating the order on two or three occasions.  He admitted to 
being arrested and jailed for 21 days after he approached her with money for school 
lunches.  In November 2014, claimant was jailed for 90 days after going to her 
residence; he does not recall this event.  The former couple’s divorce was finalized in 
December 2014.  Claimant was released from jail in February 2015, at which time he 
moved in with his mother at her residence in Carbon Cliff, Illinois.  (Claimant's 
testimony) 
On March 9, 2015, claimant returned to Dr. Short.  Claimant reported he 
continued to experience cluster headaches 2 to 3 times per week, which were disabling, 
but relieved within 45 minutes with use of sumatriptan nasal spray.  Dr. Short assessed 
episodic cluster headaches.  He prescribed verapamil for cluster headache prevention, 
amitriptyline for sleep, sumatriptan nasal spray as needed, and Midrin for milder 
headaches.  Dr. Short released claimant to work without restriction, with the noted 
exception that 2 to 3 days per week it would be expected that claimant may be unable 
to work for 45 minutes due to cluster headaches.  (JE3, pp. 57-59)   
Claimant returned to Dr. Narayana on March 25, 2015, who noted claimant had 
recently been released from jail after three months of incarceration.  Dr. Narayana noted 
claimant had a long history of bipolar disorder, history of head injury, and had indulged 
in illicit drugs.  He described claimant as volatile and lacking in insight/judgment, as 
claimant was prone to impulsive acting out.  Dr. Narayana also noted claimant denied 
the source of his problem was underlying bipolarity.  Claimant requested medication to 
aid his concentration, which Dr. Narayana denied and described as “obviously indirectly 
seeking amphetamines.”  Dr. Narayana prescribed a medication regimen.  (JE11, pp. 
207-208)    
Ms. McBride referred claimant to Daniel Tranel, PhD, of the University of Iowa 
Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC) for neuropsychological assessment.  Dr. Tranel noted he 
was asked to “help sort out the extent” to which claimant’s personality issues may be 
concussion-related as opposed to attributable to preexisting factors/traits, as well as 
whether claimant had achieved maximum medical improvement (MMI) relative to the 
May 19, 2014 work injury.  Dr. Tranel evaluated claimant on May 20, 2015 and issued 
his report on May 30, 2015.  (JE14, p. 251)  Dr. Tranel reviewed and summarized 
claimant’s treatment records.  (JE14, pp. 252-258)  Dr. Tranel interviewed claimant and 
his mother.   (JE14, pp. 258-261)   
Dr. Tranel administered a number of clinical assessments.  (JE14, pp. 261-262)  
In regard to symptom validity and effort, Dr. Tranel opined claimant’s response profiles 
on non-cognitive measures of symptom validity were borderline to grossly abnormal; he 
opined this indicated claimant’s self-reporting of symptoms could not be taken at face 
value.  (JE14, p. 262)  He found no overt signs of intentional reduction of effort, but 
noted the results may be a slight underestimate of claimant’s cognitive capacity, as 
psychological and behavioral factors appeared to negatively impact claimant’s effort.  

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 14 
 
(JE14, p. 263)  Claimant’s mother also completed a questionnaire describing her 
subjective views of claimant’s pre- and post-injury personality and behavioral 
functioning.  Dr. Tranel found her responses lacked validity “due to generalized 
minimization regarding premorbid functioning,” as she described claimant as average to 
superlative in all measures, and “gross exaggeration regarding current functioning,” as 
she rated nearly every measure at the worst level of functioning.  (JE14, p. 265) 
Dr. Tranel offered recommendations regarding claimant’s care and treatment.  
He opined claimant would benefit from substance abuse treatment and recommended a 
community support program such as Alcoholics Anonymous or Narcotics Anonymous.  
He described such substance abuse care as the first priority.  Thereafter, Dr. Tranel 
indicated claimant would likely benefit from treatment for sleep problems and a pain 
management program.  No further neuropsychological treatment was recommended.  
(JE14, p. 267) 
Dr. Tranel ultimately opined the neuropsychological evaluation indicated claimant 
possessed normal, intact cognitive functioning.  Intellectual abilities were generally 
found to be in the average to high average range.  All other cognitive abilities were 
intact, including learning, memory, attention, orientation, concentration, processing 
speed, speech, language, visuoperceptual and visuoconstructional abilities, executive 
functioning, and higher-order reasoning and problem solving.  Dr. Tranel opined these 
findings supported the conclusion, to a reasonable degree of neuropsychological 
certainty, that claimant did not present with any permanent brain dysfunction or 
permanent neurological injury as a result of the work injury.  He opined claimant 
suffered, at worst, an “uncomplicated concussion.”  (JE14, p. 266)  Dr. Tranel opined 
claimant’s behavioral and psychological adjustment issues appeared longstanding and 
were not attributable to the work injury. Dr. Tranel noted claimant’s longstanding 
problems with drug and alcohol abuse, 2006 diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder, 
and diagnoses of adjustment and depressive disorder.  (JE14, pp. 266-267)  Dr. Tranel 
continued:  
   The psychiatric difficulties he has experienced since the May 2014 
accident may be seen as an aggravation of preexisting conditions due to 
pain (headaches), although this is difficult to establish with a reasonable 
degree of certainty due to open questions about drug abuse and 
contributions from psychosocial stress.  In any event, any such 
aggravation would be seen as temporary.  In short, there is no basis to 
expect that [claimant] suffered any permanent injury in the May 2014 
accident. 
(JE14, p. 266) 
On May 21, 2015, claimant returned to Dr. Narayana.  Dr. Narayana described 
claimant as poorly compliant with his suggested medication regimen, as he had 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 15 
 
discontinued certain medication.  Dr. Narayana issued prescriptions for a recommended 
medication regimen to treat diagnosed mood disorder.  (JE11, pp. 209-210) 
On June 15, 2015, claimant returned to Dr. Short.  He reported continued 
intermittent headaches lasting up to one hour.  While headaches had been occurring 
about 2 to 3 days weekly, over the last 12 days the headaches occurred daily.  Dr. Short 
adjusted claimant’s medication regimen and performed a right occipital nerve block.  Dr. 
Short again released claimant to work without restriction, yet noted a caveat that 
headaches could prevent claimant from working for up to one hour daily.  (JE3, pp. 60-
62)  
Claimant returned to Dr. Short on August 24, 2015.  Dr. Short noted considerable 
improvement and decent control of headaches.  He noted claimant had utilized the 
sumatriptan nasal spray on 4 or 5 occasions for cluster headaches, but none in recent 
weeks.  He also noted claimant had used Midrin to treat mild headaches about once per 
week.  Dr. Short assessed episodic cluster headaches and placed claimant at MMI 
without work restrictions.  (JE3, pp. 63-64) 
On August 25, 2015, claimant presented to Dr. Narayana and described himself 
as “back to my normal self.”  Claimant reported continued cluster headaches.  Dr. 
Narayana provided claimant with information pertinent to a possible diagnosis of bipolar 
spectrum, which Dr. Narayana described as “prevalent all his life[,] more so with the 
family.”  (JE11, p. 211)  Dr. Narayana noted claimant had been poorly complaint with 
medications, but issued prescriptions for a medical regimen to treat mood disorders.  
(JE11, pp. 211-212) 
In 2016, claimant worked as a concrete finisher off and on for Christopher 
Reynolds, owner of CCS Construction.  Claimant testified his return to concrete work 
was not successful and he would experience headaches, dizziness, and vomiting.  
(Claimant's testimony) He earned $12.00 per hour.  (CE1, pp. 2, 19; DEB, p. 3)   
Christopher Reynolds, the owner of CCS Construction, testified claimant was 
never an employee of CCS Construction, but did perform work for Mr. Reynolds 
personally on a couple of occasions.  (JE42, Depo. Tr. p. 6)  He explained he would call 
claimant on an as-needed basis in 2016, in the event he needed assistance with 
concrete finishing.  Mr. Reynolds estimated claimant worked approximately one day per 
week, occurring on four occasions.  On those occasions, Mr. Reynolds paid claimant 
cash.  (JE42, Depo. Tr. pp. 7-8)  Mr. Reynolds testified claimant did not meet his 
expectations for a concrete finisher and he would walk away mid-job.  (JE42, Depo. Tr. 
pp. 13-14) 
On September 9, 2016, claimant returned to Dr. Short.  Claimant reported he 
resumed cement work 5 to 6 months prior and the associated bending over, heat, and 
physical tasks aggravated the right-sided headaches.  Tylenol and Midrin would dull the 
pain; sumatriptan provided full relief within 15 to 20 minutes, but claimant only received 
6 doses per month.  While he had not missed work as a result of the headaches, he 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 16 
 
only worked 15 to 20 hours per week and sometimes needed to take a break due to a 
headache.  Following examination, Dr. Short assessed intractable episodic cluster 
headaches and opined the cluster headaches were interfering with claimant’s ability to 
function.  He opined claimant had failed or did not respond adequately to certain 
medications and occipital nerve blocks in the past.  As a result, he prescribed atenolol 
and sumatriptan nasal spray.  (JE3, pp. 65-66) 
Dr. Short sat for deposition on September 19, 2016.  Dr. Short testified he began 
treating claimant in September 2002, at which time he diagnosed cluster headaches.  
He described cluster headaches as a type of headache syndrome, meaning there is no 
underlying structural brain abnormality causing the headache.  (JE23, Depo. Tr. pp. 6-7, 
29-30)  Dr. Short indicated cluster headaches are thought to be due to episodic 
overactivation of some of the pain fibers coming out of the base of the brain, with the 
cause of activation varying between individuals.  (JE23, Depo. Tr. p. 30)   
Dr. Short testified that on July 3, 2014, shortly after the work injury, he had 
diagnosed posttraumatic cluster headaches with a component of occipital neuralgia.  
(JE23, Depo. Tr. p. 10)  Dr. Short placed claimant at MMI, without restrictions, on 
August 24, 2015.  (JE23, Depo. Tr. p. 18)  At that time, Dr. Short testified that claimant 
appeared to have returned to baseline for his cluster headache syndrome.  (JE23, 
Depo. Tr. p. 29)  However, claimant returned for evaluation on September 9, 2016.  At 
that time, Dr. Short diagnosed episodic cluster headaches, intractable.  Dr. Short 
testified the change in claimant’s condition was likely attributable to his return to work.  
At deposition, Dr. Short opined claimant’s condition was likely permanent in nature and 
likely to interfere with claimant’s function to some extent.  (JE23, Depo. Tr. pp. 21, 29)  
Dr. Short testified he believed claimant’s work injury aggravated his preexisting 
condition.  (JE23, Depo. Tr. pp. 25-26)  In response to inquiry requesting explanation as 
to how an impact could trigger an aggravation of cluster headaches on one side of a 
patient’s head, Dr. Short replied he lacked a “good explanation.”  He clarified that 
posttraumatic headaches occur fairly regularly, but experts lack a good understanding 
of the exact pathophysiological mechanism for the occurrence.  (JE23, Depo. Tr. p. 27) 
For four days in November 2016, claimant worked as a concrete finisher for Dave 
Chenworth, earning $14.00 per hour.  (CE1, pp. 19-20)   
On December 6, 2016, claimant returned to Dr. Garrels for follow up and 
impairment rating.  Claimant reported continued intermittent, unpredictable headaches.  
Claimant reported he also became irritable and obsessive.  Following examination, Dr. 
Garrels assessed: chronic cluster headache, not intractable; polysubstance abuse; 
major depressive disorder; and unspecified superficial injury of the scalp.  (JE8, p. 163)  
Dr. Garrels placed claimant at MMI and released him to regular work duty.  Utilizing the 
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, Chapter 13, Dr. 
Garrels opined claimant sustained 0 percent permanent impairment.  Dr. Garrels based 
his opinion upon a lack of objective findings.  (JE8, p. 164)   

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 17 
 
John “Jay” Freiburger, IX, sat for deposition on December 10, 2016.  Mr. 
Freiburger co-owned defendant-employer with his father, John Freiburger, VIII.  (JE41, 
Depo. Tr. p. 5)  Mr. Freiburger indicated he hired claimant in 2011 as a concrete finisher 
and promoted claimant to foreman within a year.  (JE41, Depo. Tr. p. 6)  He described 
claimant as hardworking when present, but indicated claimant was not dependable.  For 
approximately one year prior to the work injury, Mr. Freiburger indicated claimant’s work 
was interrupted.  He explained claimant was on prescription narcotics for headaches, 
but also had been using prescription narcotics that were not prescribed to claimant.  Mr. 
Freiburger indicated he attempted to support claimant in ceasing use of these pills.  
(JE41, Depo. Tr. pp. 7-8)  He estimated claimant missed two to four days per month 
pre-injury.  (JE41, Depo. Tr. p. 35)   
When claimant was released to work four hours per day following the work injury, 
Mr. Freiburger indicated claimant would not show up for work or left early.  He described 
the situation as “same old” claimant, with claimant coming and going as he pleased.  
(JE41, Depo. Tr. p. 33)  Mr. Freiburger indicated he was unable to rely on claimant for 
the approved four hours per day and as a result, he informed claimant his services were 
no longer needed.  Mr. Freiburger did not believe claimant experienced headaches 
during this failed attempt to return to work.  (JE41, Depo. Tr. p. 34)   
Review of claimant’s earnings from defendant-employer during the years 2009 
through 2013 reveals earnings ranging from nearly $24,000.00 to nearly $33,000.00 
annually.  (JE31, pp. 437-438)  In 2013, the year preceding the work injury, claimant 
earned $29,290.19 at defendant-employer, with an hourly rate of $18.50.  (CE10, p. 40; 
JE31, pp. 437-438)   
At the referral of his counsel, on December 15, 2016, claimant presented to 
neurosurgeon, Robert Milas, M.D., for evaluation.  Dr. Milas performed a records review 
and interviewed claimant.  Claimant reported he felt dazed and extreme pain following 
the work injury.  He indicated he went to pick up a pizza and the individual waiting on 
him, who had some medical training, told him he was not making sense and should 
immediately seek medical treatment.  Claimant reported dramatic personality changes 
following the work injury, with extreme irritability and difficulty concentrating.  (JE15, p. 
283)  Dr. Milas reviewed claimant’s June 11, 2014 head MRI and opined the study 
revealed numerous punctate-like matter lesions characteristic of axonal injury as a 
result of blunt head trauma.  Following examination, Dr. Milas assessed post-
concussion syndrome and cognitive impairment secondary to head injury.  Utilizing the 
AMA Guides, Tables 13-6 and 13-8, Dr. Milas opined claimant suffered a Class I 
impairment related to mental status, warranting a permanent impairment of 14 percent 
whole person.  He further opined claimant suffered a Class II impairment related to 
emotional and behavioral disorders, warranting a 29 percent whole person impairment.  
(JE15, p. 284)  Thus, Dr. Milas opined claimant sustained a combined 39 percent whole 
person impairment.  (JE15, p. 285)  Dr. Milas opined the work injury of May 19, 2014 
was the direct cause of claimant’s “condition of ill being,” specifically including 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 18 
 
headaches, cognitive dysfunction, and behavioral dysfunction including loss of temper 
and substance abuse.  He further indicated claimant’s condition rendered him 
unemployable in his preinjury position and claimant was likely to “always” require some 
form of supervision of his lifestyle and living situation.  (JE15, p. 285) 
Dr. Milas authored an addendum to his report dated December 19, 2016, 
specifically addressing his review of Dr. Tranel’s report.  Dr. Milas clarified he did not 
“entirely” attribute claimant’s substance abuse issues to the work injury.  Rather, he felt 
strongly that claimant suffered a significant head injury which resulted in axonal shear 
injuries.  He opined these injuries further reduced claimant’s cognitive and executive 
function to a degree such that claimant was no longer able to function independently.  
He further opined the injuries worsened claimant’s level of self-control and personal 
responsibility.  Ultimately, Dr. Milas opined the work injury “significantly worsened” 
claimant’s condition(s).  (JE15, p. 286)     
On January 16, 2017, defendants requested Dr. Garrels perform a records 
review.  (JE36, pp. 511-513)  Dr. Garrels subsequently reviewed and critiqued the 
opinion of Dr. Milas, notably stating Dr. Milas opined an axonal brain injury, while Dr. 
Garrels found no such injury on MRI.  He opined claimant did not demonstrate imaging 
evidence or a clinical pattern supporting axonal injury.  Dr. Garrels also opined 
claimant’s neuropsychological testing did not support cognitive deficits.  Rather, Dr. 
Garrels opined long-term substance abuse could profoundly impact the brain and result 
in emotional and behavioral disorders; he also opined claimant demonstrated 
psychiatric issues that bore no relationship to the work injury.  Ultimately, Dr. Garrels 
opined claimant presented with a significant preexisting history, including chronic 
intermittent cluster headaches with essentially same symptom pattern currently as in the 
early 1990s, as well as substance abuse.  Dr. Garrels opined the head injury 
temporarily resulted in a pattern of increased headaches, but the pattern had since 
returned to baseline.  (JE8, p. 164)   
Defendants referred claimant back to Dr. Tranel for neuropsychological 
reevaluation to assess his cognitive and emotional functioning secondary to the work 
injury.  Claimant presented to Dr. Tranel on January 11, 2017, accompanied by his 
girlfriend, Sylvia Reyes.  (JE14, p. 270)  Dr. Tranel summarized claimant’s work injury 
and subsequent treatment.  (JE14, pp. 270-271)   
During interview, claimant reported continued intermittent headaches, 
photophobia, phonophobia, and sleep disturbance.  Claimant denied cognitive-
behavioral changes or functional changes in the interim following his initial evaluation on 
May 20, 2015.  Claimant and his girlfriend reported claimant had experienced more 
intense emotional difficulties and anger issues.  He denied any recent hallucinations, 
delusions, or psychiatric hospitalizations.  Claimant reported he ceased drinking alcohol 
two years prior and only occasionally smoked marijuana, primarily when stressed and/or 
suffering with a headache.  (JE14, pp. 271-272)  Claimant’s girlfriend reported 
witnessing “extreme obsessiveness,” with claimant “staring and zooming” in on a picture 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 19 
 
for an hour in an attempt to locate an image within the broader image.  She also 
reported he accused her of unfaithfulness and that she had observed claimant “break 
down” and cry.  (JE14, p. 271) 
Claimant underwent neuropsychological assessment.  Dr. Tranel opined formal 
validity measure was within expected limits, but claimant’s response style and 
endorsements suggested over-reporting of some types of symptoms.  (JE14, p. 272)  
On questionnaires, claimant reported symptoms consistent with severe depression and 
moderate anxiety.  In MMPI-2 testing, claimant reported depression and anxiety.  Dr. 
Tranel opined claimant lacked confidence in his ability to cope with life demands and his 
resources were overwhelmed.  Results indicated claimant tended to react to these 
elevated demands and stress with physical symptoms.  Dr. Tranel opined claimant’s 
profile also revealed: feelings of mistreatment, suspicion, and resentment; concern over 
the intentions of others; and likely difficulty with authority figures.  (JE14, p. 273)    
Dr. Tranel ultimately opined claimant’s cognitive profile remained stable as 
compared to the May 2015 evaluation and claimant continued to have normal, intact 
cognitive functioning.  Dr. Tranel opined he found no indication of cognitive impairment 
or brain damage as a result of the May 2014 work injury.  He described the results of 
the current neuropsychological assessment as strong confirmation of his conclusion, 
citing now two extensive neuropsychological examinations yielding normal results.  Dr. 
Tranel opined claimant’s psychological condition was the “salient feature” in claimant’s 
case and further opined claimant’s depression and anxiety warranted immediate 
treatment.  Dr. Tranel opined claimant’s emotional distress served as “the major factor 
underlying his cognitive concerns.”  Additional factors such as occasional drug use and 
sleep disturbance were also described as undoubtedly playing a role in claimant’s 
difficulties.  Dr. Tranel concluded claimant did not experience ongoing, permanent 
problems related to the work injury of May 2014.  (JE14, p. 274)   
While mental health, pain management, and headache treatment was 
recommended to address claimant’s condition, Dr. Tranel opined these 
recommendations were not related to the work injury.  Dr. Tranel specifically cautioned 
against attempts to infer causal connection between the work injury and headache 
complaints on the basis of the existence of a preexisting headache condition and the 
minor nature of the work injury.  Dr. Tranel also addressed Dr. Milas’ impairment rating, 
stating: claimant’s neuropsychological test results were entirely normal on two testing 
occasions; claimant did not have impairment in cognitive function; claimant did not have 
cognitive deficits that would prevent him from working at the same level as pre-injury; 
and claimant’s conditions of depression and anxiety would not warrant impairment 
ratings, as claimant could be returned to premorbid levels of function with treatment.  
(JE14, pp. 274-275)       
On February 1, 2017, claimant presented to Dr. Short.  He reported improvement 
over the last few months, a fact he attributed to not working.  Claimant reported 
experiencing mild headaches twice per week, self-treated with Tylenol; with over-

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 20 
 
exertion, he felt right-sided headaches beginning at the back of his head.  Claimant 
expressed concern cluster headaches would return upon resumption of work in the 
spring.  Dr. Short noted claimant had been seen at UIHC and alternative treatments had 
been recommended, such as acupuncture.  Dr. Short noted any recommendations for 
such care would need to come from him in order to be covered by workers’ 
compensation.  Following examination, Dr. Short assessed episodic cluster headache, 
not intractable.  He suspected claimant’s headaches would flare upon returning to work.  
Dr. Short opined further trials of preventative medicines were unlikely to be helpful, 
given past failures.  He recommended occipital nerve blocks at three-month intervals 
throughout the spring and summer, with the first in March 2017.  Dr. Short also 
indicated alternative treatments would be reasonable and indicated he would obtain the 
UIHC neuropsychology records in order to determine their recommendations.  (JE3, p. 
67-68) 
From February 2017 through August 2017, claimant worked at J.L. Hardscape as 
a construction supervisor and earned $18.50 per hour.  (Claimant's testimony; CE1, p. 
3; DEB, p. 4; DED, pp. 4-6)   
On March 8, 2017, claimant underwent the occipital nerve block recommended 
by Dr. Short to treat occipital neuralgia.  (JE3, p. 72) 
At the referral of claimant’s counsel, claimant presented to vocational expert, 
Kent Jayne, on March 29, 2017, for purposes of a vocational assessment.  Mr. Jayne 
authored a vocational assessment dated July 13, 2017.  As elements of his 
assessment, Mr. Jayne performed a medical records review and summarized select 
records.  (JE34, pp. 469-473)  He also noted claimant’s work history and education.  Mr. 
Jayne interviewed claimant regarding his care and complaints, as well as administered 
a number of questionnaires and checklists.  (JE34, pp. 473-475)  Mr. Jayne evaluated 
the results and described the testing as standardized instruments designed to evaluate 
residual vocational capacities.  He described claimant’s dexterity scores as rather 
dismal. (JE34, pp. 476-477, 480)   
Mr. Jayne ultimately opined claimant’s physical restrictions alone precluded his 
return to work as a concrete finisher.  He further opined claimant’s vocational test 
scores would preclude claimant from supervisory work, entry level clerical work, or 
bench assembly work.  (JE34, p. 480)  Mr. Jayne concluded claimant was precluded 
from participation in the competitive labor markets in Iowa and Illinois.  He opined 
claimant’s pre-injury abilities were no longer within his capacities at even a light or 
sedentary level due to extremely poor performances in fine motor coordination, 
finger/manual dexterity, name comparison, clerical perception, numerical ability, and 
nonverbal reasoning capacity.  Mr. Jayne further opined it was unlikely vocational 
rehabilitation would be successful.  (JE34, p. 487)  
Mr. Reynolds, the owner of CCS Construction, sat for deposition on April 5, 2017.  
Mr. Reynolds further testified that approximately two weeks prior to deposition, he had 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 21 
 
spoken to claimant in person, as claimant was working for JL Hardscape and was 
attempting to recruit Mr. Reynolds’ employees.  (JE42, Depo. Tr. pp. 9-10)  
Claimant testified he was able to tolerate work at JL Hardscape for a few months.  
He indicated he was not a comparable worker to his preinjury self; he was unable to 
work full days.  Claimant testified he reached a state where he was not sleeping or 
eating and he was acting out violently.  Claimant indicated he was unsure if these 
symptoms were potentially due to stress and/or anxiety.  Claimant testified he ultimately 
quit JL Hardscape.  (Claimant's testimony)  
Claimant’s legal representation arranged for claimant to be evaluated by a team 
of providers in California.  On October 16, 2017, claimant presented to board certified 
neurologist, Fernando Miranda, M.D.  (JE 16, pp. 289, 297)  Dr. Miranda noted claimant 
was struck in the head by a baseball on May 19, 2014.  Claimant reported feeling 
disoriented and confused, with people indicating he was not “making any sense.”  
(JE16, p. 297)  Claimant’s complaints included: anger issues; irritability; anxiety; 
memory difficulties; sleep problems; headaches, including whenever he is angry; 
dizziness and nausea upon looking downward; balance difficulties; paranoia; impulsive; 
forgetfulness; emotional expressions; and notable depression with headaches.  (JE16, 
pp. 297-298)  Dr. Miranda noted claimant had been admitted for mental health care on 
several occasions.  He noted the admissions were due to people believing claimant was 
under the influence of drugs and further stated claimant was “[a]lways released because 
all blood and urine tests are negative.”  (JE16, p. 298) 
Claimant underwent a 3T MRI of the brain, read by board certified radiologist, 
Murray Solomon, M.D.  (JE17, p. 301; JE37, p. 514)  Dr. Solomon opined the results 
revealed: 
   T2 flair images reveal a few small foci of increased signal intensity within 
the supraventricular and periventricular frontal lobe white matter bilaterally 
as well as within the right cerebellar hemisphere in the region of the 
middle cerebellar peduncle.  If there is no underlying history of migraine 
headaches or prior viral encephalitis, any or all of these white matter 
lesions could be posttraumatic in etiology. 
(JE17, p. 308; JE37, p. 516)  
Dr. Miranda reviewed the MRI results and opined it revealed posttraumatic white 
matter lesions.  (JE16, p. 298)  Dr. Miranda opined claimant’s EEG was abnormal, with 
findings compatible with traumatic brain injury.  (JE16, pp. 298-299)  Following 
examination, Dr. Miranda opined claimant suffered a traumatic brain injury secondary to 
being struck in the head on May 19, 2014.  Dr. Miranda opined claimant’s MRI results 
revealed damage in regions of the brain consistent with the mechanism of being struck 
in the back of the head with a baseball.  He opined claimant would continue to 
experience cognitive changes, but may receive some relief with a course of 
medications.  (JE16, pp. 299-300) 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 22 
 
At the referral of Dr. Miranda, claimant underwent neuropsychological 
examination on October 17 and October 18, 2017, with Edgar Angelone, Ph.D.  Dr. 
Angelone noted claimant had been struck in the back of the head with a baseball on 
May 19, 2014 and since that time, had experienced a number of cognitive, physical, and 
emotional issues.  Claimant reported immediate head pain after being struck and 
indicated when he stopped for pizza on the way home, another patron, who was a 
nurse, indicated claimant was slurring his words and should seek medical attention.  Dr. 
Angelone identified the purpose of the examination as assessment of the extent to 
which these issues were related to the work injury.  (JE18, p. 320)  Dr. Angelone 
interviewed claimant, his girlfriend, and his mother.  (JE18, pp. 320-323)  He also 
performed a medical records review.  (JE18, pp. 324-331)   
Dr. Angelone administered a neuropsychological examination.  (JE18, p. 331-
337)  Following evaluation, Dr. Angelone opined the neuropsychological examination 
revealed: mild to severe impairment of simple and complex forms of auditory and visual 
attention and concentration; impaired working memory; signs and symptoms of 
conversion insufficiency; diminished grip strength of the dominant left hand; mildly 
impaired simple motor function of the left hand; mildly impaired fine motor coordination; 
mild dynamic balance difficulties; mildly impaired memory studies; mild problems with 
central dysarthria and categorical fluency; average intellectual abilities with impaired 
working memory and processing speed; significant impairment of executive functions; 
and symptoms of Pseudo-Bulbar Affect.  (JE18, pp. 338-339)  Dr. Angelone indicated 
the examination revealed mild to moderate impairment in overall levels of functioning.  
He noted claimant also reported symptoms of anxiety, depression, personality changes, 
and distress “secondary to experiencing a traumatic event.”  (JE18, p. 338) 
Dr. Angelone ultimately opined he found clear, objective evidence that claimant 
suffered a traumatic brain injury in the work accident.  He opined a diagnosis of mild 
traumatic brain injury was warranted.  Dr. Angelone opined there was clear, objective 
evidence that claimant developed symptoms of post-concussion syndrome related to 
the traumatic brain injury.  (JE18, pp. 338-339).  He opined the traumatic brain injury 
and post-concussion syndrome were direct contributors to claimant’s current emotional 
state and were responsible for claimant’s depression symptoms and personality 
changes.  Dr. Angelone opined a diagnosis of personality changes due to another 
medical condition (traumatic brain injury), combined type, with associated depression 
and anxiety was warranted.  (JE18, p. 339)  In terms of prognosis, Dr. Angelone opined 
claimant’s complex combination of cognitive, personality, and behavioral disturbances 
would be difficult to treat, particularly with a preexisting demonstration of personality 
maladjustment.  Dr. Angelone opined that even with treatment, claimant’s chances of 
recovery were minimal.  (JE18, p. 340) 
In November 2017, claimant was hired at Sooner Concrete.  He remained 
employed by Sooner at the time of hearing.  (Claimant's testimony; Mr. Grchan’s 
testimony)  Claimant earns $20.00 per hour.  (CE1, p. 3; DEB, p. 4) 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 23 
 
On February 23, 2018, claimant presented to Dr. Short for headache evaluation.  
Dr. Short noted a history of cluster headaches that were worsened after being struck in 
the head by a baseball, as well as development of a component of posttraumatic 
occipital neuralgia.  Dr. Short opined claimant responded well to occipital nerve blocks, 
with the last done nearly one-year prior which yielded near complete relief for 4 to 5 
months.  Headaches returned late the previous summer, but improved over the winter 
months while not working.  He also noted complete relief of severe headaches within 15 
minutes of use of sumatriptan nasal spray; without use, headaches can incapacitate 
claimant for up to 4 hours.  Claimant also reported relief with use of marijuana.  He 
expressed concern regarding worsening headaches upon resumption of work in March 
or April, due to heat and physical exertion.  Following examination, Dr. Short assessed: 
episodic cluster headaches; posttraumatic headaches; and occipital neuralgia.  He 
recommended repeat right occipital nerve block and use of sumatriptan nasal spray.  
Dr. Short also indicated he would investigate referral to an Illinois-based physician who 
could prescribe medical marijuana, as he believed it was a reasonable treatment option.  
(JE3, p. 73) 
Claimant’s counsel authored correspondence to Dr. Short, inquiring if he 
recommended the medications mentioned by Dr. Miranda and further, if claimant would 
benefit from medical marijuana.  In the event he believed medical marijuana was 
appropriate, counsel requested Dr. Short issue a referral to an Illinois-based physician.  
(JE35, pp. 509-510)  Dr. Short replied he did not recommend the medications 
mentioned by Dr. Miranda.  Dr. Short indicated the medications were not FDA approved 
for claimant’s diagnosis and in his experience, did not provide much benefit in 
claimant’s situation.  He further highlighted claimant’s resistance to medication use.  Dr. 
Short did agree claimant might benefit from medical marijuana and issued a referral to 
Ramon Pla, M.D.  (JE35, p. 510)  
On April 19, 2018, claimant underwent a repeat right greater occipital nerve block 
with Dr. Short.  Dr. Short recommended repeat block in 4 months’ time.  (JE3, pp. 75-
76) 
Defendants in the related personal injury lawsuit referred claimant for an 
independent medical examination with board certified neurologist, Michael Jacoby, M.D.  
Claimant presented to Dr. Jacoby on June 29, 2018.  (JE19, pp. 368)  Claimant 
described the injury on May 19, 2014 and symptoms he related to the event.  (JE19, pp. 
369-370)  Dr. Jacoby reviewed and summarized provided medical records and relevant 
depositions.  (JE19, pp. 371-375)  Dr. Jacoby performed general and neurologic 
examinations.  (JE19, pp. 370-371)  He specifically took issue with references in the 
medical records to “concussion,” stating the diagnosis was possible, but lacking in 
documentation of supportive symptoms.  Dr. Jacoby also took exception to Dr. Milas’ 
diagnoses of post-concussion syndrome and cognitive impairment secondary to head 
injury, citing to Dr. Tranel’s neuropsychological testing demonstrating no traumatic brain 
injury and his own evaluation which failed to show cognitive impairment.  Regardless of 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 24 
 
whether or not claimant initially suffered a concussion, Dr. Jacoby opined claimant 
suffered no cognitive residual effects.  Dr. Jacoby also disagreed with Dr. Milas’ opinion 
that the July 2014 MRI showed features characteristic of axonal injury as a result of 
blunt head trauma; Dr. Jacoby opined the findings were nonspecific and not unique to 
the type of injury suffered by claimant on May 19, 2014.   (JE19, p. 376) 
Following records review, interview and examination, Dr. Jacoby addressed 
ongoing complaints which claimant related to the work injury.  Dr. Jacoby noted 
claimant endorsed persistent headaches, including severe headaches two to three 
times weekly.  Dr. Jacoby opined that while claimant may have experienced 
posttraumatic headache “at the time,” he found it “unusual” that claimant would continue 
to have headaches four years’ post-injury.  (JE19, p. 375)  He indicated posttraumatic 
headaches improve gradually over time, typically demonstrating notable improvement 
within three to six months and resolution by the one-year mark.  Dr. Jacoby opined 
posttraumatic headaches are not cluster headaches, as had been diagnosed by one 
neurologist.  Dr. Jacoby noted claimant’s preexisting headache problems, beginning at 
least eight years prior to the work injury.  The pre-injury care included a diagnosis of 
cluster headaches.  He, therefore, opined claimant’s ongoing headache complaints 
might be related to the long-standing headache issue.  (JE19, p. 375-376)  On this 
issue, Dr. Jacoby stated: 
   I contend that he may have experienced some degree of post-trauma 
headache, but that headache is now resolved and any continued problems 
[claimant] has with headaches is related to the headache problems that he 
experienced long before such incident. 
(JE19, p. 376) 
 
Dr. Jacoby also addressed causation with respect to claimant’s other complaints.  
With respect to a complaint of balance difficulties, Dr. Jacoby opined the complaints 
were not related to the work injury.  Rather, he opined claimant’s examination was 
strongly suggestive of peripheral neuropathy, which he opined was much more likely to 
cause balance issues than a strike to the head.  Dr. Jacoby described claimant’s 
complaint he had difficulty holding up his head as unfounded, citing lack of reference in 
the medical records, good strength of neck musculature, and no neuro-anatomic 
explanation for the symptom.  He opined claimant’s complaint of stuttering speech was 
unfounded, citing minimal focus during medical care beyond subjective reports and lack 
of speech impediment during the course of IME evaluation.  (JE19, p. 376)  Dr. Jacoby 
ultimately opined he was unable to attribute functional impairment to the work injury of 
May 19, 2014.  (JE19, p. 377) 
Pursuant to the referral of Dr. Short, claimant presented to Ramon Pla, M.D., to 
establish care.  Dr. Pla noted claimant’s history of traumatic brain injury and post-
concussion syndrome.  Dr. Pla indicated claimant’s depressive score was consistent 
with major depression, but claimant was unwilling to take an antidepressant.  Claimant 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 25 
 
expressed interest in medical marijuana.  Dr. Pla indicated he would first review 
claimant’s neurological records.  (JE33, p. 463) 
Defendants referred claimant back to Dr. Tranel for neuropsychological 
reevaluation on August 8, 2018.  Following evaluation, Dr. Tranel authored a report 
dated August 27, 2018.  Dr. Tranel noted interim persistent complaints of difficulties with 
attention, concentration, short term memory, and multitasking, as well as worsening 
mood, anxiety, and frustration.  Claimant described instances of hypervigilance and 
heightened startle response.  He also reported avoidance of public and leisure activities, 
citing a resultant headache.  (JE14, p. 277)  Claimant reported continued pulsating 
headaches and neck pain, with headaches often accompanied by nausea.  He reported 
working concrete part-time for the last year and that his boss at Sooner Concrete was 
understanding and flexible regarding his condition.  (JE14, p. 278)  Dr. Tranel noted 
claimant had not pursued psychiatric consultation or psychotherapy as previously 
recommended, as the care was not covered by workers’ compensation and claimant 
lacked insurance.  (JE14, pp. 277-278)  Claimant reported consuming a “few drinks” 
over the prior month.  He also reported daily use of marijuana since October 2017 to 
address anxiety and pain complaints; Dr. Tranel noted claimant was in the process of 
obtaining a medical marijuana card.  (JE14, p. 278) 
Dr. Tranel administered a clinical assessment, during which claimant gave 
adequate effort.  (JE14, pp. 278-279)  Following review of results, Dr. Tranel opined the 
evaluation again revealed normal, intact cognitive functioning.  Dr. Tranel opined 
claimant’s intellectual abilities typically fell in the average to high average range.  
Additionally, he described claimant’s other cognitive abilities as intact, including learning 
and memory, attention and orientation, concentration and processing speed, speech 
and language, visuoperceptual and visuoconstructional abilities, executive functioning, 
and higher-order reasoning and problem-solving.  Dr. Tranel opined the findings again 
supported the conclusion that, to a reasonable degree of neuropsychological certainty, 
claimant did not have any permanent brain dysfunction or permanent neurological injury 
related to the May 19, 2014 incident.  Dr. Tranel opined claimant presented with 
ongoing behavioral problems and psychological adjustment issues, but indicated the 
conditions appeared long-standing in nature and not attributable to the work injury.  Dr. 
Tranel again opined the psychiatric difficulties experienced since the work injury may be 
seen as an aggravation of preexisting conditions due to headache pain; however, he 
cautioned this would be difficult to establish to a reasonable degree of certainty given 
open questions regarding drug use and contributions from psychosocial stress.  Dr. 
Tranel offered care recommendations regarding claimant’s condition and specifically 
recommended substance abuse care as the first priority.  (JE14, p. 281)  
At some point following Dr. Tranel’s August 8, 2018, evaluation, Dr. Angelone 
authored an undated supplemental report.  Dr. Angelone summarized a number of 
interim medical records he was provided for review, including the reports of Drs. Tranel 
and Jacoby.  (JE18, pp. 347-351)  Following review, Dr. Angelone critiqued the provided 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 26 
 
records as incomplete and unreliable given what he deemed contraindications and 
errors.  He opined Dr. Tranel’s data was incomplete.  Dr. Angelone critiqued Dr. 
Tranel’s August 2018 opinion that claimant’s cognition was intact, citing to “cognitive 
and emotional difficulties” noted in Dr. Tranel’s own report.  (JE18, p. 352)  Dr. 
Angelone also opined Dr. Tranel failed to take microsmia and personality changes into 
effect when rendering his conclusions, both of which are seen in individuals with brain 
injury and damage of orbital frontal regions.  (JE18, pp. 352-353)  Given his concerns 
regarding Dr. Tranel’s reports, Dr. Angelone opined Dr. Jacoby’s opinions had “no 
objective evidence” of claimant’s cognitive function, due to reliance on Dr. Tranel’s 
findings.  (JE18, p. 353)  
Claimant underwent repeat right greater occipital nerve block with Dr. Short on 
August 22, 2018.  Dr. Short planned for repeat injection in 3 months.  (JE3, pp. 77-78) 
On September 7, 2018, Dr. Pla noted claimant would be applying to the Illinois 
medical cannabis program on the bases of headaches and anxiety related to traumatic 
brain injury with post-concussive syndrome.  (JE33, p. 466) 
Defendants referred claimant to vocational case manager, Lana Sellner, for 
consideration of claimant’s vocational outlook.  She ultimately authored a vocational 
assessment report dated October 4, 2018.  (JE20, p. 380)  Ms. Sellner interviewed 
claimant and reviewed medical records and deposition transcripts.  Her report provides 
detail of this review and discussion, focusing upon claimant’s work restrictions, medical 
status, background, education, and work history.  (JE20, pp. 380-383)  Ms. Sellner 
opined claimant was capable of medium-heavy physical demand level work prior to his 
work injury.  Utilizing the opinions of Drs. Tranel and Garrels, Ms. Sellner found no 
vocational impairment post-injury.  (JE20, p. 384)  Utilizing the opinion of Dr. Short, 
restricting claimant from bending, excessive physical work or heat, Ms. Sellner found 
claimant capable of working in a light to medium physical demand position.  With 
respect to the opinions of Drs. Milas, Angelone and Miranda, opining claimant 
possessed cognitive impairments which prevented claimant from functioning 
independently, Ms. Sellner identified some possible accommodations which could 
benefit claimant, as she noted claimant had already been working part-time in his 
preinjury position.  (JE20, p. 385)  Ms. Sellner also identified positions available within 
claimant’s labor market which comported with the restrictions of Dr. Short.  (JE20, pp. 
385-387)  Finally, Ms. Sellner indicated claimant might benefit from registration with 
organizations such as IowaWorks, in the event he sought to engage in a job search.  
(JE20, p. 388)    
Defendants in the personal injury action referred claimant to vocational specialist, 
Bruce Mailey, for evaluation of claimant’s residual vocational potentials.  Mr. Mailey 
authored a vocational evaluation report dated November 16, 2018.  (JE21, p. 393)  Mr. 
Mailey noted claimant’s education and work history.  (JE21, p. 396)  He also noted 
claimant had a history, dating to his mid-teens, of anger management issues, alcohol 
and substance abuse issues, and a number of arrests for assault, underage drinking, 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 27 
 
OWI, and drug possession.  He opined these factors impacted claimant’s vocational 
potentials.  (JE21, p. 394)  Mr. Mailey reviewed and summarized relevant medical 
factors.  (JE21, pp. 394-396, 405)  He concluded Drs. Garrels, Tranel, and Jacoby each 
opined claimant was capable of working full time without restrictions, which placed 
claimant in the heavy physical demand category of work.  (JE21, p. 396)  Following 
consideration of the opinions of Drs. Garrels, Tranel, and Jacoby, as well as claimant’s 
education, training, experience, and transferrable skills, Mr. Mailey opined: claimant was 
capable of returning to his preinjury position; claimant was qualified for a number of 
other semi-skilled and unskilled occupations within his labor market; the qualified 
positions fell in the heavy, medium, light, and sedentary demand categories; and jobs 
“undoubtedly” existed in claimant’s labor market.  Utilizing the opinion of Dr. Short, Mr. 
Mailey opined: claimant was capable of returning to his preinjury position with 
accommodations; claimant was qualified for unskilled occupations within his labor 
market; and the qualified positions fell in the heavy, medium, light, and sedentary 
demand categories.  (JE21, p. 400)  Mr. Mailey identified a number of appropriate, 
available positions within claimant’s vocational profile.  (JE21, pp. 401-402)  He 
ultimately opined claimant’s labor market analysis reveal “approximately 0” percent loss 
of access to the labor market.  (JE21, p. 403) 
Dr. Milas authored a supplemental report dated December 20, 2018.  Thereby, 
Dr. Milas reiterated his diagnoses of post-concussion syndrome and cognitive 
impairment secondary to head injury.  He opined claimant’s June 2014 brain MRI 
demonstrated numerous punctate white matter lesions which were characteristic of 
axonal shear injury as a result of blunt head trauma.  He opined the EEG and P300 
studies ordered by Dr. Miranda confirmed structural brain changes, which Dr. Milas 
opined were posttraumatic in origin.  Dr. Milas further opined the October 2017 MRI 
again showed white matter lesions which the radiologist opined could be posttraumatic 
in nature.  Dr. Milas opined his evaluation and the evaluations of the LIFT program 
revealed cognitive impairment.  He opined claimant demonstrated many criteria 
associated with post-concussion syndrome and further, that claimant’s symptoms 
rendered it “impossible for [claimant] to be gainfully employed in the future.”  (JE15, p. 
287)  
On January 9, 2019, Dr. Short preformed repeat greater occipital nerve block.  
He recommended repeat block in three months.  Claimant reported experiencing two 
headaches per week, which improve somewhat with use of sumatriptan nasal spray.  
However, claimant reported the headaches resulted in difficulty working and resulted in 
missing a considerable amount of work.  Dr. Short recommended a trial of Emgality.  
(JE3, pp. 79-80) 
Dr. Short sat for a second deposition on January 31, 2019.  Dr. Short again 
testified he began treating claimant in 2002 and initially diagnosed elements of migraine 
and cluster headaches.  In retrospect, Dr. Short indicated he likely would have only 
diagnosed cluster headaches.  He explained he may have thought the nausea symptom 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 28 
 
represented a migrainous element, as most cluster headache patients do not complain 
of nausea.  (JE26, Depo. Tr. pp. 9, 12)  Dr. Short acknowledged claimant reported a 
history of right-sided facial fracture with persistent numbness over the right side of his 
face.  Dr. Short opined it was possible for a facial fracture to cause axonal lesions; 
however, he did not know if that was the result in claimant’s case.  (JE26, Depo. Tr. pp. 
9-10) 
Dr. Short testified he continued to believe the work injury trauma aggravated 
claimant’s preexisting condition.  He also continued to recommend avoidance of 
bending, excess physical work, and heat, as claimant reported these activities 
aggravated his headaches.  (JE26, Depo. Tr. pp. 54-55)  Based upon his professional 
experience, Dr. Short opined it was likely claimant’s cluster headache condition would 
continue indefinitely.  He indicated that in his history of treating patients with headaches 
presumably triggered by head injuries, patients who do not improve within one year of 
the trauma do not improve.  (JE26, Depo. Tr. p. 60)   
Dr. Short testified cluster headaches can occur with or without trauma and most 
frequently, without trauma.  He testified claimant’s subsequent development of occipital 
neuralgia could be related to the cluster headaches or trauma.  He was unable to opine 
with certainty which represented the cause of the occipital neuralgia.  (JE26, Depo. Tr. 
p. 29)   
On February 5, 2019, vocational specialist, Mr. Mailey, authored correspondence 
to defense counsel.  Thereby, Mr. Mailey clarified his earlier report had “artificially 
inflated” the annual salaries of the positions of concrete finisher and supervisor of 
concrete finishers, as the earnings had been based on a 12-month, full-time schedule, 
whereas claimant had only worked seasonally.  Mr. Mailey opined records regarding 
claimant’s post-injury employment “completely disprove[d]” the assertion that claimant 
was not employable, as opined by Mr. Jayne and Dr. Milas.  (CE4, p. 26)  
On February 9, 2019, Dr. Pla completed a certification form identifying claimant 
as a qualifying patient for participation in the Illinois Medical Cannabis Pilot Program.  
He designated a debilitating medical condition of traumatic brain injury with post-
concussion syndrome.  (CE7, pp. 33-35) 
In February 2019, claimant applied for Social Security Disability benefits.  No 
decision had been rendered by the date of evidentiary hearing.  (Claimant's testimony; 
CE1, p. 13) 
Claimant continued to work at Sooner Concrete throughout 2018 and into the 
2019 concrete season.  (Claimant's testimony) 
On April 4, 2019, Mark Grchan sat for deposition.  Mr. Grchan is the owner of 
Sooner Concrete.  (JE27, Depo. Tr. p. 3)  Mr. Grchan hired claimant in November 2017, 
after he was recommended by an existing employee.  Claimant worked for two days in 
2017 and then returned during the 2018 season.  (JE27, Depo. Tr. pp. 4-5)  The work 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 29 
 
season typically runs from April to November, with workers generally working 40 hours 
per week.  (JE27, Depo. Tr. pp. 13, 26)  Claimant was paid $20.00 per hour as an 
independent contractor and earned a total of $7,410.00 during 2018.  (JE27, Depo. Tr. 
p. 12)   
During the 2018 season, Mr. Grchan indicated claimant would begin working for 
the day, but after approximately four to five hours, claimant’s face would turn red and he 
would indicate he did not feel well.  (JE27, Depo. Tr. p. 7)  Mr. Grchan testified claimant 
would generally complain of a headache and then appear as if he was sick to his 
stomach.  (JE27, Depo. Tr. p. 14)  At that time, Mr. Grchan would direct someone to 
drive claimant home.  (JE27, Depo. Tr. p. 7)  Mr. Grchan observed claimant vomit on 
one or two occasions.  On many occasions, claimant informed Mr. Grchan he vomited 
after returning home.  (JE27, Depo. Tr. p. 14)  Mr. Grchan testified this series of events 
would occur on two-thirds of the days claimant worked.  After such an incident, claimant 
typically would not work the following day.  (JE27, Depo. Tr. p. 7)  Mr. Grchan testified 
claimant’s condition was worse with hot weather, but would improve following his 
occipital block injection.  (JE27, Depo. Tr. p. 8)   
Mr. Grchan testified claimant had returned to Sooner Concrete for the 2019 
season.  As of the date of his deposition, claimant had worked one day for four hours.  
(JE27, Depo. Tr. p. 17)  Mr. Grchan testified claimant is a hard worker, when he is 
capable of working.  (JE27, Depo. Tr. pp. 13-14)  He described claimant as very 
knowledgeable, capable of setting to specifications and with correct dimensions and 
measurements.  For these reasons, Mr. Grchan values claimant’s input in concrete 
work.  (JE27, Depo. Tr. pp. 9-10)  
Claimant underwent a right greater occipital nerve block by Dr. Short on April 8, 
2019.  (CE6, pp. 29)  In his procedure note, Dr. Short assessed right occipital neuralgia 
and posttraumatic headache.  He recommended repeat nerve block in three months.  
Claimant reported experiencing poor energy “ever since his head injury.”  Dr. Short 
noted a California-based head injury specialist had recommended a stimulant medicine; 
he issued a prescription for Nuvigil.  (CE6, p. 30) 
On July 18, 2019, Mr. Jayne authored an addendum to his vocational report.  
Thereby, he noted review of additional documentation and provided comment.  (JE34, 
pp. 497-504)  Mr. Jayne devoted attention to critiquing Mr. Mailey’s report.  (JE34, pp. 
504-507)  He also opined the job postings detailed by Ms. Sellner did not comport with 
claimant’s test results.  (JE34, pp. 507-508) 
On August 15, 2019, Dr. Short performed a repeat right occipital nerve block for 
indications of occipital neuralgia and cluster headaches.  Claimant reported 
improvement in daily headaches with injections, but no impact upon exertional 
headaches.  Dr. Short noted the trial of Nuvigil was discontinued due to lack of benefit.  
(CE6, pp. 31-32) 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 30 
 
Ms. Sellner authored an addendum vocational report dated August 19, 2019.  
Ms. Sellner reviewed additional records and noted that to her knowledge, no medical 
provider had altered claimant’s restrictions from a physical or cognitive standpoint.  She 
highlighted that no medical provider had restricted claimant’s work hours.  (JE40, p. 
532)  Accordingly, she provided an updated list of viable positions within claimant’s 
restrictions.  (JE40, pp. 532-536)  She opined claimant continued to be employable, as 
demonstrated by claimant’s current employment in his preinjury occupation despite self-
limiting hours.  (JE40, p. 536) 
Mr. Jayne reviewed Ms. Sellner’s report of August 19, 2019 and authored a 
responsive letter dated September 19, 2019.  Thereby, Mr. Jayne noted claimant’s 
employer documented claimant capable of working only one day per week during the 
summer due to symptoms of headaches, vomiting, and heat reaction.  He opined such 
work was “not competitive employment” and should claimant no longer work at Sooner 
Concrete, claimant would not be employable.  (CE5, p. 27)  Mr. Jayne also opined 
claimant was not capable of performing any of the occupations proposed by Ms. Sellner 
in her report, based upon Mr. Jayne’s findings regarding claimant’s residual vocational 
capacities.  (CE5, pp. 27-28)   
On September 18, 2019, Mark Woods, M.D., completed a certification form 
identifying claimant as a qualifying patient for participation in the Illinois Medical 
Cannabis Pilot Program.  (CE8, pp. 36, 38)  He designated debilitating medical 
conditions of chronic pain and traumatic brain injury with post-concussion syndrome.  
Dr. Woods noted claimant suffered a head injury in 2014 when struck by a baseball and 
two weeks later, developed neurologic changes.  He noted claimant suffered migraine 
headaches, was unable to concentrate, and experienced decreased cognition.  Dr. 
Woods also noted cannabis was “helpful.”  (CE8, p. 37)  The Illinois Department of 
Public Health approved claimant for provisional access, lasting 90 days, to a medical 
cannabis dispensary pending further review of his application.  (CE9, p. 39) 
Claimant believes the medical marijuana is helpful to his conditions.  He 
described himself as more focused than he had been in five years and denied negative 
outbursts.  (Claimant's testimony)     
On October 9, 2019, Ms. Sellner authored a response to Mr. Jayne’s most recent 
vocational opinion.  Thereby, Ms. Sellner noted Mr. Jayne opined claimant was 
unemployable if not accommodated by Sooner Concrete and had expressly disagreed 
with potential job positions Ms. Sellner previously identified.  Ms. Sellner reviewed Dr. 
Short’s restrictions of avoidance of excess physical work, bending, and heat.  
Thereafter, she opined claimant’s work at Sooner Concrete fell outside those 
restrictions, which likely explained why claimant was unable to work full-time and 
required accommodation.  Ms. Sellner noted she had identified positions that fell in the 
light to low-heavy physical demand categories.  She concluded claimant remained 
employable on a full-time basis, provided he work within the restrictions imposed by Dr. 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 31 
 
Short.  Ms. Sellner opined many positions existed in the labor market which did not 
requiring working in excessive heat, bending, and excessive physical work.  (DEE) 
Claimant claims the following injurious conditions are causally related to the work 
injury of May 19, 2014: cluster headaches; “some rage and anger;” occasional 
stuttering; short-term memory loss; difficulty reading, sleeping, and concentrating; 
reduced attention span; anxiety; and the feeling of heaviness and swelling of his head.  
(CE1, p. 4)  Cluster headaches occur when performing physical work, bending over, or 
when in the heat; occasionally, vomiting accompanies the headaches.  (CE1, pp. 5-7)  
Claimant admits he experienced cluster headaches prior to the work injury, but believes 
those headaches had resolved.  (CE1, p. 6)  Claimant indicated he did not miss work 
due to headaches prior to the work injury.  (CE1, p. 5) 
Post-injury, claimant testified he experiences difficulty with reading 
comprehension and retention, impacted memory, and withdrawn behavior.  Claimant 
also testified he will lose his temper if situations do not go as he anticipated. He testified 
to experiencing two cluster headaches in the month prior to hearing, both of which 
began at work.  (Claimant's testimony) 
Claimant testified he continues to work at Sooner Concrete as a concrete 
finisher.  He described his boss, Mr. Grchan, as lenient.  Claimant testified he is able to 
work for a while, but then he develops a headache and begins vomiting.  Claimant 
testified he is sometimes able to work two or three days in a row, but is often lucky to 
average one day per week.  He explained he started off the 2019 season well, but once 
the weather became hot and humid, his hours decreased significantly due to symptoms.  
(Claimant's testimony) 
Claimant testified he has not attempted to obtain a sedentary, less physical job.  
He spoke with an employee at Save-A-Lot regarding a stocker position, but the 
discussion did not bear fruit.  This is the only specific position claimant inquired of which 
fell outside the concrete industry.  (Claimant's testimony) 
Ricardo Ramirez, self-described close friend of claimant, sat for deposition.  
(CE11, Depo. Tr. p. 10)  He testified claimant never complained of headaches or 
physical pain prior to May 19, 2014.  (CE11, Depo. Tr. p. 11)  He admitted he has 
observed claimant in a “handful” of fights over the years.  (CE11, Depo. Tr. p. 12)  In 
response to inquiry regarding whether he knew of any history of claimant’s anxiety or 
depression, Mr. Ramirez replied, “none in any way, shape or form.” (CE11, Depo. Tr. p. 
11)  Mr. Ramirez indicated he observed claimant use marijuana in high school.  (CE11, 
Depo. Tr. p. 11)  Otherwise, he believed claimant sought out illegal substances after the 
work injury, not before.  (CE11, Depo. Tr. p. 12) 
Mr. Ramirez testified that a couple weeks after the work injury, claimant’s 
demeanor and behavior started to go “awry.”  (CE11, Depo. Tr. p. 13)  Mr. Ramirez 
testified claimant was different after this point, looked past people, was unfocused, 
complained about lack of sleep, jumped between topics, was emotional and tearful, and 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 32 
 
spoke of horrible headaches.  (CE11, Depo. Tr. pp. 13-14, 16)  He testified claimant 
was “erratic” and “spiraled.”  (CE11, Depo. Tr. p. 12)  Mr. Ramirez testified claimant 
became erratic, accused Mr. Ramirez of sleeping with claimant’s wife and also broke 
into a neighbor’s garage.  He said claimant was no longer “all there” and even scared 
Mr. Ramirez.  (CE11, Depo. Tr. p. 16)   
Mr. Ramirez testified claimant was “emotionally distraught” about the breakup of 
his marriage.  Following the work injury, claimant could not grasp what was occurring in 
his life and still believed he could “fix” the situation, but behaved irrationally.  (CE11, 
Depo. Tr. p. 21)  Mr. Ramirez was not aware, however, that claimant and his wife were 
living separately before the incident.  (CE11, Depo. Tr. pp. 42-43)  Mr. Ramirez testified 
claimant began to drink heavily and use drugs, worrying his family.  (CE11, Depo. Tr. p. 
15)  Claimant would disappear for days, causing friends and family to search for him.  
(CE11, Depo. Tr. p. 17)  He testified claimant spoke of suicide and hurting others; this, 
as well as his arrests, led to the petitions for involuntary commitment.  (CE11, Depo. Tr. 
p. 29) 
Claimant’s mother, Mary Presson, testified at evidentiary hearing.  She moved 
from Iowa to Carbon Cliff, Illinois in April 2014.  Prior to her move to Illinois, she testified 
she saw her son often and the two were close.  She admitted she saw her son less 
often following her move; however, after his release from jail in February 2015, claimant 
moved into her residence.  Ms. Presson testified she sought to involuntarily commit her 
son because others told her she needed to do so to get him off the streets.  She 
testified he suffered from delusions and hallucinations.  She became fearful for her son.  
(Ms. Presson’s testimony)  
Ms. Presson testified claimant has changed significantly; he becomes obsessed 
and fixated on silly things, cannot tolerate loud noises, is anxious in crowds, cannot stay 
focused, and forgets conversations and events.  She testified he becomes upset if he 
forgets things.  Ms. Presson testified claimant vomits frequently.  For a time, claimant 
seemingly vomited in the driveway every time he left the house to go to work.  She 
testified the vomiting is not always related to going to work, as he also vomited before 
going to doctor’s appointments.  She questioned whether the vomiting was related to 
anxiety.  Ms. Presson testified claimant experienced severe headaches prior to the work 
injury, but indicated claimant now stays in a dark room and she will not see him for 
days.  Ms. Presson expressed optimism regarding claimant’s medical marijuana 
treatment; she indicated claimant has become more talkative and his facial expressions 
are more animated.  (Ms. Presson’s testimony)   
Ms. Presson believes claimant has only worked a limited number of days since 
the work injury.  Ms. Presson works full time, 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through 
Friday.  However, she believes claimant is in his room the majority of the time and she 
would be aware if he left for work based upon the nature in which she keeps her home 
and the presence of his work clothes.  (Ms. Presson's testimony) 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 33 
 
Ms. Presson was visibly distraught during her testimony.  Ms. Presson was 
visibly emotional and appeared significantly troubled by her role in claimant’s legal 
issues.  Beyond her emotional involvement, Ms. Presson appeared genuine and 
credible in her testimony.  Her desire to help her son is clear; however, Ms. Presson is 
either unaware of certain elements of claimant’s life and/or she wishes to downplay his 
undesirable actions.  I, therefore, find Ms. Presson to be a credible witness; however, 
the probative value of her testimony is quite limited.      
Sylvia Reyes testified at evidentiary hearing.  Ms. Reyes has dated claimant 
since March 2015; the two previously dated in the early 2000s.  Between the end of 
their relationship in 2005 and recommencement in 2015, Ms. Reyes did not interact with 
claimant.  Ms. Reyes testified claimant has memory and trust issues, as she will tell him 
about plans she may have and he will deny she ever informed him of her plans.  She 
also testified claimant is paranoid, as he believes she will be unfaithful and others are 
targeting him.  Ms. Reyes testified claimant becomes frustrated and overwhelmed by 
paperwork, is triggered by sound, has a hard time concentrating and focusing, 
sometimes searches for words, and is anxious about leaving the home.  She also 
expressed hope regarding claimant’s improvement with use of medical marijuana, as 
claimant is now calmer, more focused, and more talkative.  (Ms. Reyes’ testimony) 
Ms. Reyes’ testimony was direct, forthcoming, and consistent with the evidentiary 
record.  Her demeanor was excellent and gave the undersigned no reason to doubt her 
veracity.  Ms. Reyes is found credible. 
At the time of evidentiary hearing, claimant was clearly and visibly irritated.  
Claimant’s heightened irritation resulted in him losing his composure on multiple 
occasions; a fact claimant acknowledged at evidentiary hearing.  Claimant’s reactions at 
hearing were erratic, swinging from anger to tearful.  His emotional variation made it 
difficult for the undersigned to assess claimant’s credibility.  While he did not obviously 
demonstrate the typical indicators of an intention to deceive, claimant was not 
forthcoming and at times unresponsive to questioning.  This unresponsiveness could be 
attributable to memory-impairing issues such as potential brain injury, mental health 
conditions, passage of time, after-effects of substance abuse, or deception.  Claimant’s 
demeanor and presentation at hearing quite simply did not assist the undersigned in 
determining whether claimant is a credible witness.   
As a result, I was forced to rely upon the evidentiary record as a whole in order to 
determine if claimant is a credible witness and historian.  Following review of the 
entirety of the records, I conclude he is not.  The evidentiary record is replete with 
examples of incomplete or unsubstantiated statements regarding claimant’s medical, 
legal, and psychiatric histories.  For instance, claimant initially did not mention any 
reports of stuttering or slurred speech until after passage of approximately one week 
following the work injury.  However, by the time of his evaluation by Dr. Milas in 
December 2016, claimant’s reported history of symptoms immediately post-injury 
included a statement that an acquaintance he saw at the pizza restaurant the night of 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 34 
 
his injury informed him he required medical attention and had been slurring his words.  
This history was repeated to the evaluating providers in California.  Claimant also 
testified to this series of events at hearing, but had not done so in his prior depositions.  
Review of the records also revealed claimant regularly downplayed his history of and 
any culpability for his pre-injury legal issues, including numerous arrests and expulsion.  
Similarly, claimant downplayed his history with mental health issues and substance 
abuse.  Furthermore, claimant lays responsibility for his divorce upon his behavior post-
injury, despite the couple separating and living apart several months before the incident.  
This pattern of downplaying negative personal history, while upselling post-injury 
symptomatology, leads the undersigned to doubt claimant’s veracity and ultimately find 
he is not a credible witness or historian.         
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to temporary 
disability benefits from April 23, 2015 through August 24, 2015. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
When an injured worker has been unable to work during a period of recuperation 
from an injury that did not produce permanent disability, the worker is entitled to 
temporary total disability benefits during the time the worker is disabled by the injury.  
Those benefits are payable until the employee has returned to work, or is medically 
capable of returning to work substantially similar to the work performed at the time of 
injury.  Section 85.33(1).  
On March 9, 2015, Dr. Short specifically released claimant to return to work, 
without restrictions.  Dr. Short also, however, noted a caveat that it would be expected 
that claimant may be unable to work for 45 minutes due to cluster headaches.  
Defendants allege this date serves as the end of claimant’s entitlement to temporary 
disability benefits, as it marked the date claimant was determined medically capable of 
returning to substantially similar work as that performed at the time of the injury.  
Defendants paid claimant temporary disability benefits through April 22, 2015.  Claimant 
contends his period of temporary disability benefits should continue until Dr. Short 
placed claimant at MMI on August 24, 2015, interpreting Dr. Short’s caveat as continued 
work restrictions.   
Following Dr. Short’s release on March 9, 2015, claimant did not immediately 
return to work.  The language of Dr. Short’s March 9, 2015 report is, admittedly, 
somewhat ambiguous in that he acknowledged scenarios when claimant would be 
unable to work.  However, Dr. Short specifically released claimant to return to work 
without restrictions.  He did not restrict with specificity claimant’s hours or working 
conditions.  Rather, he stated he would expect claimant would be unable to work during 
periods that were based solely upon claimant’s subjective reports and that may or may 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 35 
 
not come to fruition.  Dr. Short ultimately placed claimant at MMI on August 24, 2015.  
During the intervening period, claimant was also seen by Dr. Tranel, who opined there 
was no basis to expect claimant sustained permanent disability as a result of the work 
injury.   
The caveat stated by Dr. Short did not place regular, verifiable limitations upon 
claimant’s hours, working conditions, or activities; thus, I find it did not preclude claimant 
from returning to substantially similar employment.  When this subjective caveat is 
coupled with claimant’s lack of credibility, I find it would be inappropriate to extend 
claimant’s entitlement to temporary disability benefits based upon a caveat which 
extended claimant control over when he did or did not work, simply by claiming a 
subjective headache.  It is determined claimant has failed to establish entitlement to 
temporary disability benefits from April 23, 2015 through August 24, 2015.    
The next issue for determination is whether the injury is a cause of permanent 
disability. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956).  If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961). 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 36 
 
Claimant alleges a number of conditions of ill-being are causally related to the 
work injury of May 19, 2014.  Such conditions have included, but are not limited to: 
cluster headaches; rage and anger; occasional stuttering; short-term memory loss; 
difficulty reading, sleeping, and concentrating; decreased attention span; anxiety; a 
sensation of heaviness or swelling of his head; challenges with comprehension and 
retention; withdrawn behavior; and loss of temper.  By argument and post-hearing brief, 
claimant has combined these complaints generally into the diagnoses of traumatic brain 
injury, including a permanent aggravation of cluster headaches, and post-concussive 
syndrome.  Defendants argue claimant has failed to prove the work injury was a cause 
of permanent disability, as claimant’s complaints should be classified as preexisting of a 
chronic and severe nature. 
Given the complexity of claimant’s alleged work-related injuries, the opinions 
rendered by medical, psychological, and psychiatric providers are of paramount 
importance.  The claims in this matter ultimately come down to a battle of these experts.     
Claimant relies heavily upon the opinions of Drs. Short, Milas, Miranda, and 
Angelone.  Upon review of the entirety of the evidentiary record, I find these opinions 
insufficient to meet claimant’s burden on causation, in large part based upon inaccurate 
or incomplete histories.  Expert opinions are probative and convincing only if based 
upon accurate and complete information.      
Dr. Short opined the work injury aggravated claimant’s preexisting headache 
condition and he suffered from posttraumatic occipital neuralgia.  However, Dr. Short’s 
opinions are based in significant part upon claimant’s stated pre-injury history and 
subjective reports of worsened symptomatology and triggering post-injury.  At the time 
claimant returned to Dr. Short in July 2014, claimant reported he was headache free for 
a period of years preceding the work injury; the record, however, denotes claimant 
suffered with continued headaches which he self-treated with illegal prescription drugs.  
It is unclear if Dr. Short possessed a full understanding of claimant’s pre-injury head 
injuries and/or substance abuse.  Dr. Short imposed permanent restrictions tied to 
headache triggers, but these triggers are identified solely via claimant’s self-report.  Dr. 
Short acknowledged cluster headaches may occur with or without trauma and, most 
frequently, without trauma.  He was also unable to opine with a reasonable degree of 
certainty whether the cause of occipital neuralgia was cluster headaches themselves or 
trauma.  Due to questions regarding the accuracy of history and reliance upon 
claimant’s subjective complaints, I award Dr. Short’s opinions little weight.  
Dr. Milas diagnosed post-concussion syndrome and cognitive impairment 
secondary to head injury.  In his report of injury to Dr. Milas, claimant reported 
immediate development of stuttering and slurred speech.  He stated these symptoms 
were noted the evening of the work injury by a person he encountered at the pizza 
restaurant.  This report is inconsistent with the contemporaneous medical records.  Dr. 
Milas also noted lesions characteristic of axonal injury as a result of blunt head trauma; 
however, it is unclear whether Dr. Milas was aware of claimant’s prior head injuries.  
Additionally, Dr. Milas diagnosed cognitive impairment based upon his own 
methodology and with contrary findings to Drs. Tranel and Jacoby.  Furthermore, I am 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 37 
 
troubled by Dr. Milas’ opinion that claimant’s work injury was a direct cause of 
claimant’s conditions, specifically including headaches, cognitive dysfunction, and 
behavioral dysfunction, specifically including loss of temper and substance abuse.  
Given claimant’s significant and long-standing history of headaches, mental health 
concerns, physical altercations, and substance abuse, Dr. Milas’ cursory statement fails 
to adequately explain how the ongoing conditions were directly a result of the work 
injury.  Due to inaccuracies in history and lack of adequate explanation distinguishing 
claimant’s pre- and post-injury conditions, I decline to award weight to the opinions of 
Dr. Milas.   
At the referral of legal counsel, claimant traveled to California and was examined 
by Drs. Miranda and Angelone on a one-time basis.  Dr. Miranda’s history is quite short 
and contains inaccuracies, such as to imply that immediately post-injury claimant was 
disoriented, confused, and not making sense; these complaints are inconsistent with the 
contemporaneous records.  Further, Dr. Miranda noted claimant’s prior mental health 
admissions, but seemingly dismissed this factor as due to false allegations that claimant 
was under the influence, when claimant’s testing was always negative which resulted in 
his discharge.  This characterization is patently false, as claimant was admitted on 
multiple occasions due to mental health conditions beyond substance abuse and 
claimant’s medical records denote positive drug screens on multiple occasions.  Given 
the inaccuracies in and truncated nature of Dr. Miranda’s stated history, it is unclear if 
he possessed sufficient historical knowledge to conclude claimant’s 3T MRI results 
showed posttraumatic white matter lesions and that these lesions were attributable to 
the work injury.  Dr. Angelone’s history notes claimant suffered immediate head pain 
and that a patron at the pizza restaurant that evening indicated claimant was slurring his 
words.  As discussed supra, this history is not noted in contemporaneous records.  Dr. 
Angelone also noted claimant reported symptoms of anxiety, depression, personality 
changes, and distress secondary to the traumatic injury.  However, the extent of Dr. 
Angelone’s knowledge of claimant’s preexisting mental health conditions and concurrent 
marital stressors and substance abuse, is unclear.  Due to these inconsistencies and 
questions regarding the completeness of histories, I am unable to award weight to Dr. 
Angelone’s opinion that claimant suffered with personality changes due to traumatic 
brain injury, with associated depression and anxiety. 
The evidentiary record contains numerous medical opinions contradicting the 
opinions relied upon by claimant.  
Shortly following the injury, Dr. Kent found intact memory, no signs of psychosis, 
and no neurological problems aside from a short attention span, which he attributed to 
longstanding headaches.  He assessed: mood disorder; ADHD; alcohol and opiate 
abuse by history; personality disorder with prominent antisocial, dependent, and 
borderline traits; and history of concussion and headaches.  He predicted any 
concussion symptoms were likely to remit within two to four months.   
Treating psychiatrist, Dr. Narayana assessed: bipolar disorder, manic with 
psychotic features; polysubstance abuse; antisocial personality traits; and status post 
head injury.  He opined claimant’s drug use and severe bipolar disorder resulted in 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 38 
 
paranoia and delusions.  Dr. Narayana opined claimant presented with a life-long 
history of unaddressed mood disorder.   
Dr. Tranel performed three neuropsychological assessments, each of which 
revealed normal, intact cognitive function, including memory, attention, concentration, 
speech, and executive functioning.  Dr. Tranel found no evidence of permanent brain 
dysfunction, neurological injury, cognitive impairment, or brain damage attributable to 
the work injury.  He specifically cautioned against an inference of causal connection 
between the work injury and claimant’s headaches, due to preexisting headaches and 
the minor nature of the work injury.  Dr. Tranel opined claimant suffered, at worst, an 
uncomplicated concussion.  Dr. Tranel opined claimant’s psychological condition served 
as the major factor underlying claimant’s cognitive concerns.  He opined claimant’s 
behavioral and psychological adjustment issues appeared longstanding and were not 
attributable to the work injury.  Dr. Tranel opined these conditions may have been 
aggravated due to headache pain, but he was unable to so opine to a reasonable 
degree of certainty due to issues of drug use and psychosocial stress.  Even if an 
aggravation had occurred, Dr. Tranel described it as temporary, with depression and 
anxiety returning to premorbid levels, and found no basis for permanent injury as a 
result of the work injury.  
Treating physician, Dr. Garrels, assessed: chronic cluster headaches, not 
intractable; polysubstance abuse; major depressive disorder; and superficial injury of 
the scalp.  Dr. Garrels opined he did not find evidence of axonal brain injury as opined 
by Dr. Milas.  He also opined claimant’s psychiatric issues bore no relationship to the 
work injury and further, that long-term substance abuse could impact the brain and 
result in emotional and behavioral disorders.  Dr. Garrels opined claimant presented 
with significant preexisting history, including chronic intermittent cluster headaches with 
essentially the same symptom pattern and substance abuse.  He opined the head injury 
temporarily increased claimant’s headaches, but they returned to baseline.  Dr. Garrels 
released claimant to regular duty, without impairment based upon a lack of objective 
findings. 
Dr. Jacoby opined it was possible claimant suffered a concussion as a result of 
the work injury, but found the documentation of supportive symptoms lacking.  He 
opined claimant’s MRI findings were nonspecific and not unique to the type of injury 
claimant suffered.  Dr. Jacoby found no cognitive impairment or permanent impairment.  
He opined it was possible claimant had posttraumatic headaches for a time post-injury, 
but such headaches had resolved.  Dr. Jacoby opined that posttraumatic headaches are 
not the same as cluster headaches.  He ultimately opined that any continued headache 
issues were attributable to claimant’s long-standing headache problems.  Dr. Jacoby 
dismissed claimant’s complaints of inability to hold up his head and stuttering as 
unfounded, given the minimal focus of care beyond subjective reports and lack of 
observation during evaluation.  
Ultimately, it is claimant’s burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence 
that the work injury was a cause of permanent impairment.  Following review of the 
entirety of the record, I find claimant has not met that burden.  Claimant was not a 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 39 
 
credible witness or historian, leading the undersigned to question the accuracy of 
reports relied upon by the experts in this case.  After such consideration and on weight 
of the evidence, claimant fell short of establishing his injury resulted in permanent 
disability.  Claimant’s claims are plausible, but mere plausibility is insufficient.  While it 
may be tempting to point to the work injury as a “turning point” in claimant’s condition, 
correlation does not imply causation.  It is also too simplistic and an example of the post 
hoc fallacy to state to a requisite certainty that because these events and worsened 
conditions happened temporally following the work injury that they are the result of the 
work injury.  
As claimant has failed to meet his burden of proving the work injury was a cause 
of permanent disability, consideration of the issues of extent of permanent disability, 
commencement date for permanent disability benefits, and any penalty benefits due on 
permanency benefits is unnecessary, as moot.  
The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to penalty 
benefits under Iowa Code section 86.13 and, if so, how much. 
Claimant argues he is entitled to penalty benefits based upon an underpayment 
on weekly benefit rate.  On the hearing report, the parties stipulated that at the time of 
the work injury, claimant’s gross earnings were $845.00 and claimant was married and 
entitled to 4 exemptions.  The proper rate of compensation is therefore, $562.45.  Any 
weekly indemnity benefits paid should have been paid at this rate of compensation.  
Claimant alleges temporary total disability benefits were paid at a lower rate; however, 
the hearing report does not contain a stipulation as to temporary disability benefits paid 
and indemnity logs are not in evidence.  As a result, I am unable to determine if 
claimant’s temporary total disability benefits were underpaid and no penalty benefits can 
be awarded absent this determination. 
The final issue for determination is a specific taxation of costs pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 86.40 and rule 876 IAC 4.33.  Claimant requests taxation of a significant 
number of costs, as found in Claimant’s Exhibit 12.  Claimant failed to prevail on any 
issue presented for determination at hearing, and as such, taxation of costs against 
defendants is unwarranted.   
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
The parties are ordered to comply with all stipulations that have been accepted 
by this agency. 
Claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings.  
Defendants shall receive credit for benefits paid. 

PRESSON V. FREIBURGER CONCRETE AND TOPSOIL, INC. 
Page 40 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to claimant pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.   
Signed and filed this ____17TH____ day of March, 2021. 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 ERICA J. FITCH            
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
            COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Jerry Soper (via WCES) 
Peter Thill (via WCES) 
Edward Rose (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
