Case Number: 22700490.01
Case Title:  RAHBUSCH, THOMAS V. PELLA CORP/2ND INJ-FUND
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Rahbusch Thomas-22700490.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
THOMAS RAHBUSCH, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
               File No. 22700490.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          
PELLA CORP, 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                        
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  : 
       Head Note Nos.: 1100; 1402.30 
 
 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant, Thomas Rahbusch, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits against Pella Corporation, self-insured employer, for an alleged 
work injury date of April 5, 2022. Claimant has included a claim against the Second 
Injury Fund of Iowa (“Fund”), alleging a first qualifying loss in 1985. The case came 
before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on July 14, 2023. Pursuant to an order 
of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this case proceeded to a live video 
hearing via Zoom, with all parties and the court reporter appearing remotely. The 
hearing proceeded without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 4, Defendant’s Exhibits A through F, and Fund Exhibit AA.  
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. Levi Schoonhoven testified on behalf of the 
employer. The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on 
July 14, 2023. The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on September 1, 2023, and the 
case was considered fully submitted on that date. 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Apr-05  11:25:49     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

RAHBUSCH V. PELLA CORP./SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
The existence of an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged  
injury; 
2. 
Whether claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of 
employment on April 5, 2022; 
3. 
Whether the injury caused temporary disability, and if so, whether claimant is 
entitled to temporary total disability and/or healing period benefits; 
4. 
Whether the injury caused permanent disability, and if so, whether claimant is 
entitled to permanent partial disability benefits; 
5. 
Payment of certain medical expenses; 
6. 
Payment of claimant’s independent medical examination (IME) under Iowa 
Code section 85.39; 
7. 
Whether claimant sustained a prior qualifying loss for Fund purposes in 1985; 
8. 
If so, the functional loss from the prior qualifying loss; 
9. 
Whether claimant sustained a compensable second qualifying loss on April 5, 
2022; 
10. 
If so, the commencement date for Fund benefits; and 
11. 
Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 63-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, 
page 9) Claimant is a high school graduate, and served in the United States Army until 
approximately 1986. (Tr., p. 10) After being honorably discharged from the Army, 
claimant took some classes at what was then called Northwest Iowa Technical College. 
(Tr., p. 11) He took classes in instrumentation tech, and said he received a diploma but 
was one credit short to receive a degree. 
 
 
After leaving the Army, claimant worked at Paullina Lamb Pack. (Tr., p. 11) He 
said it was a very tough job, and he was injured while working when he slipped and fell. 
(Tr., pp. 11-12) He next worked at Wilson’s Foods in Cherokee, Iowa, for about two 
years. (Tr., p. 12) While working there he had carpal tunnel surgery on both hands. (Tr., 
p. 16) He then worked for a short time at Interstates Electric, but was not making 
enough money so he left and got a job at Beef Specialists of Iowa. At some point while 
working there he sustained a lower back injury, which resolved without surgery. (Tr., p. 
17) He worked there from 1990 until 2002, when the company announced that 
operations were being moved to Minnesota. Claimant did not want to move to 
Minnesota, so he left that position and was hired at Pella Windows in Sioux Center.  
 
 
Clamant started working for Pella on April 22, 2002. (Tr., p. 13) Shortly after 
being hired, while still in training, claimant sustained a work-related injury when he 
tripped while carrying a large pane of glass and cut his pinky finger. (Tr., pp. 17-18) 

RAHBUSCH V. PELLA CORP./SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
Claimant’s job mainly consisted of cutting parts to make windows fit. (Tr., p. 21) He 
testified that 95 percent of his time at work was spent standing on a concrete floor. (Tr., 
p. 22) Claimant was required to wear steel-toed boots while working. 
 
 
In addition to prior workers’ compensation injuries, claimant also has some prior 
non-occupational health issues. In 1966 claimant had a depressed skull fracture when 
he was accidentally run over by a truck. (Tr., p. 15) In 2017 claimant missed work for a 
time due to non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. (Tr., p. 14)  
 
Claimant was also diagnosed with diabetes in 2016 by John Weber, M.D. (Joint 
Exhibit 2, p. 9) Medical records indicate claimant was reluctant to start insulin for quite 
some time after his initial diagnosis. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 11-14) On December 11, 2019, he 
was seen for cellulitis in his right great toe, and the medical record notes he is a 
“noncompliant diabetic.” (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 18-19) He was seen again on May 26, 2020 for a 
right great toe wound. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 20) He noted at that time that his wife trimmed the 
callus on his toe every one to two weeks with a battery-operated foot file/callus remover. 
Dr. Weber sent him to wound care, where the callus was pared down. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 21) 
Claimant was advised of the importance of good-fitting shoes to prevent further injury to 
the area, as well as regular foot and nail care due to diabetes and other co-morbidities. 
 
 
On September 28, 2021, claimant reported to the emergency room with toe pain. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 22) He reported a wound on his toe for months that had been hurting more. 
The record notes he had been seeing “the wound people” and a podiatrist, Sara Oelke, 
DPM. He was started on antibiotics and scheduled to see the wound nurse the following 
day. The wound nurse noted that he had the wound for approximately one year, but it 
had become worse over the last month. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 23) At that time, selective 
debridement was completed, and the assessment was diabetic, neuropathic full-
thickness wound. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 24-25) He continued to follow up with wound care 
regularly, with the goal of healing the wound by December 30, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 26-
33) On October 20, 2021, Dr. Oelke was contacted regarding the condition of his toe, 
and she requested an x-ray. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 36)  
 
 
Claimant saw Dr. Oelke on October 25, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 102) Her record notes 
that wound care was concerned about a bone infection in the big toe. Claimant followed 
up with wound care on November 17, 2021, and at that time he complained of 
discomfort in the right posterior heel area, in addition to his toe. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 43) With 
respect to his toe, Dr. Oelke eventually sent claimant for an MRI, which was done on 
November 29, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 104) Dr. Oelke also cultured the bone from the distal 
phalanx. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 105) On December 3, 2021, Dr. Oelke advised claimant he had a 
bone infection in the big toe, and recommended distal amputation of the proximal 
phalanx. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 106-107) The surgery was performed, consisting of a distal 
amputation of the right hallux and flexor tenotomy of the second toe of the right foot. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 108) 
 
 
At a follow up with Dr. Oelke on December 15, 2021, claimant had an ulceration 
on the right second toe, which was debrided. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 110) He continued with 

RAHBUSCH V. PELLA CORP./SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
regular follow up appointments, and on January 18, 2022, he told Dr. Oelke that he 
noticed his third toe was looking worse. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 114) He denied any injury. Dr. 
Oelke noted hammertoes, and discussed a flexor tenotomy of the third toe if it did not 
improve. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 115) On January 26, 2022, claimant had a flexor tenotomy of the 
right third and fourth toes. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 116) He continued with regular follow up 
appointments following surgery. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 117-129) 
 
 
At his follow up on March 15, 2022, claimant reported that he had been working 
the past two weeks, and noticed a blood blister on the fifth toe, as well as pain along the 
back of the right heel. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 130) He denied any new injury and stated he was 
wearing his post-operative shoe at work daily. He reported sharp and aching pain in the 
back of the heel when walking. On examination, Dr. Oelke noted pain in the posterior 
Achilles tendon insertion of the right heel and swelling at the insertion site. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 
131) She also noted good strength to the Achilles at that time. X-rays showed a 
calcaneal spur. Dr. Oelke’s diagnoses included Achilles tendonitis, right leg, and 
calcaneal spur, right foot. She recommended custom functional orthotics and instructed 
claimant on heel cord stretches. She also dispensed a large heel lift to try to shorten the 
Achilles when walking.  
 
 
At his next follow up on March 30, 2022, claimant continued to complain of pain 
along the back of the right heel. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 132) He stated he was wearing his boots 
at work daily. There was still swelling present at the posterior Achilles tendon insertion, 
and Dr. Oelke again instructed claimant about the benefits of proper shoes and heel 
cord stretches. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 133) Claimant was also referred for physical therapy for the 
Achilles tendonitis. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 134) 
 
 
On April 5, 2022, claimant was suspended from work pending an investigation. 
(Defendants’ Exhibit A, p. 14) Claimant testified that another team member came to him 
and told him that he was messing up and providing the wrong parts. (Tr., p. 24) In the 
employer’s investigative report, claimant said that a coworker named Angie came to tell 
him that Bill was receiving the wrong parts. (Def. Ex. A, p. 13) He said that he was doing 
exactly what the computer told him to do, and was not purposefully providing bad parts. 
(Tr., p. 24; Def. Ex. A, p. 13) He then told Angie to “tell Bill to fuck off.” (Id.; see also Def. 
Ex. A, p. 16) 
 
 
A little bit later, claimant’s supervisor, Levi Schoonhoven, approached claimant 
and took him to meet with Ashley Dominguez, a human resources representative. (Def. 
Ex. A, p. 12; Tr., pp. 25-27) The decision was made to place claimant on suspension 
pending investigation, due to claimant’s prior disciplinary record, including a prior Class 
2 Corrective Action letter within a 24-month period. (Def. Ex. A, p. 14) The investigative 
report indicates that claimant and Levi left the conference room to gather claimant’s 
belongings at 4:04 p.m., and claimant left the building at 4:12 p.m. Claimant testified 
that he turned in his employee badge, and then cleaned his personal belongings out of 
his locker and walked out. (Tr, p. 28) He said he thought Levi was “in tow,” but when he 
looked back Levi was not there at the door. As he left, he said that he walked down the 
sidewalk and into the parking lot, and there is a small step down into the parking lot, like 

RAHBUSCH V. PELLA CORP./SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
a curb. He said when his foot hit the parking lot surface, he felt “a pop and then pain, 
and it stopped me in my tracks.” The pain was in the calf and ankle area on the right 
side. (Tr., p. 29) Claimant testified that when he felt the pop in his calf/ankle area, it 
stopped him in his tracks “momentarily, maybe a minute, two minutes.” (Tr., p. 53) He 
said it happened before he reached his vehicle, and he had immediate difficulty walking. 
(Tr., pp. 33; 53) He did not see Levi around when it happened. He testified that he was 
told not to talk to any team members or supervisors during his suspension, and since he 
no longer had his badge, he was not able to reenter the building. (Tr., pp. 29-30) As 
such, he did not immediately report the incident.  
 
 
On April 11, 2022, Judy Delperdang, Human Resources Manager for Pella, 
called claimant with Levi to notify him that the decision had been made to move forward 
with separation of employment due to him receiving two Class A Corrective Action 
letters within a 24-month period. (Def. Ex. A, p. 15) Ms. Delperdang’s notes from the 
phone call indicate that claimant stated there were several things he had brought up to 
Levi that he said were unresolved and/or he was unresponsive to. When Ms. 
Delperdang asked him what he was referencing, he said he “had an injury with his foot 
that we were doing nothing about.” Ms. Delperdang’s notes state she explained to 
claimant that she was not aware there was a workers’ compensation injury reported, 
and that her understanding was that his situation was personal medical and he was 
covered under short-term disability. Her notes indicate claimant was “combative” 
throughout the conversation and at one point he indicated he was going to talk to his 
lawyer.  
 
 
Claimant was also sent a discharge letter, which is dated April 6, 2022. (Def. Ex. 
A, pp. 16-17) Claimant testified the letter came four or five days after he was suspended 
from work, but he could not remember whether he received the letter before or after the 
phone call. (Tr., p. 51) Claimant testified that he was “a slight bit” angry that he was 
being suspended, and “befuddled” when he was terminated from employment. (Tr., pp. 
51-52) 
 
 
Levi Schoonhoven also testified. I found Mr. Schoonhoven to be a highly credible 
witness. Mr. Schoonhoven graduated from Dordt University with a business degree in 
May of 2020. (Tr., p. 85) He started working for Pella about a month prior to graduation, 
in April of 2020. (Tr., p. 86) At the time of hearing, Mr. Schoonhoven was no longer 
employed with Pella, as he had moved for family reasons. He left his employment at 
Pella voluntarily at the beginning of February 2023. While working at Pella, Mr. 
Schoonhoven was a department manager, first in the value-add department, and then 
the CM3 and metal parts department. (Tr., pp. 86-87)  
 
While in the value-add department, Mr. Schoonhoven was claimant’s manager, 
and his job duties included handling disciplinary issues. (Tr., pp. 87-88) He testified that 
claimant did have some disciplinary issues, most of which involved respectful work 
environment issues in which claimant used profanity with other team members or in the 
area around other team members. (Tr., p. 90) He testified that prior to the April 5, 2022 
meeting with claimant, he had several documented conversations with claimant, both 

RAHBUSCH V. PELLA CORP./SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
formal and informal, regarding respectful work environment. He stated that on April 5, 
2022, he heard claimant swearing at someone, and had a conversation with him and 
then went and sat down with human resources, where the decision was made to 
suspend his employment. (Tr., p. 91) 
 
After he was suspended, claimant was allowed to collect his personal 
belongings. Mr. Schoonhoven testified that he then escorted claimant to the exit doors, 
and then stood in the entryway and watched claimant exit the facility, walk into the 
parking lot, get into his pickup, and drive off the premises. (Tr., pp. 91-92) He testified 
that he did not see anything abnormal. (Tr., p. 92) He did not see claimant stop walking 
for any period of time. It was not raining. He did not see claimant slip or fall down. He 
did not see claimant grab at his right heel or calf area. (Tr., p. 93) He did not see 
claimant walk differently or having difficulty bearing weight on his right leg. He testified 
that claimant walked with his typical gait to his truck. He did not see anything out of the 
ordinary while claimant walked to his truck. (Tr., p. 95) 
 
Mr. Schoonhoven was later on the phone call when claimant was informed of his 
termination. (Tr., p. 93) He testified that claimant did not report during that call that he 
injured his Achilles while stepping off the curb. He was later on another call with 
claimant regarding unemployment benefits, and likewise testified that claimant did not 
discuss or describe injuring his Achilles while stepping off a curb. (Tr., pp. 93-94) He 
testified that claimant never reported to him that he injured his Achilles while stepping 
off a curb. (Tr., p. 94) Mr. Schoonhoven testified that he stayed at the door of the 
building and watched claimant walk to his vehicle through the window. (Tr., pp. 95-96) 
He said from his location to the end of the sidewalk was about 50 to 60 feet, and from 
his location to claimant’s vehicle was about 100 feet. (Tr., p. 96) He testified that 
claimant was not particularly upset after the conversation in which he was suspended; 
noting he was “not happy about the situation, but . . . handled it very respectfully with us 
and understood what we were saying.” (Tr., p. 97) 
 
The first time claimant saw a doctor after his suspension and termination from 
employment was April 12, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 135) At that time, he returned to Dr. Oelke 
for his regular post-operative follow up of his prior toe surgeries. He reported increased 
pain along the back of his right heel. Dr. Oelke’s record states that claimant “noticed last 
week that he slipped on the right foot, and he felt a pain that was sharp and stabbing to 
the right heel.” He reported the area seemed to be more swollen and was having pain in 
the back of the heel with walking and standing. He had not tried to treat the area and 
had not attended physical therapy. On physical examination, Dr. Oelke noted pain and 
swelling at the insertion site of the Achilles tendon right heel, and a palpable dell just 
proximal of the insertion site with increased swelling. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 136) She was 
concerned about a full or partial rupture of the Achilles and recommended an MRI of the 
right ankle. She also provided a cam boot for him to wear, and instructed him to wear it 
at all times for his Achilles tendonitis and related symptoms. 
 
 
There is a note in the record dated April 22, 2022, indicating that claimant’s 
insurance had advised no prior authorization was needed for the MRI. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 137) 

RAHBUSCH V. PELLA CORP./SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
The note further states that claimant did not answer his phone when Dr. Oelke’s office 
called him to advise that the MRI order had been faxed. At his next visit on April 26, 
2022, claimant told Dr. Oelke that he was unable to get the MRI due to insurance, but 
was starting new insurance the next month. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 138) He advised he had not 
been wearing the cam boot, but said his pain was much better and the area was less 
swollen. He still had pain in the back of the heel with walking and standing, but it was 
better than the week prior. Dr. Oelke again recommended an MRI and instructed 
claimant to wear the cam boot at all times. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 139)  
 
 
Claimant had an MRI of the right ankle on May 2, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 66) The MRI 
showed a complete rupture of the Achilles tendon at the insertion of the calcaneus. The 
torn tendon fibers were retracted approximately four centimeters. The MRI also found 
extensive soft tissue edema throughout the ankle and proximal foot; thickening of the 
plantar fascia possibly related to chronic plantar fibromatosis; and was not able to 
exclude a split tear of the peroneus brevis tendon, although there was no significant 
surrounding edema.  
 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Oelke on May 10, 2022 to discuss his MRI. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 
140) He had not been wearing the cam boot, but again said his pain was much better. 
Dr. Oelke recommended surgery, but wanted claimant to be evaluated by Phinit 
Phisitkul, M.D. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 141) Claimant saw Dr. Phisitkul on May 16, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 143) His notes indicate that claimant felt a pop at the back of his right heel a few 
months ago, and now cannot walk well due to the lack of strength. On physical 
examination, Dr. Phisitkul noted swelling at the posterior aspect of the Achilles tendon, 
and a palpable gap at the Achilles tendon insertion. He reviewed the MRI and noted 
evidence of a complete rupture of the Achilles tendon insertions with a five-centimeter 
retraction. His impression was chronic rupture of the Achilles tendon insertion, along 
with a hammertoe deformity of the fifth toe. He recommended surgery to both repair the 
Achilles tendon and correct the hammertoe deformity. 
 
 
Claimant had a preoperative examination with Dr. Weber on May 23, 2022. (Jt. 
Ex. 2, p. 67) Dr. Weber noted claimant was planning to have surgery for his hammertoe 
deformity and also debridement and repair of the Achilles tendon. His record states that 
claimant “has been battling these problems and discomfort for some time now and 
surgery has now been planned.”  
 
 
Claimant had surgery on May 26, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 157) Dr. Phisitkul performed 
a flexor hallucis longus tendon transfer to the calcaneus, secondary repair of the 
“chronic degenerative rupture” of the Achilles tendon, and fifth hammertoe repair with 
soft tissue release. In his operative note, Dr. Phisitkul notes that the Achilles tendon was 
repaired “due to degenerative rupture,” and the degenerative part of the tendon was 
removed. His notes further indicate that claimant was to be non-weightbearing for six 
weeks, followed by progressive weightbearing. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 158) He was to use a knee 
scooter for ambulation. 
 

RAHBUSCH V. PELLA CORP./SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
 
Claimant saw Dr. Phisitkul for a post-operative follow-up on June 10, 2022. (Jt. 
Ex. 4, p. 147) His record indicates that claimant had been noncompliant and had been 
walking on his leg. He recommended claimant strictly avoid weightbearing on the right 
foot. At his next visit on July 12, 2022, claimant had been doing well, and had been 
walking only a few steps with a cast on. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 149) At that time claimant had 
good ankle range of motion and strength. He recommended progressive weightbearing 
using a walking boot, and advised claimant not to over-do it or the reconstruction could 
fail. He was advised not to walk without the boot. At his next visit on August 23, 2022, 
claimant was doing well, and had been walking with normal shoes already. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
151) Dr. Phisitkul recommended physical therapy, and advised he could use normal 
shoes or work boots as tolerated.  
 
 
Claimant’s first physical therapy appointment took place on August 26, 2022. (Jt. 
Ex. 2, p. 69) He told the therapist that he recalled injuring his right Achilles on April 5, 
2022, the same day he was terminated from his job at Pella Windows. He said that as 
he was leaving the parking lot that day, he stepped off a curb and felt the pain in his 
right heel. This was the first time claimant provided this detailed description of how his 
injury occurred to any medical professional. As claimant progressed in physical therapy, 
his therapist noted more than once that claimant was pondering whether he wanted to 
return to work or retire. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 69, 75, 77, 78, 81, 83, 86)  
 
By October 4, 2022, claimant was having some improvement in his function with 
physical therapy, and Dr. Phisitkul recommended he continue in order to build up 
strength. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 154) He was told to increase activities as tolerated and was 
allowed to “return to work that suits him.” The record notes that claimant was 
unemployed at that time, but planning to look for a job. Physical therapy records note 
claimant had applied for a job at Diamond Vogel, but was also considering retirement. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 76-83) In November, it appears claimant began to consider going back to 
school to obtain a business degree. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 88-91) On November 17, 2022, 
claimant cancelled his physical therapy appointment due to feeling frustrated with the 
lack of progress. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 94) The note indicated that he did not wish to continue 
physical therapy. However, claimant did return on December 9, 2022, and continued 
with physical therapy until December 30, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 95-101) 
 
His last visit with Dr. Phisitkul was on January 9, 2023, at which time he reported 
doing normal activities with minimal pain. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 156) He still felt his right ankle 
was slightly weaker than his left, and Dr. Phisitkul documented grade 4+ strength on 
physical examination. Claimant was to continue with progressive activities using normal 
shoes, and Dr. Phisitkul noted that he had reasonable strength and should not have any 
difficulties in the future. He was told to continue with Dr. Oelke for foot care and follow 
up with Dr. Phisitkul as needed.  
 
  
 
Claimant attended an independent medical evaluation (IME) with Sunil Bansal, 
M.D., on April 27, 2023. (Claimant’s Exhibit 3, p. 31) Dr. Bansal reviewed medical 
records from Dr. Oelke and Dr. Phisitkul, as well as the MRI report, surgical report, and 
physical therapy records. (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 31-35) Under the description of the injury, Dr. 

RAHBUSCH V. PELLA CORP./SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
Bansal wrote that claimant sustained an injury to his right foot on April 5, 2022. (Cl. Ex. 
3, p. 35) He stated that claimant “had been dealing with a callous on his toe that had 
burst, resulting in an ulcer. He informed his supervisor of his condition, and as he was 
leaving work, he stepped off a curb that he was unaware of and had considerable foot 
pain.”  
 
 
 
In his description of claimant’s treatment, Dr. Bansal briefly outlined claimant’s 
toe issues and treatment with Dr. Oelke. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 36) He then stated that after 
claimant’s work injury, his foot difficulties worsened to the point he had difficulty walking 
and began to drag his leg. Dr. Bansal stated that workers’ compensation referred 
claimant to Dr. Phisitkul and was found to have an Achilles tendon rupture for which he 
had surgery.  
 
 
On physical examination, Dr. Bansal noted tenderness to palpation over the right 
Achilles, along with swelling. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 37) He also measured some diminished 
range of motion in the ankle. His diagnosis was right Achilles tendon rupture, right fifth 
hammertoe deformity; status post right flexor hallucis longus tendon transfer to the 
calcaneus, secondary repair of the chronic degenerative rupture of the Achilles tendon, 
and fifth hammertoe repair with soft tissue release. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 38) He agreed with Dr. 
Phisitkul that claimant reached maximum medical improvement (MMI) on January 9, 
2023. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 39)  
 
 
With respect to causation, Dr. Bansal opined that claimant incurred an Achilles 
tendon tear from stepping off the curb. He stated that an “abrupt and forceful movement 
such as stepping off a curb can place an increased load on the Achilles tendon, 
especially if the individual is not prepared for the drop or lands awkwardly, resulting in 
an Achilles tendon tear.” Using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, he assigned a seven percent lower extremity impairment 
rating, based on claimant’s dorsiflexion measurement. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 39) Finally, he 
recommended permanent restrictions of no prolonged walking or standing greater than 
one hour at a time, and to avoid walking on uneven ground. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 40) 
 
 
There are some issues with Dr. Bansal’s IME report. First is his description of the 
injury, as Dr. Bansal states that claimant stepped off a curb that he was not aware of. 
(Cl. Ex. 3, p. 35) To the contrary, claimant testified that he knew about the curb as it has 
been there for 20 years, and he had parked in basically the same parking spot for 20 
years. (Tr., pp. 71-72) This is relevant because in his causation opinion, Dr. Bansal 
states that an “abrupt and forceful movement such as stepping off a curb can place an 
increased load on the Achilles tendon, especially if the individual is not prepared for the 
drop or lands awkwardly, resulting in an Achilles tendon tear.” (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 39) 
(emphasis added) There is no indication in the record that claimant landed awkwardly 
when stepping off the curb, and it is clear he was not unfamiliar with it. The inaccuracies 
in Dr. Bansal’s understanding of the facts make his causation opinion unreliable. 
 
 
In addition, claimant’s entire account of what happened after he exited the 
building on April 5, 2022 was refuted by the credible testimony of Levi Schoonhoven. 

RAHBUSCH V. PELLA CORP./SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 10 
 
Mr. Schoonhoven no longer works at Pella and has no reason to falsify his testimony. I 
found him to be a highly credible witness. He watched claimant leave the building and 
walk all the way to his vehicle, and did not see claimant “stop in his tracks,” did not see 
claimant limp or otherwise walk differently, and stated it was not raining at the time 
claimant left. (Tr., pp. 91-93) He testified that claimant walked with a normal gait all the 
way to his vehicle. (Tr., p. 93) Further, claimant never reported to Mr. Schoonhoven that 
he injured his Achilles tendon at work. (Tr., p. 94)  
 
 
Claimant’s own testimony during hearing calls his credibility into question with 
respect to mechanism of injury. Claimant initially testified that as he stepped into the 
parking lot, there is a small step and as he hit the parking lot surface, he felt a pop and 
the pain. (Tr., p. 29) However, at his first visit with Dr. Oelke after the alleged incident, 
on April 12, 2022, he stated that he “slipped” on the right foot and felt a pain in his right 
heel. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 135) Claimant first testified that he remembered telling Dr. Oelke this 
when saw her. (Tr., p. 31) However, when confronted with the difference between 
stepping off a curb and slipping, claimant testified he could not remember the 
conversation with Dr. Oelke verbatim, but he said he “stepped off of the curb and it was 
raining, and I could have probably – possibly said I slipped.” (Tr., p. 59) Then, when 
asked if he had reason to dispute the fact that Dr. Oelke’s records contain no reference 
to the mechanism of injury involving stepping off a curb, claimant testified that it was not 
discussed: “It wasn’t brought up.”  (Tr., p. 61) 
 
 
There is also no mention in Dr. Phisitkul’s records of claimant injuring his Achilles 
tendon when stepping off a curb at work. Claimant testified that he does not think it 
came up, and Dr. Phisitkul never asked him. (Tr., pp. 61-62) He did admit to telling Dr. 
Phisitkul that he experienced a pop and a sharp pain that stopped him in his tracks, 
however. (Tr., p. 62) Again, however, there is no reference in any of Dr. Oelke’s records 
or Dr. Phisitkul’s records that claimant ever indicated that he injured his Achilles tendon 
at work. The first and only mention in any treatment records of claimant injuring his 
Achilles when he stepped off a curb exiting Pella was in his physical therapy note dated 
August 26, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 69) 
 
Finally, the medical records clearly document that claimant began having issues 
with his Achilles tendon prior to April 5, 2022. He complained about heel pain while in 
wound care on November 17, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 43) Dr. Oelke noted the pain and 
swelling as early as March 15, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 130) He testified that Dr. Oelke told 
him in March of 2022 that something in his Achilles area had “slipped, something had 
readjusted -- something had gone awry, and she was concerned.” (Tr., p. 83) He told 
Dr. Phisitkul on May 16, 2022 that he had felt a pop at the back of his heel a few months 
prior. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 143) Additionally, Dr. Phisitkul diagnosed the Achilles tendon tear as 
chronic in nature, as opposed to the acute injury claimant has alleged. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 157) 
In his operative report he described the repair of the Achilles tendon due to 
“degenerative rupture.”  
 
The evidence, when viewed as a whole, does not support a finding that 
claimant’s Achilles tendon injury arose out of and in the course of his employment with 

RAHBUSCH V. PELLA CORP./SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 11 
 
Pella. There are inconsistencies in claimant’s testimony regarding the mechanism of 
injury, and claimant’s testimony was directly contradicted by Mr. Schoonhoven. There 
are additional inconsistencies between the medical records involving treatment and Dr. 
Bansal’s IME. Dr. Bansal’s causation opinion is based on inaccurate information 
regarding the mechanism of injury. The medical records also point to claimant’s Achilles 
tendon rupture being a chronic, degenerative rupture, as opposed to a traumatic rupture 
as claimant has alleged. Claimant has not proven by a preponderance of the evidence 
that his Achilles tendon injury arose out of and in the course of his employment with 
Pella. As such, all other issues, including claimant’s claim for benefits against the 
Second Injury Fund, are moot. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.904(3).  
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995). An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma. The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes of 
nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body. Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence. Injuries that result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable. Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however. Ellingson v. 
Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440 (Iowa 1999); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 
379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 

RAHBUSCH V. PELLA CORP./SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 12 
 
cause. A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974).  
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
In this case, I found that claimant has not met his burden to prove that his 
Achilles tendon injury arose out of and in the course of his employment with Pella. 
There are inconsistencies in claimant’s testimony regarding the mechanism of injury, 
and claimant’s testimony was directly contradicted by Mr. Schoonhoven. There are 
additional inconsistencies between the medical records involving treatment and Dr. 
Bansal’s IME. Dr. Bansal’s causation opinion is based on inaccurate information 
regarding the mechanism of injury. The medical records also point to claimant’s Achilles 
tendon rupture being a chronic, degenerative rupture, as opposed to a traumatic rupture 
as claimant has alleged. 
Because claimant has not proven his injury arose out of and in the course of his 
employment, all other issues are moot, including his claim against the Second Injury 
Fund of Iowa. Section 85.64 governs Second Injury Fund liability. Before liability of the 
Fund is triggered, three requirements must be met. First, the employee must have lost 
or lost the use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye. Second, the employee must sustain a 
loss or loss of use of another specified member or organ through a compensable injury. 
Third, permanent disability must exist as to both the initial injury and the second 
injury.     
The Second Injury Fund Act exists to encourage the hiring of handicapped 
persons by making a current employer responsible only for the amount of disability 
related to an injury occurring while that employer employed the handicapped individual 
as if the individual had had no preexisting disability. See Anderson v. Second Injury 
Fund, 262 N.W.2d 789 (Iowa 1978); 15 Iowa Practice, Workers’ Compensation, Lawyer, 
Section 17:1, p. 211 (2014-2015).   
The Fund is responsible for the Industrial disability present after the second injury 
that exceeds the disability attributable to the first and second injuries. Section 
85.64. Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467 (Iowa 1990); Second 

RAHBUSCH V. PELLA CORP./SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 13 
 
Injury Fund v. Neelans, 436 N.W.2d 335 (Iowa 1989); Second Injury Fund v. Mich Coal 
Co., 274 N.W.2d 300 (Iowa 1979).   
In this case, I found that claimant failed to prove his Achilles tendon injury arose 
out of and in the course of his employment on April 5, 2022. Therefore, I conclude he 
has not proven a second qualifying injury. All other issues pertaining to the Second 
Injury Fund claim are rendered moot by this decision. I conclude claimant has failed to 
establish entitlement to benefits from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa. 
With respect to costs, assessment of costs is a discretionary function of this 
agency. Iowa Code § 10A.328. Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy 
commissioner or workers’ compensation commissioner hearing the case. 876 IAC 4.33. 
Given that claimant was unsuccessful on the merits of his claim, I decline to assess 
costs against defendant employer. 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
Claimant shall take nothing in this proceeding. 
The parties shall bear their own costs. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this _5th _ day of April, 2024. 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Brian Keit (via WCES) 
Matthew Phillips (via WCES) 
Andrew Duffelmeyer (via WCES) 
 

RAHBUSCH V. PELLA CORP./SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 14 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days from the date 
above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ 
Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the 
following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, 
Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a 
weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
