Case Number: 5068270
Case Title:  VAN GORP, DARIN V. ANDERSON ERICKSON DAIRY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Van Gorp Darin-5068270R.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DARIN VAN GORP, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
               File No. 5068270 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  REVIEW-REOPENING         
ANDERSON ERICKSON DAIRY, 
  : 
 
 
 
 
  :                            DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
TRAVELERS INDEMNITY CO. OF CT,   : 
Head Note Nos: 1302.1; 1402.40; 
 
 
  : 
1704; 1803; 1808; 2501; 2502; 2701; 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
2905; 2907 
 
Defendants. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Darin Van Gorp filed a petition for review-reopening, seeking additional 
permanent partial disability benefits from Anderson Erickson Dairy, employer, and 
Travelers Indemnity Company of Connecticut, insurer, for an accepted work injury date 
of October 9, 2014. Specifically, claimant seeks to review and reopen an agreement for 
settlement that was approved by this agency on May 11, 2016. The case came before 
the undersigned for a review-reopening hearing on August 19, 2020. This case was 
scheduled to be an in-person hearing occurring in Des Moines. However, due to the 
outbreak of a pandemic in Iowa, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
ordered all hearings to occur via video means, using Court Call. Accordingly, this case 
proceeded to a live video hearing via Court Call with all parties and the court reporter 
appearing remotely.  
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 6, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 5, and Defendants’ Exhibits A and B.  
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. No other witnesses testified. The evidentiary 
record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on August 19, 2020. The 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Aug-16  13:25:45     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

VAN GORP V. ANDERSON ERICKSON DAIRY 
Page 2 
 
parties submitted post-hearing briefs on September 4, 2020, and the case was 
considered fully submitted on that date. 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. Whether claimant has proven a change of condition and/or is entitled to 
additional permanency benefits under review-reopening; 
2. If so, the extent of additional permanent disability to which claimant is entitled; 
3. The proper commencement date for payment of additional benefits, if any; 
4. The proper amount of credit to which defendants are entitled; 
5. Payment of claimant’s independent medical evaluation; 
6. Alternate medical care pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27; and 
7. Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
his demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
Claimant was 49 years old at the time of hearing. (Claimant’s Exhibit 2, p. 4) He 
has worked for Anderson Erickson Dairy in Des Moines, Iowa, for most of his adult life. 
At the time of hearing he had worked there for 26 years. (Hearing Transcript, p. 16) He 
has always been a full-time employee. (Tr., p. 27)  
 
Claimant has done several different jobs over the course of his career with 
Anderson Erickson. Most of the jobs involved working in a cooler. (Tr., p. 25) In 2014, 
he was working in the plant as a gallon filler. (Tr., p. 17) He had started to have 
problems with both arms, and in 2014 he reported cumulative bilateral arm injuries to 
his employer. (Tr., p. 17) 
 
Claimant had an EMG/NCS study on January 30, 2015. The study was 
performed at Capital Orthopaedics & Sports Medicine, by Donna Bahls, M.D. (Joint 
Exhibit 1, pp. 1-2) Dr. Bahls’ impressions were moderately severe carpal tunnel 
syndrome bilaterally, and mild bilateral ulnar nerve entrapment at the wrist with sensory 
involvement only. She found no evidence of ulnar nerve entrapment at the cubital 
tunnels bilaterally, and no findings to suggest peripheral neuropathy or an acute 
radiculopathy. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 2) 
 
Following the EMG, claimant was sent to Iowa Ortho, where he saw Ze-Hui Han, 
M.D. His first visit with Dr. Han was February 12, 2015. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 1) At that time, 
claimant reported bilateral hand pain, severity level 2, along with numbness and tingling. 
He also had difficulty fully extending his right elbow. Dr. Han reviewed the EMG, and 

VAN GORP V. ANDERSON ERICKSON DAIRY 
Page 3 
 
found that claimant had bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome that was severe, and right 
cubital tunnel syndrome. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 1) It was decided that claimant would have right 
carpal and cubital tunnel releases. Claimant was released to return to regular work 
activities pending surgery. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 1) 
 
Claimant had right carpal tunnel release and right cubital tunnel release with 
ulnar nerve anterior transposition on February 24, 2015. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 1-2) He returned 
to Dr. Han on March 9, 2015. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 2) At that time, claimant’s symptoms were 
reported as being mild in both the right wrist and elbow. Dr. Han also noted “minimally 
reduced numbness and tingling” in the right hand. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 2) Claimant was able to 
make a composite fist with full extension, and his elbow also had full range of motion. 
Claimant was to start occupational therapy for range of motion and strengthening, and 
continue with light duty work consisting of no use of the right hand. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 2)  
 
With respect to claimant’s left arm, a left carpal tunnel release surgery was 
performed on April 14, 2015. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 3) He followed up with Dr. Han on June 1, 
2015, at which time claimant reported he was still having numbness in his left 4th and 5th 
digits, along with tingling in the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd digits of his left hand. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 3) Dr. 
Han noted claimant had full range of motion, and released him to return to work with no 
restrictions. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 3) 
 
On July 9, 2015, Dr. Han responded to a letter from the insurer seeking a 
permanent partial impairment rating. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 1) Dr. Han stated that claimant 
reached maximum medical improvement on June 19, 2015. He provided a rating of 1 
percent permanent partial impairment related to the left upper extremity, and 3 percent 
permanent partial impairment related to the right upper extremity. He did not assign any 
permanent restrictions, and did not recommend any additional medical care. (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 1) 
 
Claimant testified that his symptoms on the right side did not improve after 
surgery. (Tr., p. 18) With respect to the left side, claimant testified that at first it seemed 
to get better, but after he returned to work, it seemed to get worse again. (Tr., p. 18) 
When claimant returned to work after surgery, he went back to working in the cooler, as 
opposed to the gallon filler job. (Tr., pp. 18-19) Initially his work in the cooler involved 
“picking yogurts.” (Tr., p. 19) He said the gallon filler job was “a little less physical” than 
the work in the cooler. (Tr., p. 19) 
 
On March 17, 2016, claimant returned to Dr. Han. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 4) The record 
notes “follow up of bilateral hand pain,” with gradual onset and moderate severity. Dr. 
Han noted the pain occurs constantly and is fluctuating. The pain is aggravated by 
bending, lifting, movement and night pain. He noted associated symptoms of joint 
tenderness, numbness, tingling in the arms, and weakness. On physical examination, 
Dr. Han found full range of motion. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 5) Claimant was able to make 
composite fists with full extension. Dr. Han noted “EMG demonstrates a normal study.”1 
                                                                 
1 There is no EMG study in evidence that corresponds with this date. 

VAN GORP V. ANDERSON ERICKSON DAIRY 
Page 4 
 
Dr. Han discussed claimant’s condition with him, and advised that he “modify activity as 
needed.” He was released to return to work with no restrictions, and Dr. Han stated that 
he is at MMI. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 5) 
 
Shortly thereafter, claimant entered into an agreement for settlement with 
defendants pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.35(2). (Defendants’ Exhibit A) The 
settlement was approved by the agency on May 13, 2016. The parties agreed that 
claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of his employment on 
October 9, 2014. The parties further agreed that the injury caused claimant to sustain 
permanent partial disability for 6 percent loss of his bilateral upper extremities, resulting 
in 30 weeks of compensation under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(s).2 Permanent 
benefits commenced on August 22, 2015. The parties further agreed to payment of 
certain temporary benefits. The weekly rate of compensation was agreed to be $618.42. 
(Def. Ex. A, p. 1) 
 
It appears claimant had another work injury involving his left long finger in July of 
2016. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 6) Records indicate he had left trigger finger surgery on September 
23, 2016, and was placed at MMI on October 21, 2016. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 6-7; Jt. Ex. 3, p. 
4) That injury is not a part of the current claim. 
 
Claimant testified that at the time of settlement in 2016, he was working in the 
cooler picking yogurts. (Tr., p. 19) Within about a year after settlement, he had changed 
from the yogurt-picking job to a job doing a few different things, including pulling carts, 
loading trailers, and running a forklift. (Tr., p. 19) Claimant stated that these job duties 
increased his symptoms in both arms. (Tr., p. 19) 
 
Claimant did not make a claim until 2019 regarding his increased symptoms. He 
testified that he did not know if his symptoms were the result of a new injury or related 
to the 2014 injury, but he told his employer it was getting worse, and he was sent for 
medical treatment. (Tr., p. 20) On February 22, 2019, he saw Judith Nayeri, D.O., at 
Unity Point Occupational Medicine. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 1-2) Dr. Nayeri noted that claimant’s 
job at that time was loading trailers. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 1) She noted that he complained of 
problems with his hands, which have been an issue since 2014. She reviewed prior 
medical records, and noted his prior surgeries. Dr. Nayeri reported that claimant was 
continuing to have pain from the wrist to the palmar surface of the hand on the right, 
going into the first two fingers and tingling in those fingers. He was having pain in the 
palm of the hand, starting in the center of his anterior wrist. He reported that he had 
been dropping things and having problems with gripping. With respect to the left side, 
claimant said that his left arm “never felt right.” He also said that he started noticing arm 
pain more over the past year, and has a constant ache starting in the upper arm. He 
stated that the pain comes down the arm and wraps around the back to the 4th and 5th 
fingers of the hand with tingling. He stated it involved the same fingers as the initial 
injury in 2014. When asked how he felt after surgery, claimant told Dr. Nayeri that he 
                                                                 
2 The injury occurred prior to the amendments to Iowa Code section 85.34; as such, the version in place 
at the time of injury is cited. 

VAN GORP V. ANDERSON ERICKSON DAIRY 
Page 5 
 
could hold things better and did not drop things as much, and that he thought the 
numbness and tingling resolved. He stated that the left upper extremity never improved, 
and that his symptoms started again the previous fall. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 1) 
   
Dr. Nayeri ordered a repeat EMG and allowed claimant to return to work with no 
restrictions. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 1-2) Claimant had a bilateral upper extremity EMG/NCV at 
Central Iowa Neurology on March 15, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 5) The EMG was performed by 
Irving Wolfe, D.O. Dr. Wolfe noted claimant presented with pain and numbness of his 
right and left upper limbs for the past year. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 1) Dr. Wolfe found moderate 
dysfunction right and mild dysfunction of the left median nerve at wrist level consistent 
with bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome; mild slowing of the right and left median motor 
nerve condition velocity within the forearm consistent with bilateral pronator syndrome; 
and mild dysfunction of the right ulnar nerve at the level of the elbow consistent with 
right cubital tunnel syndrome. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 1-2) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Han on March 28, 2019, following Dr. Wolfe’s EMG. Dr. 
Han noted bilateral hand pain with a severity level of 3. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 8) The pain 
radiated to the left elbow, and was described as aching and tingling. The pain was 
aggravated by holding things for too long. Associated symptoms included numbness. 
Claimant reported increasing pain and weakness that started about one year prior. (Jt. 
Ex. 2, p. 8) On physical exam, he was noted to have decreased strength in his right and 
left hands, and abnormal sensation with respect to his right ulnar nerve at the elbow. (Jt. 
Ex. 2, p. 9) Dr. Han’s assessment was bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and bilateral 
pronator syndrome. He reviewed Dr. Wolfe’s EMG, and noted that claimant had “almost 
left normal ulnar nerve. Sensory function has not resumed.” Dr. Han stated claimant’s 
symptoms were clinically more related to the ulnar nerve, and he needed a “valid EMG” 
to compare the EMG from 2015. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 10) He ordered a new EMG and advised 
claimant to follow up in two weeks. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 10) 
 
Claimant had another EMG/NCS with Dr. Bahls on April 4, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 3) 
Dr. Bahls noted under “history” that claimant had numbness and tingling in the left ulnar 
hand distribution to the elbow. Symptoms were getting worse over the past 6 months. 
Claimant had some numbness and tingling and pain in the right hand, and occasional 
neck pain. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 3) Dr. Bahls’ impressions after performing the testing included 
moderately severe carpal tunnel syndrome bilaterally; left cubital tunnel syndrome; and 
mild right ulnar nerve entrapment at the wrist with sensory involvement only, no 
evidence of right cubital tunnel syndrome. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 4) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Han on April 15, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 11) Dr. Han 
reviewed Dr. Bahls’ EMG, and compared it to the study from 2015. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 12) Dr. 
Han opined that “[t]he RIGHT cubital tunnel is the same, RIGHT carpal tunnel has 
improved, LEFT carpal tunnel is the same, and LEFT cubital is worse.” (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 12) 
Left cubital tunnel surgery was recommended, and claimant was allowed to return to full 
duty work pending surgery. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 12) 
 

VAN GORP V. ANDERSON ERICKSON DAIRY 
Page 6 
 
Claimant had left cubital tunnel release with ulnar nerve anterior transposition on 
July 30, 2019. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 5) On October 22, 2019, Dr. Han responded to a letter from 
Attorney Michael Roling, who was representing the employer regarding claimant’s 2019 
injury claim.3 (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 2-3) Dr. Han agreed to the statements in Attorney Roling’s 
letter, which summarized their recent phone conversation. Dr. Han agreed that after 
comparing the EMG studies from 2015 and 2019, his opinion, to a reasonable degree of 
medical certainty, was that claimant’s right cubital tunnel was the same, and right carpal 
tunnel had improved. With respect to the left arm, his opinion was that the left carpal 
tunnel was the same, and the left cubital tunnel was worse. As such, a new injury was 
diagnosed with respect to the left upper extremity, and treatment was provided for the 
new injury. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 2) 
 
On December 5, 2019, Dr. Han provided a letter regarding permanent 
impairment related to the 2019 left cubital tunnel surgery. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 4) Dr. Han noted 
that claimant reached MMI on November 8, 2019, and assigned a 4 percent impairment 
rating. There were no permanent work restrictions. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 4)  
 
Claimant had an independent medical evaluation (IME) with John Kuhnlein, D.O., 
on March 4, 2020. (Cl. Ex. 1) His report is dated June 22, 2020. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) Dr. 
Kuhnlein reviewed claimant’s prior job descriptions, including Federal Operator and 
Cooler Loader. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-4) He noted that claimant worked the Federal Operator 
job between approximately 2013 and 2015. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) Then, from 2015 to 2017, 
claimant worked in the cooler picking yogurt orders. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 3) After that, he 
moved to the Cooler Loader job. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 3) He noted that the cooler loader job 
involved working 4 days per week loading product into trailers. The fifth day was spent 
running a forklift for half the day, and picking product for the other half of the day. (Cl. 
Ex. 1, p. 3) This is consistent with claimant’s testimony. (Tr., pp. 18-19) He further noted 
that in 2019, claimant changed to a job that involves covering for people on their breaks, 
and he rarely works in the cooler now. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10) This is also consistent with 
claimant’s testimony. (Tr., p. 25) 
 
Dr. Kuhnlein provided a detailed summary of the medical records and his 
interview with claimant. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 4-10) He notes several times that the records 
indicated claimant’s symptoms initially improved following the surgeries in 2015. (Cl. Ex. 
1, pp. 6, 7) While claimant continued to have complaints of numbness and tingling, he 
was able to do his job. He notes that in 2017 when claimant moved to the cooler loader 
position, his symptoms started to get worse. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 8) Dr. Kuhnlein recorded that 
at the time of his examination, claimant described more left upper extremity symptoms 
than right. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10) He described constant pain in the left medial elbow 
extending through the forearm to the left ulnar hand and ring and small fingers. He also 
complained of intermittent numbness and tingling in all fingers on his left hand, and pain 
in the left medial elbow when compressed. He had no right elbow symptoms, but 
described “rare pain” in the right ulnar wrist and palmar hand areas with gripping and 
                                                                 
3 At the time of the 2019 injury, Anderson Erickson had workers’ compensation insurance through Sentry. 

VAN GORP V. ANDERSON ERICKSON DAIRY 
Page 7 
 
grasping, along with waxing and waning numbness and tingling in the right ring and 
small fingers. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10) 
 
Dr. Kuhnlein further notes that claimant described problem with material handling 
functions of more than 50 pounds, especially lifting boxes. He has problems with the left 
elbow when working above shoulder height. He has difficulty using hand and power 
tools because of the gripping and grasping. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10) He has similar problems at 
home. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 11) In the three months prior to Dr. Kuhnlein’s exam, claimant’s left 
elbow symptoms had gotten worse, while his other symptoms had mainly stayed the 
same. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 11)  
 
After his physical examination, Dr. Kuhnlein provided diagnoses of right carpal 
tunnel syndrome and cubital tunnel syndrome with related surgeries; right pronator 
syndrome; left carpal and cubital tunnel syndrome with related surgeries, left middle 
finger trigger finger with related surgery, and left pronator syndrome. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 13-
14) With respect to causation, Dr. Kuhnlein opined that claimant’s work at Anderson 
Erickson was a substantial factor in the development of the right carpal and cubital 
tunnel syndrome surgically addressed by Dr. Han in February 2015, as well as the left 
carpal tunnel syndrome surgically addressed in April of 2015. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 14) He 
further related claimant’s left cubital tunnel syndrome back to the 2014 injury date. (Cl. 
Ex. 1, p. 14) He noted that when claimant moved to the cooler loader job in 2017, he 
had to perform significant gripping and grasping throughout the workday while loading 
trailers or picking products in the cooler, and had to use a hook in the right hand and 
hand-held computer in the left hand, demonstrating frequent narrow pinching and 
gripping to move product. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 15) This caused increased soreness in both 
arms. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 15) 
 
Dr. Kuhnlein noted that the incident report from February 21, 2019, noted 
complaints of pain in the right wrist and hand, and the left arm from the elbow down. (Cl. 
Ex. 1, p. 15) The incident report further noted that “the left arm and right hand 
symptoms never fully recovered after the previous surgeries, and had gradually 
worsened after time.” He also told Dr. Nayeri that he had been noticing more arm pain 
over the previous year, when performing his duties as a cooler loader. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 15) 
Dr. Kuhnlein specifically noted that there were “issues in the record with Mr. VanGorp 
stating that his symptoms improved after the surgeries, then stating that the symptoms 
never completely resolved, and then describing the start of symptoms after a previous 
fall about a year ago. . . The recurring theme is that Mr. VanGorp’s symptoms never 
fully resolved even though they improved.” (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 15-16)  
 
Dr. Kuhnlein provided impairment ratings for both upper extremities. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 
17) With respect to the right upper extremity, he assigned a combined total rating of 8 
percent of the upper extremity, which converts to 5 percent of the whole person. (Cl. Ex. 
1, p. 17) With respect to the left upper extremity, he assigned a combined total rating of 
8 percent of the upper extremity as well. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 17) Dr. Kuhnlein did not specify 
whether his rating was in addition to the prior ratings provided by Dr. Han. Dr. Kuhnlein 
recommended restrictions of lifting 50 pounds occasionally from floor to waist, waist to 

VAN GORP V. ANDERSON ERICKSON DAIRY 
Page 8 
 
shoulder, and over the shoulder. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 17) He recommended claimant lift with 
the palms up as much as possible, using his hands underneath boxes rather than 
gripping boxes by the edges if possible. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 17) He recommended only 
occasional crawling due to his upper extremity problems. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 18) He is not 
restricted from ladders as long as he can demonstrate the ability to maintain a three-
point safety stance. He should limit work at or above shoulder height to an occasional 
basis, and grip or grasp occasionally. He should only use hand or power tools 
occasionally, and should consider using anti-vibration gloves if working with power or 
vibrating tools. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 18)  
 
Claimant subsequently entered into an agreement for settlement with his 
employer and Sentry Insurance for the February 20, 2019 injury to his left upper 
extremity. (Def. Ex. B) The settlement was approved by the agency on August 17, 2020. 
The parties agreed that claimant sustained permanent partial disability of 4.2 percent 
loss of the left upper extremity, resulting in 10.5 weeks of compensation commencing 
on November 8, 2019. (Def. Ex. B, p. 1) The parties included a stipulation with the 
settlement agreement, which acknowledged the parties’ agreement that claimant has 
ongoing subjective complaints regarding his left upper extremity, and while he has not 
been assessed permanent restrictions that preclude him from returning to his job with 
the employer, there may be positions that claimant may have difficulty performing due to 
his left upper extremity injury. (Def. Ex. B, p. 4) 
 
Claimant credibly testified that his symptoms in his bilateral upper extremities 
have progressively worsened since the time of the 2016 agreement for settlement. (Tr., 
pp. 18-20; 25-28; 30-33) His testimony is supported by the medical records. (Jt. Ex. 6; 
Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 8-12; Cl. Ex. 1) His symptoms have worsened such that he sought out a 
second opinion on his own after Dr. Han indicated there was nothing more he could do. 
(Tr., pp. 22-23)  
 
Claimant testified that some of the things he could do before, he is no longer able 
to do. (Tr., p. 25) For example, at the time of the 2016 settlement, claimant worked in 
the cooler picking yogurts. (Tr., pp. 18-19) Claimant does not feel capable of working in 
the cooler any more, as those jobs are more physical. (Tr., pp. 25; 35) Picking in the 
cooler involves grabbing certain cartons and containers and his hands “just don’t work 
with the cartons that you have to grab and whatnot.” (Tr., p. 25) When the opportunity 
arose for claimant to move to a job outside of the cooler, he took it. (Tr., pp. 25; 35-36) 
Claimant still makes the same amount of money, and is not claiming an economic 
change in condition. (Tr., p. 26)  
 
At the time of the settlement in 2016, no physician had assigned any permanent 
restrictions with respect to claimant’s upper extremities. (Tr., p. 26) Dr. Kuhnlein has 
since recommended permanent restrictions, noted above, after a thorough examination 
of claimant and review of the medical records. (Cl. Ex. 1) Claimant also has increased 
functional impairment since the settlement agreement. Dr. Kuhnlein provided an 8 
percent upper extremity rating to each arm, which included specific ratings for range of 
motion deficits, ulnar nerve sensory deficits, and the carpal tunnel syndrome in each 

VAN GORP V. ANDERSON ERICKSON DAIRY 
Page 9 
 
arm. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 17) At the time of settlement, Dr. Han had provided a 1 percent left 
upper extremity rating, and 3 percent right upper extremity rating. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 1)  
 
Dr. Kuhnlein’s increased impairment rating is supported by the medical evidence. 
Claimant had a normal EMG in March of 2016, shortly before the settlement was 
approved. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 5) However, his EMG in April of 2019 showed moderately 
severe carpal tunnel syndrome bilaterally; left cubital tunnel syndrome; and mild right 
ulnar nerve entrapment at the wrist. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 4) Additionally, claimant demonstrated 
full range of motion in both upper extremities at the time of the 2016 settlement, while 
Dr. Kuhnlein noted some deficits in range of motion during his examination. (Jt. Ex. 2, 
pp. 2-7; Cl. Ex. 1, p. 2) Dr. Kuhnlein also provided ratings related to claimant’s sensory 
deficit, which has gotten worse since the 2016 settlement. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 17)  
 
Claimant also testified that at his last visit with Dr. Han, he advised that he would 
not perform any additional surgeries because “it wouldn’t do any good.” (Tr., p. 23) 
Claimant requested a second opinion, and was told he could return to Dr. Han. (Cl. Ex. 
4, p. 1; Tr., pp. 10-15; 23) Rather than return to Dr. Han, claimant sought a second 
opinion on his own at Des Moines Orthopaedic Surgeons (DMOS). (Tr., p. 23)4 Claimant 
testified that the surgeon at DMOS said he would be willing to do surgery, but agreed 
with Dr. Han that it might not do any good, and he would not know until he was actually 
performing the surgery. (Tr., pp. 23-24) Based on that, claimant decided against further 
surgery at that time. (Tr., pp. 24, 28-29) He did state that if he was presented with a 
surgical option that could make his symptoms better, he would want to do it. (Tr., p. 24) 
 
Based on claimant’s testimony and the medical records, I find that claimant’s 
symptoms in his bilateral upper extremities began to worsen in approximately 2017, 
about one year after the agreement for settlement was approved. His symptoms 
continued to worsen until he finally went to his employer to request treatment in 2019. 
Claimant has increased permanent restrictions and additional impairment per Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s report. While he continues working for the employer, he has fortunately been 
able to bid into a less physical position. He does not believe he would be able to do the 
jobs in the cooler any longer. As such, I find that claimant has proven a change in his 
physical condition. While a new injury related to left cubital tunnel syndrome was 
discovered and treated, no physician has offered any additional treatment of substance 
for the ongoing symptoms caused by the right carpal and cubital tunnel and left carpal 
tunnel related to the 2014 injury. Given that claimant’s symptoms have persisted, I find 
that this change of condition is permanent in nature. As such, I find that claimant has 
sustained a permanent worsening of his physical condition since the agreement for 
settlement was filed in 2016. 
 
Dr. Kuhnlein provided an 8 percent impairment rating to each upper extremity. 
Using the combined values chart in the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, total impairment comes to 15 percent of the bilateral upper extremities. 
                                                                 
4 At hearing, claimant could not remember the name of the physician he saw at DMOS. Dr. Kuhnlein’s 
report indicates he saw Shane Cook, M.D., on March 10, 2020. The DMOS record is not in evidence and 
was not available at the time of Dr. Kuhnlein’s report. 

VAN GORP V. ANDERSON ERICKSON DAIRY 
Page 10 
 
Using Table 16-3 of the AMA Guides, 15 percent of the upper extremity converts to 9 
percent of the whole person. Therefore, I find that claimant is entitled to 9 percent of the 
whole person, or 45 weeks of benefits, pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(s). 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
This is a review-reopening case. In a proceeding to reopen an award for 
payments or agreement for settlement as provided by section 86.13, inquiry shall be 
into whether or not the condition of the employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, 
or increase of compensation so awarded or agreed upon. Iowa Code section 86.14(2).  
Upon review-reopening, claimant has the burden to show a change in condition related 
to the original injury since the original award or settlement was made. The change may 
be either economic or physical. Blacksmith v. All-American. Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 
1980); Henderson v. Iles, 250 Iowa 787, 96 N.W.2d 321 (1959). 
The Iowa Supreme Court provided guidance on this change of condition 
requirement in Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387 (Iowa 2009). The Supreme 
Court held: 
 
In determining a scheduled or unscheduled award, the commissioner finds 
the facts as they stand at the time of the hearing and should not speculate 
about the future course of the claimant’s condition. The functional 
impairment and disability resulting from a scheduled loss is what it is at 
the time of the award and is not based on any anticipated deterioration of 
function that might or might not occur in the future. See Iowa Code § 
85.34(2); Second Injury Fund v. Bergeson, 526 N.W.2d 543, 548 (Iowa 
1995) (“a scheduled injury is evaluated by determining the loss of 
physiological capacity of the body part”). Likewise, in an unscheduled 
whole-body case, the claimant’s loss of earning capacity is determined by 
the commissioner as of the time of the hearing based on the factors 
bearing on industrial disability then prevailing—not based on what the 
claimant’s physical condition and economic realities might be at some 
future time . . . The workers’ compensation statutory scheme 
contemplates that future developments (post-award and post-settlement 
developments), including the worsening of a physical condition or a 
reduction in earning capacity, should be addressed in review-reopening 
proceedings. See Iowa Code § 86.14(2). The review-reopening claimant 
need not prove, as an element of his claim, that the current extent of 
disability was not contemplated by the commissioner (in the arbitration 
award) or the parties (in their agreement for settlement). 
A compensable review-reopening claim filed by an employee requires 
proof by a preponderance of the evidence that the claimant’s current 
condition is “proximately caused by the original injury.” See Simonson, 
588 N.W.2d at 434 (original emphasis omitted) (quoting Collentine, 525 
N.W.2d at 829). While worsening of the claimant’s physical condition is 
one way to satisfy the review-reopening requirement, it is not the only way 

VAN GORP V. ANDERSON ERICKSON DAIRY 
Page 11 
 
for a claimant to demonstrate his or her current condition warrants an 
increase of compensation under section 86.14(2). See Blacksmith v. All-
Am., Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348, 354 (Iowa 1980) (holding a compensable 
diminution of earning capacity in an industrial disability claim may occur 
without a deterioration of the claimants [sic] physical capacity). 
Therefore, we have held that awards may be adjusted by the 
commissioner pursuant to section 86.14(2) [then section 86.34] when a 
temporary disability later develops into a permanent disability, see Rose v. 
John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 906, 76 N.W.2d 756, 759 
(1956), or when critical facts existed but were unknown and could not 
have been discovered by the exercise of reasonable diligence at the time 
of the prior settlement or award, see Gosek v. Garmer & Stiles Co., 158 
N.W.2d 731, 735 (Iowa 1968). We have also previously approved a 
review-reopening where an injury to a scheduled member later caused an 
industrial disability. See Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 13, 
17 (Iowa 1993) (“[A] psychological condition caused or aggravated by a 
scheduled injury is to be compensated as an unscheduled injury.”). 
Although we do not require the claimant to demonstrate his current 
condition was not contemplated at the time of the original settlement, we 
emphasize the principles of res judicata still apply—that the agency, in a 
review-reopening petition, should not reevaluate an employee’s level of 
physical impairment or earning capacity if all of the facts and 
circumstances were known or knowable at the time of the original action. 
As this court has explained, 
 
a contrary view would tend to defeat the intention of the 
legislature [:]... “The fundamental reason for the enactment 
of this legislation is to avoid litigation, lessen the expense 
incident thereto, minimize appeals, and afford an efficient 
and speedy tribunal to determine and award compensation 
under the terms of this act.” 
 
Stice, 228 Iowa at 1038, 291 N.W. at 456 (quoting Flint v. City of Eldon, 
191 Iowa 845, 847, 183 N.W. 344, 345 (1921)). Therefore, “once there 
has been an agreement or adjudication the commissioner, absent appeal 
and remand of the case, has no authority on a later review to change the 
compensation granted on the same or substantially same facts as those 
previously considered.” Gosek, 158 N.W.2d at 732. For example, a “mere 
difference of opinion of experts or competent observers as to the 
percentage of disability arising from the original injury would not be 
sufficient to justify a different determination by another commissioner on a 
petition for review reopening.” Bousfield v. Sisters of Mercy, 249 Iowa 64, 
69, 86 N.W.2d 109, 113 (1957). Likewise section 86.14(2) does not 
provide an opportunity to relitigate causation issues that were determined 
in the initial award or settlement agreement. 

VAN GORP V. ANDERSON ERICKSON DAIRY 
Page 12 
 
Kohlhaas, 777 N.W.2d at 392-393. 
The supreme court in Kohlhaas thus identified five ways the change in condition 
review-reopening requirement can be satisfied: (1) a worsening of the claimant’s 
physical condition; (2) a reduction of the claimant’s earning capacity; (3) a temporary 
disability developing into a permanent disability; (4) a critical fact existed but was 
unknown or could not have been discovered by the exercise of reasonable diligence at 
the time of the prior settlement or award; or (5) a scheduled member injury later causes 
an industrial disability. See Verizon Business Network Services. Inc. v. McKenzie, 823 
N.W.2d 418, (Iowa App. 2012). 
 
I found that claimant has proven a permanent worsening of his physical condition 
since the agreement for settlement was filed in 2016. As such, he has established 
entitlement to reopening his prior agreement for settlement. Iowa Code section 
86.14(2). 
 
The next issue to determine is the extent of additional permanent partial disability 
to which claimant is entitled. Benefits for permanent partial disability of two members 
caused by a single accident is a scheduled benefit under section 85.34(2)(s); the 
degree of disability must be computed on a functional basis with a maximum benefit 
entitlement of 500 weeks.  Simbro v. DeLong's Sportswear, 332 N.W.2d 886 (Iowa 
1983). 
 
Dr. Kuhnlein provided an 8 percent impairment rating to each upper extremity. 
Using the combined values chart in the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, total impairment comes to 15 percent of the upper extremities. Using Table 
16-3 of the AMA Guides, 15 percent of the upper extremity converts to 9 percent of the 
whole person. Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(s), claimant is entitled to a 
proportional award equivalent to 9 percent of 500 weeks. Blizek v. Eagle Signal Co., 
164 N.W.2d 84 (Iowa 1969). Therefore, I found that claimant is entitled to 45 weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(s). 
 
Pursuant to the prior agreement for settlement, claimant was paid 30 weeks of 
compensation at the rate of $618.42. (Def. Ex. A, p. 1) The parties stipulated that 
defendants are entitled to that credit. (Hearing Report) Claimant also received 10.5 
weeks of compensation, at the rate of $727.30 per week, related to the 2019 left cubital 
tunnel injury. (Def. Ex. B, p. 1) Defendants argue they are entitled to additional credit for 
those 10.5 weeks of benefits. Claimant disagrees, and argues that Iowa Code 85.34(7) 
provides no authority for credit for a subsequent injury, only prior injuries or disabilities.  
 
The legislature enacted amendments to Iowa Code chapter 85 in 2017. See 
2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23. The amendments included changing the language of Iowa Code 
section 85.34. See id. at § 13. This amendment applies to injuries that occur on or after 
July 1, 2017, so it does not apply to the current case. See id. at § 24. The version of 
Iowa Code section 85.34(7) in effect between the effective dates of the 2004 and 2017 
amendments applies here.  
Iowa Code section 85.34(7), as it was then in effect, states: 

VAN GORP V. ANDERSON ERICKSON DAIRY 
Page 13 
 
a. An employer is fully liable for compensating all of an employee's 
disability that arises out of and in the course of the employee's 
employment with the employer. An employer is not liable for compensating 
an employee's preexisting disability that arose out of and in the course of 
employment with a different employer or from causes unrelated to 
employment. 
b. If an injured employee has a preexisting disability that was caused by a 
prior injury arising out of and in the course of employment with the same 
employer, and the preexisting disability was compensable under the same 
paragraph of section 85.34, subsection 2, as the employee's present 
injury, the employer is liable for the combined disability that is caused by 
the injuries, measured in relation to the employee's condition immediately 
prior to the first injury. In this instance, the employer's liability for the 
combined disability shall be considered to be already partially satisfied to 
the extent of the percentage of disability for which the employee was 
previously compensated by the employer. 
If, however, an employer is liable to an employee for a combined disability 
that is payable under section 85.34, subsection 2, paragraph “u”, and the 
employee has a preexisting disability that causes the employee's earnings 
to be less at the time of the present injury than if the prior injury had not 
occurred, the employer's liability for the combined disability shall be 
considered to be already partially satisfied to the extent of the percentage 
of disability for which the employee was previously compensated by the 
employer minus the percentage that the employee's earnings are less at 
the time of the present injury than if the prior injury had not occurred. 
c. A successor employer shall be considered to be the same employer if 
the employee became part of the successor employer's workforce through 
a merger, purchase, or other transaction that assumes the employee into 
the successor employer's workforce without substantially changing the 
nature of the employee's employment. 
 
Nothing in section 85.34(7) applies to the situation in this case. The 2019 injury, 
for which defendants seek credit, is not a preexisting disability, and was not 
compensable under the same paragraph of section 85.34(2) as the 2014 injury.5 
Additionally, this case does not present a scenario in which claimant acquires a double 
recovery if defendants are not allowed a credit for the 2019 payment. The parties 
agreed that the 2019 injury was a new injury, not compensated or claimed in the 
settlement of the prior 2014 injury. While it involved the left upper extremity, the 2019 
injury was specifically only related to the left cubital tunnel syndrome, while the 2014 
injury specifically only includes the carpal tunnel syndrome on the left. As such, I find 
                                                                 
5 The 2014 injury was compensated pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(s). The 2019 injury was 
compensated pursuant to section 85.34(2)(m). 

VAN GORP V. ANDERSON ERICKSON DAIRY 
Page 14 
 
that defendants are not entitled to a credit for the 10.5 weeks of benefits paid to 
claimant for the 2019 left upper extremity injury. 
Defendants are entitled to credit for 30 weeks of compensation at the rate of 
$618.42. I found claimant is entitled to 45 weeks of benefits. As such, defendants shall 
pay claimant an additional 15 weeks of benefits. The parties dispute the proper 
commencement date for those benefits. Claimant asserts the proper commencement 
date is January 30, 2020, when Dr. Kuhnlein determined claimant reached MMI for the 
right upper extremity and left carpal tunnel syndrome. Defendants did not present a 
different date for consideration. As such, benefits shall commence on January 30, 2020. 
The next issue to determine is whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical 
care pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27(4). 
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish reasonable 
services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the right to 
choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
Iowa Code § 85.27(4). 
Defendants’ “obligation under the statute is confined to reasonable care for the 
diagnosis and treatment of work-related injuries.” Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 
N.W.2d 122, 124 (Iowa 1995) (emphasis in original).  In other words, the “obligation 
turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability.”  Id. 
Similarly, an application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained 
because claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving. Mere 
dissatisfaction with the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for 
alternate medical care. Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered 
promptly, was not reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly 
inconvenient for the claimant. See Iowa Code § 85.27(4). Thus, by challenging the 
employer’s choice of treatment and seeking alternate care, claimant assumes the 
burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable. See Iowa R. App. P 14(f)(5); 
Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124.   
Ultimately, determining whether care is reasonable under the statute is a 
question of fact. Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123. 

VAN GORP V. ANDERSON ERICKSON DAIRY 
Page 15 
 
In this case, claimant produced no evidence to establish that the care offered by 
defendant to date has been inferior or less extensive than other available care. In fact, 
claimant failed to prove that any alternative medical care is available or recommended 
for his conditions. Claimant testified that the physician he saw at DMOS told him that 
while he could do surgery, he would not know if it would help until he had “gotten in 
there, but more than likely, it wouldn’t improve.” (Tr., pp. 23-24) Essentially, the doctor 
at DMOS had a similar opinion as Dr. Han. The main difference was the doctor at 
DMOS was willing to do surgery if claimant chose, while Dr. Han did not provide that 
choice. (Tr., p. 29) Ultimately, claimant chose not to have any additional surgery based 
on what the doctors told him. (Tr., pp. 24, 29-30, 34-35)   
While claimant clearly has ongoing symptoms, the record shows that no specific 
additional medical care is currently being recommended. Additionally, defendants 
continue to authorize Dr. Han, and have not abandoned care. For this reason, I find 
claimant failed to prove that any additional medical treatment exists with another 
physician that is likely to improve his condition or reduce his symptoms. Therefore, I find 
that claimant is not entitled to alternate medical care at this time. 
The next issue to determine is whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for 
his IME with Dr. Kuhnlein. In this case, defendants did not seek any opinion regarding 
additional permanent disability related to the 2014 injuries prior to Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME. 
Claimant argues that Dr. Han’s opinion that the right upper extremity and left carpal 
tunnel were not new injuries in 2019, but rather related back to the original 2014 date, is 
essentially a zero percent rating, which triggers claimant’s right to an IME under section 
85.39. Defendants disagree. 
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has noted that the Iowa 
Supreme Court adopted a strict and literal interpretation of Iowa Code section 85.39 in 
Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015) 
(hereinafter “DART”). See Cortez v. Tyson Fresh Meats. Inc., File No. 5044716 (Appeal 
December 2015). The Commissioner has taken a similar strict interpretation of the pre-
requisites set forth in Iowa Code section 85.39. See Reh v. Tyson Foods, Inc., File No. 
5053428 (Appeal March 2018).  
Prior to the court’s decision in DART, this agency had held that a release to full-
duty work coupled with the failure to expressly opine as to impairment produces an 
inference that the employer-retained physician did not believe the injured worker 
sustained permanent impairment related to the injury. Countryman v. Des Moines Metro 
Transit Authority, File No. 5009718 (App. March 16, 2006); Kuntz v. Clear Lake Bakery, 
File No. 1283423 (Rehearing July 13, 2004).  
The supreme court’s decision in DART, as well as several recent appeal 
decisions, support a finding that said inference is no longer applicable to open the door 
for injured workers to obtain a section 85.39 examination. Instead, there must be a 
definitive permanent impairment rating rendered by a physician selected by the 
defendants before the injured worker qualifies for an independent medical evaluation 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.  

VAN GORP V. ANDERSON ERICKSON DAIRY 
Page 16 
 
In cases where defendants have denied liability, the commissioner has 
concluded that medical opinions or reports obtained for the purposes of determining 
causation, regardless of whether they are obtained from a treating or expert physician, 
are not the equivalent of an impairment rating for purposes of Iowa Code section 85.39. 
See Reh, File No. 5053428 (App. March 2018); Soliz v. Farmland Foods, Inc., File No. 
5047856 (App. March 2018).  
If an injured worker wants to be reimbursed for the expenses associated with a 
disability evaluation by a physician selected by the worker, the process established by 
the legislature must be followed. This process permits the employer, who must pay the 
benefits, to make the initial arrangements for the evaluation and only allows the 
employee to obtain an independent evaluation at the employer’s expense if dissatisfied 
with the evaluation arranged by the employer. DART, 867 N.W.2d at 847 (citing Iowa 
Code § 85.39).  
In this case, defendants did not obtain a new permanent impairment rating for 
claimant’s 2014 injury. Instead, they asked Dr. Han to address causation. Unless a 
claimant can establish the prerequisites of Iowa Code section 85.39, the defendants are 
not obligated to pay for the claimant’s evaluation. DART, 867 N.W.2d at 843-844. Under 
the circumstances of this case, claimant is not able to establish the prerequisites of 
Iowa Code section 85.39 to qualify for an evaluation at defendants’ expense. Therefore, 
I conclude that claimant’s request for reimbursement of Dr. Kuhnlein’s evaluation under 
Iowa Code section 85.39 must be denied.  
That being said, the Supreme Court in DART noted that in cases where Iowa 
Code section 85.39 is not triggered to allow for reimbursement of an IME, a claimant 
can still be reimbursed at hearing for the costs associated with the preparation of the 
written report as a cost under rule 876 IAC 4.33. DART, 867 N.W.2d at 846-847. 
Assessment of costs is a discretionary function of this agency. Iowa Code § 86.40. 
Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers’ 
compensation commissioner hearing the case. 876 IAC 4.33. 
Dr. Kuhnlein provided an itemized bill breaking down the cost for the IME exam, 
and the cost for preparing the written IME report. (Cl. Ex 1, p. 21) As such, I find that the 
cost of $2,671.90 for the preparation of Dr. Kuhnlein’s written report is reimbursable as 
a cost pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33. 
With respect to the remainder of claimant’s requested costs, I find that claimant 
was generally successful in his claim, and an award of additional costs is appropriate. I 
exercise my discretion and award claimant the additional cost of the $100.00 filing fee.  
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 

VAN GORP V. ANDERSON ERICKSON DAIRY 
Page 17 
 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant an additional fifteen (15) weeks of benefits at the 
stipulated rate of six hundred eighteen and 42/100 dollars ($618.42) commencing on 
January 30, 2019. 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.  
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of two thousand 
seven hundred seventy-one and 90/100 ($2,771.90), which includes the cost of Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s written report and the filing fee. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this ____16th ____ day of August, 2021. 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Nick Platt (via WCES) 
James Bryan (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days from the date 
above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ 
Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the 
following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, 
Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls o n a 
weekend or legal holiday. 
