Case Number: 5066837
Case Title:  JONES, JENNIFER V. ALUMA LTD
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Jones Jennifer-5066837D 1.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JENNIFER JONES, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          File No. 5066837 
ALUMA, LTD., 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
DEPOSITORS INSURANCE 
  : 
COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :              Head Note Nos.:  1402.30, 2907 
______________________________________________________________________ 
Claimant Jennifer Jones filed a petition in arbitration on December 3, 2018, 
alleging she sustained injuries to while working for the defendant, Aluma Ltd. (“Aluma”).  
Aluma and its insurer, the defendant, Depositors Insurance Company (“Depositors”), 
filed an answer on April 20, 2019. 
An arbitration hearing was held on March 3, 2020, at Iowa Workforce 
Development in Fort Dodge, Iowa.  Attorney Janece Valentine represented Jones.  
Jones appeared and testified.  Attorney Anne Clarke represented Aluma and Depositors 
and appeared by telephone conference call.  April Braun appeared in Fort Dodge and 
testified on behalf of Aluma and Depositors.  Joint Exhibits (“JE”) 1 through 13 were 
admitted into the record.  The record was held open through April 1, 2020, for the 
receipt of post-hearing briefs.  The briefs were received and the record was closed.   
At the start of the hearing the parties submitted a hearing report, listing 
stipulations and issues to be decided.  Aluma and Depositors waived all affirmative 
defenses. 
STIPULATIONS 
 
1. 
An employer-employee relationship existed between Aluma and Jones at 
the time of the alleged injury. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Apr-22  09:45:04     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

JONES V. ALUMA, LTD. 
Page 2 
 
 
2. 
Temporary benefits are no longer in dispute. 
 
3. 
If the alleged injury is found to be a cause of permanent disability, the 
disability is an industrial disability. 
 
4. 
At the time of the alleged injury Jones’s gross earnings were $517.45 per 
week, she was single and entitled to one exemption, and the parties believe the weekly 
rate is $326.06. 
 
5. 
Costs have been paid. 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
Did Jones sustain an injury on December 14, 2016, which arose out of 
and in the course of her employment with Aluma? 
 
2. 
Is the alleged injury a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery? 
 
3. 
Is the alleged injury a cause of permanent disability? 
 
4. 
If the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability, what is the extent of 
disability? 
 
5. 
If the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability, what is the 
commencement date for permanency?   
 
6. 
Is Jones entitled to payment of medical expenses? 
 
7. 
Is Jones entitled to recover the cost of an independent medical 
examination? 
 
8. 
Should costs be assessed against either party? 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Jones lives in Clear Lake, Iowa.  (Transcript, page 8)  Jones is divorced and is 
the mother of three children.  (Tr., p. 15)  At the time of the hearing Jones was thirty-six.  
(Tr., p. 8)   
Jones graduated from Nevada High School and attended college at Waldorf 
College, Iowa State University, and Iowa Lakes Community College.  (JE 4, p. 24; Tr., 
pp. 8-9, 55)  Jones has good reading, writing, and math skills.  (Tr., p. 55)  Jones 
received a scholarship to Waldorf College and served as an English tutor.  (JE 4, p. 24; 
Tr., p. 55)  Jones studied interior design at Iowa State University and nursing at Iowa 

JONES V. ALUMA, LTD. 
Page 3 
 
 
Lakes Community College.  (Tr., p. 8)  Jones did not graduate from college or complete 
any program of study.  (JE 4, p. 24; Tr., p. 8)   
Jones has worked for many employers.  (JE 1)  Jones has worked as a 
detasseler, call salesperson, line worker in egg production, bartender, waitress, 
environmental aide, youth counselor, certified nursing assistant (“CNA”), factory worker 
for Winnebago Industries, homemaker service provider, welder, and warehouse 
operator.  (JE 1; Tr., pp. 10-12)  The egg production job required Jones to stand for long 
periods of time, bend over, and reach.  (Tr., p. 12)  Bartending and waitressing required 
fast movement.  (Tr., p. 13)  Waitressing required Jones carry heavy trays and 
bartending required her to lean over the bar.  (Tr., p. 13)  While working as a CNA 
Jones had to lift and transfer residents.  (Tr., p. 14)  Her position with Winnebago 
Industries required frequent bending and crouching and she worked with heavy parts.  
(Tr., pp. 14-15) 
In August 2016, Aluma hired Jones as a welder.  (JE 3; Tr., pp. 18-19, 59, 93)  
Aluma manufactures motorcycle, car, boat, small utility, and ATV trailers.  (Tr., p. 20)  
Jones did not have experience welding and received on-the-job training from Aluma.  
(Tr., p. 20)  Jones reported the work was repetitive.  (Tr., p. 22)   
When welding Jones held a five-pound gun attached to a long lead that was 
twenty-five feet long she would drag around the trailer.  (Tr., pp. 22-23)  Jones testified 
the gun and lead were “super heavy.”  (Tr., pp. 22-23)  The position required frequent 
lifting.  (Tr., p. 23)  Jones testified most of the parts were not heavy, with the exception 
of the flipper and moving the trailer and flipping it, which she described as involving 
“heavy-duty lifting.”  (Tr., p. 23)  Jones estimated the flipper, which was made of cast 
iron steel weighed seventy-five pounds.  (Tr., p. 24)  Jones reported each trailer had a 
flipper she had to put on and take off during fabrication.  (Tr., pp. 24-25)  Jones testified 
Aluma had hoists to assist with the lifting, but she was not permitted to use the hoists.  
(Tr., p. 25)  Working on the trailers required Jones to crouch down while putting clamps 
in place.  (Tr., p. 24)   
Braun, the human resources director for Aluma, disagreed the flippers weigh 
seventy-five pounds.  (Tr., p. 106)  Braun testified the flippers weigh just under thirty 
pounds.  (Tr., p. 107)  Jones reported there are different flippers on different lines and 
some are very light, but the flipper she was working with when she was injured was not 
one of the lighter ones.  (Tr., p. 116)   
Jones had performance issues and interpersonal difficulties while working for 
Aluma.  (JE 3, pp. 16, 20, 94)  Aluma determined Jones was making frequent mistakes 
at work, which improved over time.  (JE 3, p. 16)  Jones continued to receive wage 
increases in January 2017, April 2017, and July 2017, until she left Aluma for a position 
with 3M.  (JE 3, p. 18; Tr., p. 42)  Jones was eligible for rehire when she left Aluma. 

JONES V. ALUMA, LTD. 
Page 4 
 
 
On December 14, 2016, Jones went to speak to Braun.  (Tr., p. 26)  Jones 
testified she told Braun she was having trouble with her back, but she could not recall if 
they discussed whether her back issues were due to her work.  (Tr., p. 26)   
Braun kept contemporaneous records of her conversations with Jones and of the 
documents she received from Jones.  (JE 3)  Braun documented on December 14, 
2016, Jones came to her office and asked if Aluma had any light duty work for her.  (JE 
3, p. 17)  Braun wrote, 
I asked her why she needed light duty and she told me that she hurt her 
back over the weekend and it was acting up.  I asked if she did something 
here at Aluma that caused the pain and she said no.  I then told her the 
Aluma policy is we do not have light duty for non-work related injuries and 
Jennifer said “that is fine but I am going to go home today.”   
(JE 3, p. 17)  Braun noted Jones punched out and left the building, and the next day she 
called into work and stated she would not be in.  (JE 3, p. 17)   
Jones testified at hearing she did not want to report she had sustained a work 
injury, noting “I was trying to kind of be vague about it and kind of work around saying 
that Aluma was causing these – the injury” because she did not want to lose her job.  
(Tr., pp. 26-27)  Braun testified Aluma had provided Jones with instruction on reporting 
work injuries the first day of her employment.  (Tr., pp. 94-95)   
Jones further testified she felt pressured not to report her injury because the 
Aluma workers received a bonus, as follows: 
[t]hat you go – that the whole company goes accident-free and injury-free.  
They give you free stuff for reaching a certain date.  I think it was maybe 
150 days accident-free, and then I think one other time we got chairs and 
another time maybe blankets.  It just depended.  There wasn’t – there 
always seems to be injuries so it didn’t happen very often. 
(Tr., pp. 27-28)  Jones relayed other workers would “really get after you” for reporting a 
work injury.  (Tr., p. 28)   
Braun testified Aluma has never had a bonus plan for safety, reporting “[w]e don’t 
have a benefit plan, no.  For safety, no.”  (Tr., p. 111)  Jones did not present any 
witness testimony or documents supporting the existence of the alleged bonus plan. 
On December 14, 2016, Jones attended an appointment with Jennifer VonBank, 
PA-C.  (JE 6, p. 30)  VonBank documented Jones complained of back pain and a 
urinary tract infection and reported, “I threw my back out at work today.”  (JE 6, p. 30)  
Jones relayed the pain was radiating into her buttocks and down her right leg to the 
level of her posterior knee.  (JE 6, p. 30)  VonBank documented Jones relayed she had 
back pain in the past.  (JE 6, p. 30)  VonBank assessed Jones with lumbar back pain 

JONES V. ALUMA, LTD. 
Page 5 
 
 
with radiculopathy affecting the right lower extremity and prescribed a Medrol Dosepak.  
(JE 6, p. 30)  On March 6, 2017, VonBank issued an addendum to the note, writing 
Jones’s visit was not scheduled as a workers’ compensation visit and Jones did not 
mention her employer during the visit, but reported she had back pain when VonBank 
asked her whether she had back pain and then relayed she had thrown out her back at 
work.  (JE 6, p. 31)  VonBank did not explain her reason for writing the addendum.   
Jones testified she had back pain before working for Aluma, but it had been 
“really mild, you know, compared to what it had been.  It was nothing more than, you 
know, maybe getting out of the car and feeling sore, but, you know, you stretch a couple 
times and you’re done and, like, you would just automatically think ‘Oh, I have a bad 
back,’ you know.”  (Tr., p. 34)  Jones denied having recurring back pain and stated she 
had not sought treatment for her back before December 2016.  (Tr., pp. 34, 57)  Jones 
testified she had back pain when she was pregnant, and not through her whole 
pregnancy.  (Tr., p. 57)  
Braun documented she received a faxed work excuse from VonBank for Jones 
for December 19, 2016, but she did not receive a work excuse for the previous week.  
(JE 3, p. 17; JE 6, p. 32)  Braun documented she received work excuses from VonBank 
for Jones for December 20, 2016, December 21, 2016, and December 22, 2016 through 
January 1, 2017.  (JE 3, p. 17; JE 6, pp. 33-35)  Braun noted there was no production 
the week of December 25, 2016 because the plant was closed.  (JE 3, p. 17)   
Braun testified Jones did not report a work injury to Aluma in December 2016 or 
January 2017.  (Tr., p. 98)  Braun testified on February 27, 2017, Jones called and left a 
voicemail message, asking Braun to call her back because she had hurt her back 
before Christmas and it was acting up.  (Tr., p. 99)  The next day, on February 28, 2017, 
Jones completed a report of injury form for Aluma.  (JE 3, p. 19)  Jones reported she 
had been injured while working on the back of a trailer on December 15, 2016, at 10:00 
a.m., and that she told Melissa Orr and Ron Blocker about it.  (JE 3, p. 19)  Jones 
testified she put the wrong date of injury on her injury report, noting “I missed it by a 
day.  I don’t know.  I’m not good with dates, I guess.”  (Tr., p. 87)  Jones documented 
she was injured when “[p]utting light bar on back of trailer.  Twisted to put it on there & 
bending over.”  (JE 3, p. 19)  When asked to describe, step by step, what led to the 
injury, Jones wrote: 
[b]ack aggravated & sore from lifting heavy flippers.  Soreness started on 
a Friday morning.  Soreness increased on Mon, Tue & Wed.  Wednesday 
morning I twisted to bring light bar to back of trailer & legs gave out. I told 
Melissa & Tiffany & Ron Blocker.  I walked to HR to tell April but at the 
time, I didn’t believe it was work related because I’ve had back soreness 
prior to working at Aluma. 
(JE 3, p. 19)  Jones relayed she injured her “[b]ack, down legs to feet.  Numbness, 
tingling, burning & weakness.  Legs giving out.”  (JE 3, p. 19)   

JONES V. ALUMA, LTD. 
Page 6 
 
 
At hearing Jones testified she did not report the work injury before because  
I just really was not wanting to put the blame on them because I still had to 
work there.  So I guess that was more like I just didn’t really want to 
directly say, like, you know, “This is your fault.  You’re liable.”  You know, I 
just didn’t really want to come out and say, like, “It’s all your fault.”  You 
know, I didn’t want them to, you know, try to get rid of me, try to get me 
out of there. 
I wanted them to know, like, “I’m sorry.  I’m trying to still work.”  But I 
had had, like, I guess, back pain from when I was pregnant, but I was just 
trying to come up with anything just to try to, you know, make it not seem 
like it was their fault. 
(Tr., pp. 28-29)   
Jones admitted she did not provide Aluma with any information her back 
condition was related to her employment in 2016, noting, “I was pretty vague about it.”  
(Tr., p. 85)  Jones reported before she filed the injury report she told her lead person 
and supervisor at Aluma she was having problems with the flipper, which was making 
her back hurt.  (Tr., p. 86)  Jones testified she did not tell her supervisor specifically 
about the December 14, 2016 incident.  (Tr., p. 86)   
Braun testified she spoke with Melissa, Tiffany, and Ron, after Jones identified 
them in her February 28, 2017 injury report.  (Tr., p. 100)  Braun reported Melissa and 
Ron told her they had not heard Jones talk about injuring her back and they did not 
know anything about an injury.  (Tr., p. 100)  Braun stated Tiffany reported Jones 
“stated that at one time she recalled helping her outside to her car, but from the 
comments made, her inclination was that it was something that happened outside of 
work.”  (Tr., p. 101)  Braun testified Melissa, Tiffany, and Ron did not tell her Jones had 
sustained a work injury based on their observations of Jones or based on conversations 
with her.  (Tr., p. 101)   
Jones returned to VonBank on March 6, 2017, complaining of back pain.  (JE 6, 
p. 37)  VonBank documented Jones told her “when it happened I didn’t even think about 
it being work related.  I have a history of a recurring sore back,” and noted she had 
been lifting at work that day and her back felt “tired.”  (JE 6, p. 37)  Jones denied at 
hearing she reported having a history of recurring back pain.  (Tr., p. 57) 
VonBank documented she saw Jones as part of a typical workup for a urinary 
tract infection and questioned her about back pain.  (JE 6, p. 37)  VonBank documented 
she did not know on that visit whether the back pain was secondary to a work injury or 
whether it was being exacerbated by a urinary tract infection.  (JE 6, p. 37)  VonBank 
documented Jones reported she discussed her back pain with some coworkers and 

JONES V. ALUMA, LTD. 
Page 7 
 
 
they encouraged her to report it as a workers’ compensation injury.  (JE 6, p. 37)  No 
coworkers testified or provided written affidavits for Jones at hearing. 
VonBank documented Jones reported the radiculopathy in her legs had resolved 
and the Medrol Dosepak resulted in significant improvement, but relayed she was 
experiencing pain across her low back.  (JE 6, p. 37)  VonBank assessed Jones with 
chronic low back pain and documented, “I told patient that I could not conclusively prove 
that her low back pain in December was caused by a work injury.  She has underlying 
history of chronic low back issues which are recurrent,” and noted she presented with 
urinary complaints that could have contributed to her discomfort.  (JE 6, pp. 37-38)  
VonBank prescribed a Medrol Dosepak and released Jones to return to work with a ten 
pound lifting restriction.  (JE 6, p. 38)   
The claims adjuster for Aluma and Depositors sent a missive to VonBank asking 
for her opinion on Jones’s injury.  (JE 6, p. 39)  VonBank responded she had diagnosed 
Jones with an exacerbation of chronic back pain and opined Jones had not sustained a 
work injury, documenting there was no way to concretely prove Jones’s low back pain 
was secondary to a work injury because she has a history of chronic back pain.  (JE 6, 
p. 40)   
On March 7, 2017, Braun sent Jones a letter, which provided, in part: 
[t]his morning you had a doctor appointment and submitted a note that 
included work restrictions to no lifting above 10 pounds.  After looking at 
the note closer, it was noted that the injury is not caused by work.  
Because this is not a work-related injury and Aluma has a policy to not 
honor work restrictions when they are from a non-work-related injury, we 
are unable to accommodate the work restrictions set in place by your 
physician. 
You began working for Aluma on August 8, 2016 and because you 
have not yet completed 12 months of service and you have not worked 
1,250 hours for Aluma, you are not eligible for FMLA leave.  However, 
Aluma will grant you a short term, 1 week, personal leave of absence as 
your follow-up appointment for a re-check is scheduled for 1 week.  At 
your follow up appointment, if you receive a return to work note without 
any restrictions you will be able to return to work after completing a PCP 
screening.  The PCP screening will not be completed until you are cleared 
to work with no restrictions as we do not want to aggravate your condition. 
(JE 2, 3, p. 8) 
VonBank issued a work release on March 13, 2017, releasing Jones to return to 
work without restrictions.  (JE 6, p. 41)  The next day Jones underwent a physical 
capacity profile for her position with Aluma.  (JE 3, p. 9)  The tester noted Jones’s 

JONES V. ALUMA, LTD. 
Page 8 
 
 
position fell in the category of heavy work, requiring the ability to exert fifty to 100 
pounds of force occasionally, and/or twenty-five to fifty pounds of force frequently, 
and/or ten to twenty pounds of force constantly.  (JE 3, p. 9)  The tester found Jones 
could not physically perform her position, but she could perform medium work, requiring  
the ability to exert twenty to fifty pounds of force occasionally, and/or up to ten to 
twenty-five pounds of force frequently, and/or greater than negligible up to ten pounds 
of force constantly.  (JE 3, p. 9)  The tester noted Jones complained of significant low 
back pain with associated muscle weakness in either or both legs and using the AMA 
Guides 5th Edition, Jones had a job placement presumptive impairment of 25 percent.  
(JE 3, p. 10)   
On March 15, 2017, Jones returned to work.  (JE 3, p. 20)  Braun documented 
because of her score on the physical capacity profile she was moved to assembly by 
the robot because the area does not have any heavy lifting.  (JE 3, p. 20)   
Jones testified the welding robot has two different sides.  (Tr., p. 32)  One side 
made ATV ramps and the other made tailgates.  (Tr., p. 32)  Jones reported her job was 
to put the pieces “in there” and the robot would weld it together, and then she would 
take off the item and fix any of the welds that needed to be fixed.  (Tr., p. 32)  Jones 
reported the position with the robot involved “a lot of lifting all day long. . . instead of 
welding,” which aggravated her back.  (Tr., pp. 32-33)  Jones relayed the assembly 
department would have been an easier assignment for her and she does not know why 
Aluma did not assign her there.  (Tr., p. 33)   
The robot is located in the assembly department.  (Tr., p. 109)  Braun testified 
the robot assembly area does not have any heavy lifting.  (Tr., p. 103)  Braun testified 
Jones was not actually using the robot, she was working in front of the robot.  (Tr., p. 
109)   
On August 18, 2017, Jones attended an appointment Josiah Brinkley, M.D. for an 
employment physical for a position with 3M.  (JE 6, p. 42)  Dr. Brinkley documented 
Jones reported a history of bipolar disorder, but he did not believe she had ever had 
bipolar disorder.  (JE 6, p. 42)  Dr. Brinkley’s record does not discuss any back pain or 
back problems Jones was having or had in the past.  (JE 6) 
On September 5, 2017, Jones resigned from Aluma after accepting a position 
with 3M.  (JE 3, p. 23; Tr., p. 42)  Braun testified from the time Jones returned to work in 
March 2017 until she left in September 2017, Jones’s work performance was fantastic 
and she received two pay increases.  (Tr., p. 105)  Braun testified when Jones resigned, 
she did not tell her she was resigning due to her back issues, noting Jones told Braun 
she was excited to be working in a building that was air-conditioned and that she did not 
like the heat on the production floor at Aluma, which is not air-conditioned.  (Tr., p. 105)  
Jones was eligible for rehire at Aluma when she resigned. 

JONES V. ALUMA, LTD. 
Page 9 
 
 
During her employment with Aluma Jones worked as a waitress and bartender 
for Pep’s restaurant in Algona.  (Tr., p. 59)  Jones continued to work for Pep’s until 
September 2017.  (Tr., pp. 59-60)   
At 3M Jones worked as a warehouse operator where she operated a forklift with 
a pallet to pick up boxes to fill orders.  (Tr., p. 44)  Jones testified she enjoyed working 
at 3M, but over time she was missing work due to her back and she not meeting her 
goals and her position ended when 3M let her go.  (Tr., pp. 45, 64)   
On October 5, 2017, Jones attended an appointment with Twyla Ostercamp, 
D.O. with MC Forest City, regarding urinary symptoms and back pain.  (JE 7, p. 43)  
Jones complained of low back pain for ten months that “occurs occasionally,” radiating 
into her right calf and thigh she described as burning, deep, and cramping, and 
recurring urinary tract infections.  (JE 7, p. 43)  Dr. Ostercamp documented Jones 
reported the “[t]rauma occurred due to lifting while at work, 10 [m]onths ago, on 
12/5/2016,” and that her symptoms were aggravated by lying/rest and intimacy, and 
relieved by movement.  (JE 7, p. 43)  Dr. Ostercamp assessed Jones with acute midline 
low back pain with sciatica, acute cystitis, and dysuria, ordered x-rays of her spine, and 
treated her urinary symptoms.  (JE 7, p 44)  Jones received the imaging and the 
reviewing radiologist listed an impression of some disc narrowing from L4 through L6.  
(JE 7, p. 45)   
Jones attended a follow-up appointment with Dr. Ostercamp on October 12, 
2017, complaining of urinary problems, back pain, and a mood disorder aggravated by 
conflict or stress and chronic low back pain.  (JE 7, p. 46)  Dr. Ostercamp assessed 
Jones with acute cystitis, leg cramps, and anxiety, and prescribed Lexapro.  (JE 7, p. 
48)   
On December 18, 2017, Jones returned to Dr. Ostercamp regarding her mood 
disorder and back pain.  (JE 7, p. 49)  Jones described her back pain as an ache and 
dull, reported it was worsening, and relayed it was aggravated by bending, changing 
positions, daily activities, lifting, standing, twisting, and walking, and relieved by lying 
down and rest.  (JE 7, p. 49)  Jones complained of leg cramps “usually every night.”  
(JE 7, p. 49)  Dr. Ostercamp assessed Jones with anxiety and leg cramps and 
continued her Lexapro.  (JE 7, p. 51)   
Jones attended an appointment with Dr. Ostercamp on December 29, 2017, 
complaining of piercing and sharp musculoskeletal pain with an onset four months 
before the appointment that was occasional and fluctuating in her calf without radiation 
or an injury and a mood disorder.  (JE 7, p. 52)  Dr. Ostercamp assessed Jones with leg 
cramps and anxiety and prescribed Prozac.  (JE 7, pp. 53-54)  Jones underwent a 
Doppler exam of her legs for her leg cramps, which was normal.  (JE 7, pp. 55-56)   
On January 24, 2018 and February 13, 2018, Jones attended appointments with 
Dr. Ostercamp regarding her leg pain, leg swelling, and depression.  (JE 7, pp. 57-62)   

JONES V. ALUMA, LTD. 
Page 10 
 
 
On March 2, 2018, Jones attended an appointment with Jessica Koppen, ARNP, 
with MC Forest City, complaining of upper back pain radiating into her right thigh and 
problems with anxiety.  (JE 7, p. 63)  Koppen documented Jones reported she had 
injured her back eighteen months ago when she was lifting something at work.  (JE 7, p. 
63)  Koppen assessed Jones with acute midline low back pain with right-sided sciatica 
and anxiety with depression, referred Jones for physical therapy, and prescribed 
prednisone.  (JE 7, p. 65)   
On March 26, 2018, Jones attended an appointment with Mercy Clinics Family 
Medicine in Fort Dodge, complaining of lower back pain and right leg and foot pain for 
eighteen months, and reporting she recently reinjured herself while moving things two to 
three weeks ago.  (JE 8, p. 75)  Jones reported she had injured her back while lifting at 
work eighteen months ago and noted the pain was worse for the past two weeks with 
severe pain down her right leg.  (JE 8, p. 75)  John Birkett, M.D., examined Jones, 
assessed her with acute lumbar radiculopathy, and encouraged Jones to return to her 
regular physician for magnetic resonance imaging and a neurosurgical evaluation, if 
needed.  (JE 8, pp. 75-76)   
Mercy Clinics Family Medicine submitted an attending physician statement to 
3M, documenting Jones had injured her back at work eighteen months before and had 
reinjured herself while moving.  (JE 8, p. 77)  Mercy Clinics Family Medicine restricted 
Jones from working form March 26, 2018 through April 10, 2018, and released her to 
return to work on April 11, 2018.  (JE 8, p. 78)   
Jones testified at hearing she reinjured her back when pulling her mattress away 
from the wall so she could clean behind it.  (Tr., pp. 37, 65, 72)  Jones reported her 
symptoms eventually returned to her baseline.  (Tr., p. 37)   
Jones applied for a welder position with JetCo.  (Tr., p. 40)  Jones reported on 
her way to her interview she fell and knocked herself out.  (Tr., p. 40)   
On April 5, 2018, Jones underwent a pre-employment physical for a welder 
position with JetCo with Jacob Miller, ARNP, CRNA with Humboldt County Public 
Health.  (JE 9, p. 79)  Jones reported she had injured her back in December 2016, but 
had no restrictions.  (JE 9, p. 80)  After examining Jones, Miller opined Jones could not 
perform the essential functions of the position.  (JE 9, p. 82)   
On April 10, 2018, Jones attended an appointment with Mark Palit, M.D., an 
orthopedic surgeon with Iowa Specialty Hospitals and Clinics.  (JE 10, p. 90)  Dr. Palit 
documented Jones reported she injured her back eighteen months ago when she 
twisted her back while carrying a light bar, and complained of low back pain radiating 
into her right leg.  (JE 10, p. 90)  Dr. Palit documented Jones had asymmetrical reflexes 
and recommended magnetic resonance imaging.  (JE 10, p. 91)   

JONES V. ALUMA, LTD. 
Page 11 
 
 
Jones underwent lumbar spine magnetic resonance imaging on April 11, 2018.  
(JE 10, p. 93)  The reviewing radiologist listed an impression of “(Hypertrophic) 
degenerative changes (exaggerated throughout the lower lumbar spine facet joints with 
a mild lumbar facet joint arthropathy) with (developing) L4-L5 and L5-S1 degenerative 
disc disease (without significant central canalicular stenosis and/or foraminal stenosis).”  
(JE 10, p. 94)   
On April 12, 2018, Jones returned to Dr. Palit after reviewing her imaging.  (JE 
10, p. 95)  Dr. Palit diagnosed Jones with spinal stenosis of the lumbar region with 
neurogenic claudication and L5-S1 stenosis, recommended a right-sided selective 
nerve root block at L5 and S1, and released Jones to return to work on April 18, 2018, 
following the injection.  (JE 10, pp. 95-99)   
On April 17, 2018, Jones attended an appointment with Miller for an initial 
consultation and right L5 nerve root injection on a referral from Mark Palit, M.D.  (JE 9, 
p. 83)  Jones complained of axial lower back pain symptoms in her right hip, right leg, 
and right foot.  (JE 9, p. 83)  Miller assessed Jones with lumbosacral radiculopathy 
unresponsive to conservative treatment, noted her level of disability was moderate to 
severe, and administered a right L5 selective nerve root block.  (JE 9, pp. 86-89) 
Jones returned to Dr. Palit on May 10, 2018, following the injection and reporting 
her shooting pain was better, but she still had constant pain mostly in her right leg and 
thigh that becomes worse by the end of the day.  (JE 10, p. 100)  Dr. Palit examined 
Jones and ordered physical therapy.  (JE 10, p. 101)   
Jones testified she injured her left clavicle when she fell after her leg gave out 
when she was going down some stairs at a park.  (Tr., p. 41)  Jones made an 
appointment with Kristina Johnson, PA-C who works under Emile Li, M.D. at Iowa 
Specialty Hospitals and Clinics.  (JE 10, p. 102; Tr., p. 41)  Dr. Li documented Jones 
reported on June 20, 2018, “two men were fighting.  The altercation came towards her 
and she states she was ‘slammed into the wall.’”  (JE 10, p. 102)  Dr. Li diagnosed 
Jones with a displaced left midshaft clavicle fracture and recommended she wear a 
sling.  (JE 10, p. 103)  Jones testified at hearing she told Johnson and Li her leg had 
given out and denied she told them she was slammed into a wall when two men were 
fighting, explaining “nobody was fighting.  It’s, like – it was friends that were just kind of 
horsing around, and I got pushed into the wall.  I didn’t even – I don’t know why it’s even 
in quotes because I didn’t say I was slammed into any wall.”  (Tr., pp. 75-76)  Jones 
agreed her medical records did not document she fell after her leg gave out when she 
was going some stairs at a park.  (Tr., p. 77) 
During a follow-up appointment with Johnson on July 13, 2018, Jones reported 
she had tripped and fell the day before while getting ready and landed with her left arm 
extended.  (JE 10, p. 104)  Johnson ordered and reviewed additional imaging, assessed 
Jones with a resolving fracture without complication, and recommended she continue 
wearing the sling.  (JE 10, p. 105)   

JONES V. ALUMA, LTD. 
Page 12 
 
 
Jones received surgery for her left clavicle in October 2018.  (Tr., p. 41)   
On November 6, 2018, Jones returned to Dr. Palit complaining of low back pain.  
(JE 10, p. 106)  Dr. Palit documented Jones had not pursued physical therapy due to 
economic and financial reasons and he prescribed prednisone.  (JE 10, p. 107)   
Jones attended an appointment with Dr. Palit on November 20, 2018, and 
relayed she had received minimal pain relief from the prednisone taper.  (JE 10, p. 108)  
Dr. Palit ordered additional physical therapy.  (JE 10, p. 109)  Dr. Palit did not impose 
any permanent restrictions.  (Tr., p. 82)   
IMT hired Jones as a body welder.  (Tr., pp. 45-46)  Jones was moved to the 
crane weld department, where she was paid $17.00 per hour.  (Tr., pp. 45-46)  Jones 
reported her position with IMT ended because the lifting was heavier than the lifting at 
Aluma and she was experiencing a lot of pain and cramping.  (Tr., pp. 46-47)   
After leaving IMT, Jones went to work for Bennigan’s, but reported she was 
having a lot of pain and tripping a lot, so she applied for a position with Dollar General.  
(Tr., pp. 47-48)  At the time of the hearing Jones was still working for Dollar General as 
a cashier, earning $9.75 per hour.  (Tr., p. 48)  She was also working for Apple Valley 
Assisted Living as a medication manager, passing medication to the residents, and 
earning $12.00 per hour.  (Tr., pp. 48-49)  Jones helps with laundry, setting up meals, 
giving meals, cleaning up after meals, and assisting the residents with taking showers.  
(Tr., p. 48)  Jones works for Dollar General and Apple Valley a total of fifty-five hours 
per week.  (Tr., p. 82)   
On July 31,2019, Jones attended an appointment with Burt Bottjen, M.D., with 
MC Forest City, complaining of back pain and musculoskeletal pain.  (JE 7, p. 69)  
Jones relayed she had low back pain and aching, dull, and piercing pain in her right leg 
with associated numbness.  (JE 7, p. 69)  Dr. Bottjen assessed Jones with lumbar back 
pain with radiculopathy affecting the lower extremity and leg cramps, and ordered 
magnetic resonance imaging.  (JE 7, pp. 72-73)   
Sunil Bansal, M.D., an occupational medicine physician, conducted an 
independent medical examination for Jones on January 23, 2020 and issued his report 
on January 31, 2020.  (JE 11)  Dr. Bansal examined Jones and reviewed her medical 
records.  (JE 11)  Dr. Bansal documented Jones reported on December 20, 2016, she 
sustained an injury to her back when: 
[s]he was welding, and began to develop pain in her back.  She went to 
Human Resources and asked if she could be placed on light duty, but this 
request was denied and she was returned to work.  She bent forward and 
lifted a flipper made of cast iron and steel approximately 14 times per day.  
She had already lifted it and set it down three times that day.  The day 
prior to this she had lifted the flipper all day long.  As she lifted a lighter 

JONES V. ALUMA, LTD. 
Page 13 
 
 
object and twisted, she had sharp severe pain in her right lower back, with 
no radiating pain. 
(JE 11, pp. 117, 119)  Dr. Bansal noted Jones reported no previous injuries or problems 
with her back.  (JE 11, p. 117)   
Dr. Bansal diagnosed Jones with a disc bulge at L5-S1 with an annular tear.  (JE 
11, p. 119)  Dr. Bansal opined Jones aggravated a disc bulge at L5-S1 with annular 
tearing “from repeatedly bending and lifting the flippers, coming forward to December 
20, 2016.”   (JE 11, p. 119)   
Using the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment (AMA Press, 5th 
Ed. 2001) (“AMA Guides”), Dr. Bansal opined “based on her current symptomatology 
and physical examination, she meets the criteria of a DRE Category II Impairment.  She 
has radicular complaints, loss of range of motion, and guarding,” and he assigned her a 
five percent whole person impairment based on Table 15-3.  (JE 11, p. 119)  Dr. Bansal 
recommended permanent restrictions of no lifting over twenty-five pounds, no frequent 
bending or twisting, and no prolonged sitting greater than 30 minutes at a time.  (JE 11, 
p. 120)   
Jones testified day-to-day she has constant pain in her lower back and pain that 
goes down the middle of her leg.  (Tr., p. 49)  Jones described the pain as sciatica, a 
burning, strong ache, twitching in her calf muscle, pain in her foot and ankle, with 
tingling, numbness, and weakness.  (Tr., p. 49)  Jones relayed “I have just the feeling of 
weakness in my leg where it feels like it’s going to go out underneath me.  And starting 
to get pains where my big toe is starting to hurt from – I’m starting to walk differently so 
my leg, you know, doesn’t teeter on me.”  (Tr., pp. 49-50)  Jones stated the pain 
sometimes feels like she has been stung by a hornet, noted her leg will jerk randomly, 
her foot and ankle will turn inward on her.  (Tr., p. 50)   
Jones reported she has difficulty with reaching and carrying her children.  (Tr., p. 
50)  Jones relayed she has to spend a lot of time lying down flat.  (Tr., p. 51)   
At the time of the hearing Jones was living alone.  (Tr., p. 85)  Jones reported 
she does her own laundry, housecleaning, and meal preparation.  (Tr., p. 85)  Jones 
has to carry smaller loads of laundry and cannot dance, or go for long walks, or 
snowmobile anymore.  (Tr., pp. 50-51)  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
I. 
Applicable Law 
This case involves several issues, including nature and extent of disability, 
recovery of the cost of an independent medical examination, recovery of costs, and 
interest under Iowa Code sections 85.34, 85.39, 86.40, and 535.3.  In March 2017, the 
legislature enacted changes (hereinafter “Act”) relating to workers’ compensation in 

JONES V. ALUMA, LTD. 
Page 14 
 
 
Iowa.  2017 Iowa Acts chapter 23 (amending Iowa Code sections 85.16, 85.18, 85.23, 
85.26, 85.33, 85.34, 85.39, 85.45, 85.70, 85.71, 86.26, 86.39, 86.42, and 535.3).  Under 
2017 Iowa Acts chapter 23 section 24, the changes to Iowa Code section 85.34 apply to 
injuries occurring on or after the effective date of the Act.  This case involves an alleged 
work injury occurring before July 1, 2017, therefore, the provisions of the new statute do 
not apply to this case.   
The calculation of interest is governed by Sanchez v. Tyson, File No. 5052008 
(Ruling on Defendant’s Motion to Enlarge, Reconsider, or Amend Appeal Decision Re: 
Interest Rate Issue), which holds interest for all weekly benefits payable and not paid 
when due which accrued before July 1, 2017, is payable at the rate of ten percent; all 
interest on past due weekly compensation benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, is 
payable at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.   
II. 
Arising Out of and in the Course of Employment 
To receive workers’ compensation benefits, an injured employee must prove, by 
a preponderance of the evidence, the employee’s injuries arose out of and in the course 
of the employee’s employment with the employer.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 
N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 1995).  An injury arises out of employment when a causal 
relationship exists between the employment and the injury.  Quaker Oats v. Ciha, 552 
N.W.2d 143, 151 (Iowa 1996).  The injury must be a rational consequence of a hazard 
connected with the employment, and not merely incidental to the employment.  Koehler 
Elec. v. Willis, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held an 
injury occurs “in the course of employment” when: 
it is within the period of employment at a place where the employee 
reasonably may be in performing his duties, and while he is fulfilling those 
duties or engaged in doing something incidental thereto.  An injury in the 
course of employment embraces all injuries received while employed in 
furthering the employer’s business and injuries received on the employer’s 
premises, provided that the employee’s presence must ordinarily be 
required at the place of the injury, or, if not so required, employee’s 
departure from the usual place of employment must not amount to an 
abandonment of employment or be an act wholly foreign to his usual work.  
An employee does not cease to be in the course of his employment 
merely because he is not actually engaged in doing some specifically 
prescribed task, if, in the course of his employment, he does some act 
which he deems necessary for the benefit or interest of his employer. 
Farmers Elevator Co. v. Manning, 286 N.W.2d 174, 177 (Iowa 1979).   

JONES V. ALUMA, LTD. 
Page 15 
 
 
Whether a claimant’s injury arises out of the claimant’s employment is a “mixed 
question of law and fact.”  Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 169, 173 (Iowa 2007).  
The Iowa Supreme Court has held, 
[t]he factual aspect of this decision requires the [trier of fact] to determine 
“the operative events that [gave] rise to the injury.”  Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 
N.W.2d 213, 218 (Iowa 2006).  Once the facts are determined, a legal 
question remains:  “[W]hether the facts, as determined, support a 
conclusion that the injury ‘arose out of . . . [the] employment,’ under our 
workers’ compensation statute.”   
Id.   
Aluma and Depositors contend Jones did not sustain an injury arising out of and 
in the course of her employment with Aluma alleging Jones is not a credible witness, 
relying on the testimony of Braun, and records in the case.  Jones alleges Dr. Bansal’s 
opinion is unrebutted and supports she sustained a work-related injury.  During the 
hearing I assessed the credibility of Jones and Braun by considering whether their 
testimony was reasonable and consistent with other evidence I believe, whether they 
made inconsistent statements, their “appearance, conduct, memory and knowledge of 
the facts,” and their interest in the case.  State v. Frake, 450 N.W.2d 817, 819 (Iowa 
1990).   
Jones has an obvious interest in the outcome of this case.  Braun is employed by 
Aluma and also has an interest in this case.  I had the opportunity to observe Braun and 
Jones testify under oath.  During their testimony Braun and Jones engaged in direct eye 
contact, their rate of speech was appropriate, and they did not engage in any furtive 
movements.  Braun’s memory was clear and consistent.  Braun maintained 
contemporaneous records of her interactions with Jones and of the documents she 
received regarding Jones.  (JE 3)  I find Braun’s testimony reasonable and consistent 
with the other evidence I believe.  I can understand a claimant may be off by one day in 
reporting a work injury like Jones did in this case, however, Jones’s testimony is replete 
with inconsistencies, from the alleged bonus plan, to her conversations with co-workers 
about the alleged injury, to her preexisting back pain, to the story regarding her clavicle 
fracture.  I do not find Jones’s testimony she sustained an injury to her back while 
working for Aluma on December 14, 2016, reasonable and consistent with the other 
evidence I believe. 
Jones testified on December 14, 2016, she told Braun she was having trouble 
with her back.  (Tr., p. 26)  Jones reported “ I don't really remember if we talked about 
why.· I think she just kind of knows that with that job, there comes a lot of pain with it.· I 
don't·know if she -- if we talked about it.· I don't remember exactly what was said.”  (Tr., 
p. 26)  Braun documented on December 14, 2016, Jones came to her office and asked 
if Aluma had any light duty work for her.  (JE 3, p. 17)  Braun wrote, 

JONES V. ALUMA, LTD. 
Page 16 
 
 
I asked her why she needed light duty and she told me that she hurt her 
back over the weekend and it was acting up.  I asked if she did something 
here at Aluma that caused the pain and she said no.  I then told her the 
Aluma policy is we do not have light duty for non-work related injuries and 
Jennifer said “that is fine but I am going to go home today.”   
(JE 3, p. 17)  Braun testified Aluma had provided Jones with instruction on reporting 
work injuries the first day of her employment.  (Tr., pp. 94-95)  December 14, 2016 was 
a Wednesday.  At the time of her alleged work injury, Jones was also working for 
another employer, Pep’s as a bartender and waitress.  (Tr., p. 59)   
Jones testified at hearing she did not want to report she had sustained a work 
injury, noting “I was trying to kind of be vague about it and kind of work around saying 
that Aluma was causing these – the injury” because she did not want to lose her job.  
(Tr., pp. 26-27)  There is no evidence Jones’s job was in jeopardy.  Jones continued to 
receive raises from Aluma following the alleged work injury and when she resigned to 
take the position with 3M, Jones was eligible for rehire.   
Jones’s testimony is also inconsistent with her written statement on the February 
28, 2017 injury report, where she wrote, “I didn’t believe it was work related because I 
had back soreness prior to working at Aluma.”  (JE 3, p. 19) 
Jones testified she felt pressured not to report her injury because the Aluma 
workers received a bonus for maintaining an accident or injury free workplace.  Jones 
explained, 
[t]hat you go – that the whole company goes accident-free and injury-free.  
They give you free stuff for reaching a certain date.  I think it was maybe 
150 days accident-free, and then I think one other time we got chairs and 
another time maybe blankets.  It just depended.  There wasn’t – there 
always seems to be injuries so it didn’t happen very often. 
(Tr., pp. 27-28)  Jones relayed other workers would “really get after you” for reporting a 
work injury.  (Tr., p. 28)   
There are 365 days in a year.  Jones worked for Aluma for thirteen months until 
she resigned to take a position with 3M.  (JE 3, p. 23; Tr., p. 42)  Her testimony that the 
“bonuses” did not happen often because “there always seems to be injuries” does not 
make sense.  According to her testimony, the plant was accident free two-thirds of the 
time, but injuries were “always” happening.   
Contrary to Jones’s testimony, Braun testified Aluma has never had a bonus plan 
reporting “[w]e don’t have a benefit plan, no.  For safety, no.”  (Tr., p. 111)  Braun 
reported there were no departmental goals for safety; workers are not given a prize or 

JONES V. ALUMA, LTD. 
Page 17 
 
 
benefit for being injury-free.  (Tr., p. 111)  Jones did not present any documentary or 
witness testimony concerning the alleged bonus plan.   
When she completed the injury report form on February 28, 2017, Jones 
documented she told three of her coworkers, Ron, Melissa, and Tiffany about her work 
injury.  (JE 3, p. 19)  Braun testified she spoke with Melissa and Ron and they told her 
they had not heard Jones talk about injuring her back and they did not know anything 
about an injury.  (Tr., p. 100)  Braun testified Tiffany told her Jones “stated that at one 
time she recalled helping her outside to her car, but from the comments made, her 
inclination was that it was something that happened outside of work.”  (Tr., p. 101)  
Braun testified Melissa, Tiffany, and Ron did not tell her Jones had sustained a work 
injury based on their observations of Jones or based on conversations with her.  (Tr., p. 
101)  Jones did not call any witnesses at hearing or submit any affidavits to contradict 
Braun’s testimony. 
Jones also made inconsistent statements concerning a preexisting back 
condition.  Her medical records document a recurring back problem.  Jones explained 
she had intermittent back pain during pregnancy.  Her medical records do not reference 
back pain during pregnancy, but rather document preexisting back pain.  This is also 
supported by Jones’s statement on the report of injury form, “I didn’t believe it was work 
related because I’ve had back soreness prior to working at Aluma.”  (JE 3, p. 19) 
Jones’s testimony regarding the clavicle fracture is also troubling.  Jones testified 
she injured her left clavicle when she fell after her leg gave out when she was going 
down some stairs at a park.  (Tr., p. 41)  Dr. Li documented Jones reported she was 
injured when “two men were fighting.  The altercation came towards her and she states 
she was ‘slammed into the wall.’”  (JE 10, p. 102)  Jones testified at hearing she told 
Johnson and Li her leg had given out and denied she told them she was slammed into a 
wall when two men were fighting, explaining “nobody was fighting.  It’s, like – it was 
friends that were just kind of horsing around, and I got pushed into the wall.  I didn’t 
even – I don’t know why it’s even in quotes because I didn’t say I was slammed into any 
wall.”  (Tr., pp. 75-76)  Jones agreed her medical records did not document she fell after 
her leg gave out when she was going down some stairs at a park.  (Tr., p. 77) 
Based on the foregoing, I do not find Jones to be a credible witness.  I do not 
believe Jones sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of her employment 
with Aluma.  Jones has not met her burden of proof in this case.  Based on this finding 
the issues of permanency and recovery of medical bills are moot.   
III. 
Independent Medical Examination 
Jones seeks to recover the $2,632.00 cost of Dr. Bansal’s independent medical 
examination.  Iowa Code section 85.39 (2016), provides, in part: 

JONES V. ALUMA, LTD. 
Page 18 
 
 
[a]fter an injury, the employee, if requested by the employer, shall submit 
for examination at some reasonable time and place and as often as 
reasonably requested, to a physician or physicians authorized to practice 
under the laws of this state or another state, without cost to the employee; 
but if the employee requests, the employee, at the employee’s own cost, 
is entitled to have a physician or physicians of the employee’s own 
selection present to participate in the examination.  If an employee is 
required to leave work for which the employee is being paid wages to 
attend the requested examination, the employee shall be compensated at 
the employee’s regular rate for the time the employee is required to leave 
work, and the employee shall be furnished transportation to and from the 
place of examination, or the employer may elect to pay the employee the 
reasonable cost of the transportation. . . . If an evaluation of permanent 
disability has been made by a physician retained by the employer and the 
employee believes this evaluation to be too low, the employee shall, upon 
application to the commissioner and upon delivery of a copy of the 
application to the employer and its insurance carrier, be reimbursed by the 
employer the reasonable fee for a subsequent examination by a physician 
of the employee’s own choice, and reasonably necessary transportation 
expenses incurred for the examination. . . . 
No physician retained by Aluma or Depositors made an evaluation of permanent 
disability before Dr. Bansal conducted his independent medical examination.  Jones is 
not entitled to recover the cost of Dr. Bansal’s independent medical examination under 
Iowa Code section 85.39.   
IV. 
Costs 
Jones seeks to recover $100.00 for the filing fee, $13.40 for service, $182.60 for 
a deposition copy, and the $2,632.00 cost of Dr. Bansal’s independent medical 
examination.  (JE 13)  Iowa Code section 86.40 provides, “[a]ll costs incurred in the 
hearing before the commissioner shall be taxed in the discretion of the commissioner.”  
And rule 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33(6), provides 
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by 
Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) costs of persons reviewing 
health service disputes.  

JONES V. ALUMA, LTD. 
Page 19 
 
 
Jones was not successful in proving her claim.  I find the parties should bear their own 
costs.   
ORDER 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, THAT: 
Claimant shall take nothing in this proceeding. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this     22nd      day of April, 2020. 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           HEATHER L. PALMER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Janece M. Valentine (via WCES) 
Anne Clark (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
