Case Number: 5066443
Case Title:  GRIM, JOHN WILLIAM V. DEXTER LAUNDRY, INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Grim John-5066443D.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JOHN WILTON GRIM, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                         File No. 5066443 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N 
 
 
  : 
DEXTER LAUNDRY, 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
 
Defendant. 
  :                Head Note Nos.:  1803.1, 2901 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, John Wilton Grim, brought a claim for workers’ compensation benefits 
against Dexter Laundry, a self-insured employer for a disputed work injury.  
The hearing was held on October 14, 2019 in Des Moines, Iowa, and considered 
fully submitted on November 4, 2019, upon the simultaneous filing of briefs.  
The record consists of JE 1-3, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-3 and 5-9, Defendant’s 
Exhibits A-I, and the testimony of the claimant and Katie Six.  
STIPULATIONS 
The parties agree claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of 
his employment on January 26, 2017. They agree that the injury was the cause of 
temporary disability entitlement to which is no longer in dispute.  
The parties disagree as to the nature and extent of the injury but agree that the 
commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any are awarded, would 
be December 17, 2018.  
At the time of the injury, claimant was married and entitled to two exemptions. 
His gross earnings were $1,171.80. Based on those numbers the weekly benefit rate is 
$731.48. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Jan-21  15:31:25     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

GRIM V. DEXTER LAUNDRY 
Page 2 
 
 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
ISSUES 
Whether claimant sustained injuries which arose out of and in the course of his 
employment on February 21, 2018; February 22, 2018; and/or March 5, 2018; 
Whether claimant is entitled to temporary disability benefits during a period of 
recovery; 
Whether claimant's alleged injuries are a cause of permanent disability; 
Whether claimant's alleged injuries have resulted in industrial disability; 
Whether claimant's claim is barred by a lack of timely notice pursuant to Iowa 
code section 85.23;  
Whether claimants claim is barred as an untimely claim pursuant to Iowa code 
section 85.26; and 
Whether claimant is entitled to payment of medical expenses. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant was a 55-year-old person at the time of hearing. He graduated from 
high school and has some vocational training including a two-week welding course. 
After high school, claimant went to work for a farmer as a general laborer. He fed 
animals, ran machines, and other work around the farm. He worked there for 
approximately one year. Following that position, he moved to a wood shop where he did 
sandblasting for approximately a year. He then began welding on tanks and then 
worked as a material handler at an overhead crane manufacturer. In 1991, he began 
work for the defendant employer where he welded commercial laundry machines. He 
primarily worked with tubs, welding the metal tumblers together and affixing legs. He 
averaged 45 to 50 hours of work per week. He wore a welding helmet for approximately 
22 to 23 years. He would handle the helmet 100 to 200 times a day and sometimes up 
to 300 to 400 times a day by lifting the facemask of the helmet up with his hand and 
then jerking his head to bring the helmet down. In 2017, his job changed when two 
panels were added to his work routine. This required him to pull a 4x4 panel weighing 
approximately 45 pounds, lift it, flip it upright and slide it on to the table.  
He is still employed with the defendant employer.  
On February 2, 2018, claimant was seen at the University of Iowa Hospitals and 
Clinics (UIHC) for “continued left knee pain” following the knee replacement surgery in 

GRIM V. DEXTER LAUNDRY 
Page 3 
 
 
August 2017. (Joint Exhibit 1:2) He was walking with a limp and feeling pain in his left 
lower leg, hip and back. The pain began in November and worsened. Id. He also 
reported numbness, tingling and weakness in the left arm. (JE 1:5) He had some 
reduced strength on the left as opposed to the right upper extremity and slightly 
decreased sensation in the C4-T1. (JE 1:10) He reported that he was dropping things 
when he tried holding them in his left hand. Imaging showed prominent osteophyte 
formation at C5-C6. An MRI was ordered and claimant was instructed to modify 
activities and limit hyperextension of his neck. (JE 1:11) 
Claimant testified that his symptoms of numbness and general “weirdness” in his 
fingertips began in January and that his neck pain began weeks before his knee 
surgery. At hearing, claimant described having pain that caused him to go “down at 
work” and at the deposition he characterized the pain as a spasm. (Exhibit A:6; Hearing 
Testimony) 
After the cervical MRI which showed severe canal and left foraminal involvement 
at C3 – C5 claimant returned to the Spine Clinic on February 23, 2018. (JE 1:16) 
Claimant was prescribed gabapentin for the radicular discomfort and baclofen for lower 
back spasms. Id. He was encouraged again to modify his activity and avoid 
hyperextension of his neck. Id.  
Andrew Pugely, M.D., an orthopedic specialist, evaluated claimant on February 
27, 2018. (JE 1:17) In the historical section, patient was reported to have had 
clumsiness with the left hand and decreased grip strength present since November, 
numbness and tingling most intensely in the thumb, index and middle fingers but also 
affecting the entire arm. (JE 1:17) Claimant also complained of debilitating low back 
spasms that had kept him from work. Id. Given the claimant's condition, Dr. Pugely 
recommended decompression and fusion of levels C3-C5 as even a minor trauma could 
result in a devastating injury to the cervical spine. (JE 1:19)  
The surgery took place on March 5, 2018. (Joint Exhibit 1:42 – 43)  
After reading claimant’s job description and discussing the issue with claimant, 
Dr. Pugely came to the conclusion that claimant’s injury was work related. Dr. Pugely 
wrote in a letter to the defendants that claimant reported a specific work incident on or 
about 6 weeks’ post-surgery. (Ex. C:1) This is consistent with claimant’s testimony that 
he recalls discussing the issue with Jonathan Rueter, PA-C on the April 24, 2018 visit. 
(JE 1:47) That day the two discussed claimant’s welding activities and Mr. Rueter 
verbally suggested the claimant’s condition was work-related. Claimant then researched 
this issue and came to the conclusion his neck pain, radicular numbness and weakness 
may be work related.  
During the June 1, 2018, postoperative visit with Dr. Pugely, claimant reported 
improvement and left arm pain and weakness. (JE 1:51) He expressed his desire to 
return to work. Id. Work restrictions of no lifting more than 50 pounds, no excess of 

GRIM V. DEXTER LAUNDRY 
Page 4 
 
 
overhead lifting and no excessive neck motion were imposed. (JE 1:52) Claimant tried 
to return to work during the first week of June, but his employer did not want him to 
return until he had no restrictions. (JE 1:49) Claimant’s job description was sent to Dr. 
Pugely’s office by the claimant’s wife and new restrictions were provided of work eight 
hours per day for five days a week, no overtime, and no excessive overhead lifting or 
lifting over 50 pounds. (JE 1:49-50; Ex. 3) 
On June 5, 2018, claimant informed the defendant employer via a letter that he 
had learned that the surgery was necessitated by his many years of working as a 
welder. (Ex. 2:1) 
As you know I have been off of work for a neck surgery that took place on 
March 5, 2018.  It was an emergency surgery.  At a follow up appointment 
the doctor told me that he believed my many years of working as a welder 
likely resulted in the condition and need for surgery.  He said this was a 
common problem for welders.  I did not know this was a work related issue 
until I had this discussion with the surgeon.  During my work hours up to 
the time of surgery I began having significant pain and discomfort in my 
back, left arm and left leg.  I am writing you as I want to let you know that 
this needs to be turned into the workers[’] compensation insurance 
company.  I believe they should be paying the medical expenses and for 
my time off work. 
(Ex 2:1)  
After the work restrictions were sent to the defendant employer, the defendant 
employer informed the claimant that there was no work available within his current job 
classification. (Ex. 3:5)  
Based off of your recent evaluation from Dr. Rueter, your work restrictions 
are very strict.  Based on these restrictions we do not have any work for 
you to perform within your current job classification.  If any changes 
between now and your follow-up appointment in September, you need to 
let us know right away so we can evaluate your return to work status.  
Another option would be to post or bid to a job that may be less physically 
intensive that you could perform within your restrictions, that is totally up to 
you if a bid becomes available.  In summary your restrictions are listed 
below. 
These are John’s restrictions as of 6/8/18 from Dr. Rueter: 
 50 pounds lifting/carrying 
 Avoid repetitive pushing, pulling, lifting, neck twist and turn, head 
look up/down for set periods of time 

GRIM V. DEXTER LAUNDRY 
Page 5 
 
 
 No overhead lifting 
 Work no more than 8 hours daily/5 days a week 
I hope and encourage you to get better soon, so you can return to 
work. 
(Ex. 3:5) Claimant’s claim was officially denied on July 12, 2018, based on the medical 
records received from Dr. Pugely and Jonathan Rueter, PA-C. (Ex. E) Defendants 
informed the claimant that there was no work for him within the current job classification. 
Katie Six, the senior HR administrator for defendant employer who handles workers’ 
compensation claims, testified that prior to June 4, 2018, no one at the defendant 
employer was aware that claimant’s neck injury was a work condition. 
Defendants argue that the claimant did not bring up a work connection until after 
he was told they could not accommodate his restrictions and that his 13 weeks of sick 
and accident leave benefits were exhausted.  
Claimant’s testimony at his deposition, in his answers to interrogatories, and 
during hearing were largely consistent. His demeanor at hearing was straightforward 
and non-argumentative. To the extent that this issue requires a credibility determination, 
I find that claimant was credible based on the consistency in his testimony and the 
subjective complaints as well as his demeanor. I further find that the possibility of the 
injury being work related was not raised until April because that was when Dr. Pugely 
became aware of claimant’s job duties. I do not adopt defendants’ suggestion that 
claimant’s allegations of a work related injury were motivated by the refusal of the 
company to accommodate his restrictions and/or because he ran out of sick and 
accident leave.  
On July 19, 2018, attorney for the claimant wrote to Dr. Pugely asking for a 
causation opinion. (JE 2:1) The following history was provided to Dr. Pugely: 
As I indicated to you on the phone, Mr. Grim has been a welder for 27 
years.  This has required him to use a welding helmet.  For the first 20+ 
years he would have to lift the welding helmet up and down 200-400 times 
a day.  In the past few years there were some changes to the helmet 
where he did not have to lift it as much, but he was still lifting it 100-200 
times a day. 
As noted in his medical records, in February of 2018 he noted that he was 
having left upper extremity numbness and decreased sensation for 
approximately three weeks.  He reported this was related to his work 
activities.  Mr. Grim has indicated that during that time he was working on 
a new side panel, which is approximately four feet by four feet and 40-60 
pounds.  He would have to pull it out of a rack, put it on the ground, then 

GRIM V. DEXTER LAUNDRY 
Page 6 
 
 
pick it up and slide it into a rack.  In order to put it on a rack, he would 
have to lift it in front of his face and tilt his head back to position it and 
place it back on the table that he would weld on.  He would have to do that 
10-20 times.  During late January-early February, while he was doing this 
he noted that his arm was causing him more difficulties in terms of 
numbness and sensation.  He would also feel some discomfort down into 
his back and left leg.  The 10-20 of the larger sized panels would be done 
once a week.  This is when Mr. Grim began feeling more discomfort in his 
left arm, shoulder, and down into his back. 
(JE 2, p. 1) 
Based on this history as well as the examinations conducted by Dr. Pugely and 
treatment recommended by Dr. Pugely, the orthopedic doctor agreed that claimant's 
work activities up through February 2018 were a substantial contributing factor to the 
claimant’s cervical condition and the need for the cervical surgery performed. (JE 2:2) 
Defendants argue that the first two sentences of the attorney’s letter are 
evidence that claimant knew that he had a work related injury in February 2018. 
(Defendant’s Brief, p. 5) First, the undersigned is reluctant to ascribe the writings of the 
attorney to the claimant who may or may not have had input in the creation of the 
document. Second, the statement that “[claimant] reported this was related to his work 
activities” does not necessarily relate to the February 2018 date in the preceding 
sentence. Claimant has reported the left upper extremity numbness and decreased 
sensation was related to his work and that the discussion arose around April to June 
2018. I find that the statement in JE 2:1 that “[claimant] reported this was related to his 
work activities” does not backdate to the February 2018 date. Instead, I rely on the 
claimant’s letter to his employer, the medical notes, and his testimony that he was not 
aware the neck problems were work related until April of 2018.  
By July 26, 2018, claimant had some occasional arm numbness and 
dyscoordination but reported that his balance had greatly improved post-surgery. At this 
time, Dr. Pugely wrote, “His injury and disc herniations and progressive myelopathy are 
the result of a work related injury and chronic overuse as a welder.” (JE 1:54) The plan 
was to gradually increase activity but not release claimant to full activity. (JE 1:54) 
Claimant was instructed to minimize lifting, bending and twisting and keep activities 
below 50 pounds. Id.  
Claimant returned to Dr. Pugely on September 13, 2018 for follow-up. (JE 1:58) 
Dr. Pugely set forth the following restrictions: 
John W. Grim has the following activity restrictions regarding his neck.  
Limit lifting, bending and twisting.  No lifting, pushing, pulling or carrying 
more than 50 pounds. 

GRIM V. DEXTER LAUNDRY 
Page 7 
 
 
John W. Grim is advised not to drive or undertake any activity requiring 
alertness if taking sedating medication. 
Activity restrictions are valid only up to the next appointment date.  If the 
employee fails to keep an appointment, the employee will be assumed to 
be fully recovered, at full duty and at MMI. 
These restrictions apply to work and non-work activities. 
If the employer has no work available within these restrictions, then it is up 
to the employer to remove the employee from work. 
(JE 1:58)  
In a letter dated December 11, 2018, Dr. Pugely was asked by defendant 
employer as to when claimant reported his injury relating to welding. (Ex. C) Dr. Pugely 
did not recall nor did he have it documented. He did agree that “Mr. Grim subsequently 
reported a specific work incident to you approximately six weeks after surgery which 
indicates that he sustained an acute injury at work in January or February 2018.” (Ex. C) 
Dr. Pugely then disagreed with the remainder of the letter including the suggestion that 
claimant had provided an alternate history. (Ex. C) Instead, Dr. Pugely characterized the 
information about claimant’s work as “additional history” and that claimant “provided [Dr. 
Pugely] additional factual history and told [Dr. Pugely] that his symptoms began after 
the injury.” (Ex. C:2)  
December 13, 2018, claimant was nine months’ post-surgery. He continued to 
have some persistent neck, arm and leg pain and intermittent paresthesias, gait 
disturbance and stiffness. (Ex. 1:61) Dr. Pugely released claimant at maximum medical 
improvement and anticipated the claimant would have long-term use of gabapentin for 
management of symptoms. He released claimant with no activity restrictions. (JE 1:61) 
Dr. Pugely assigned a 27 percent whole person impairment. (JE 1:62) The initial 
plan was to reevaluate claimant within a year; however, claimant returned on March 23, 
2019 with reports of low level pain at the posterior base of his neck, left arm and hand, 
bilateral low back, right thigh and calf and medial left knee. He described numbness 
with the second, third and fourth toes, left greater than the right. He also had 
experienced an intermittent sensation like a shock at his left side thoracic area. (JE 
1:66) He reported that when he was tired, his left foot would flap across the floor when 
he walked and that he dropped things with his left hand because of a lack of grip 
strength and decreased feeling in the hands of his fingers. (JE 1:66) Claimant's 
restrictions and treatment remained unchanged. (Ex. 1:70) 
Sunil Bansal, M.D., conducted an examination on July 19, 2019. (Ex. 1) During 
the examination, claimant exhibited tenderness to palpation over the cervical paraspinal 
musculature and a loss of sensory discrimination of the triceps. (Ex. 1:5) 

GRIM V. DEXTER LAUNDRY 
Page 8 
 
 
Dr. Bansal concluded that claimant sustained cervical spine damage as a result 
of cumulative work performed for the defendant employer and assigned a 28 percent 
whole person impairment. (Ex. 1:6, 1:8) Dr. Bansal recommended that claimant may 
benefit from additional medications, epidural injections, physical therapy, a TENS unit, 
or even future fusion surgery. (Ex. 1:8) 
On September 11, 2019, an independent medical evaluation (IME) of the 
claimant was obtained from Chad Abernathey, M.D., a board-certified neurologist. (Ex. 
B:1) Dr. Abernathey opined that the claimant's diagnosis was related to work activities 
causing acute disc extrusion on top of his pre-existing degenerative changes. (Ex. B:1) 
He opined that the claimant achieved maximum medical improvement as of September 
11, 2019 and that he sustained a permanent impairment due to limited range of motion 
secondary to the two-level cervical fusion. (Ex. B:1) He assessed a 15 percent whole 
body impairment rating, but recommended no additional restrictions. (Ex. B)  
Claimant seeks reimbursement for mileage in the amount of $1,832.00 (Ex. 5:1) 
and medical bills in the amount of $112,525.17. (Ex. 6)  
In an FMLA form that was signed by Dr. Pugely on March 29, 2018, the injury 
date was set as February 27, 2018. (Ex. G:1) Dr. Pugely indicated that the condition did 
not arise out of claimant’s employment. (Ex. G:2) In the section requesting a description 
of relevant medical facts, Dr. Pugely wrote the following: 
4.  Describe other relevant medical facts, if any, related to the condition for 
which the employee seeks leave (such medical facts may include 
symptoms, diagnosis, or any regimen of continuing treatment such as the 
use of specialized equipment): 
Orthopedic condition affecting the spine.  Patient underwent surgery on 
3/5/18.  3 - ≈ 5 clinic visits over the next ≈ 6 months.  Pain medications, 
surgical wound care, activity restrictions, lifting restrictions, immobilization, 
etc. 
Patient was originally having problems with his left knee, which was 
thought to originally be due to a previous surgery in August.  However, it 
was determined the problems were coming from his spine.  Relief of the 
leg problem was almost immediate after the spine surgery.  Patient now 
being followed by the spine surgeon. 
(Ex H:2)  
Claimant has returned to his regular welding job and is earning more post-injury 
than pre-injury. He still has symptoms of numbness up the back of his arm, some 
numbness in the left leg, and some pain in his shoulders. His strength is reduced. He 
has self-modified how he carries out his work duties such as welding a handle onto a jar 

GRIM V. DEXTER LAUNDRY 
Page 9 
 
 
as he cannot hold a jar without a handle. He takes 300 mg of gabapentin three times a 
day.  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.14(6). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 
440 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 
1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985).  An 
occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically excluded from the definition 
of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4)(b); Iowa Code section 85A.8; Iowa Code 
section 85A.14. 
In 2017, there were modifications to Chapter 85 of the Iowa Code pertaining to 
the workers’ compensation law. As it pertains to the 90-day notice requirement of Iowa 
Code section 85.23, the following language was added: 

GRIM V. DEXTER LAUNDRY 
Page 10 
 
 
For the purposes of this §, “date of the occurrence of the injury” means the 
date that the employee knew or should have known that the injury was 
work-related.  
Iowa Code § 85.23 (2019). 
The defendant's argument is that the modification to § 85.23 eliminates the 
discovery rule from cumulative injury cases. However, the plain language of the statute 
includes the knew or should have known language which has been used by the Iowa 
Supreme Court for decades in applying the discovery rule. From the face of the statute, 
the legislative intent appears to have codified the discovery rule.  
In Baker v. Bridgestone, 872 N.W.2d 672 (Iowa 2015), the Iowa Supreme Court 
laid out the history of the workers’ compensation statute and described it as a grand 
bargain between the employee who gives up certain tort rights in exchange “for a 
system designed to provide compensation benefits and medical services promptly, 
without protracted and expensive litigation.” Id. at 677. Further, we are to “liberally 
construe workers' compensation statutes in claimants' favor to effectuate the statute's 
humanitarian and beneficent purpose.” Id. at 679. Baker involved the question of 
whether the discovery rule should apply to a single traumatic incident causing a work-
related injury or whether it should be limited to cumulative injuries. Id. at 672. The 
Supreme Court refuse to place the burden on a reasonable worker to know when every 
ache, pain, or symptom was the result of his work. Id. at 682. 
Therefore, without specific language rejecting the discovery rule, the discovery 
rule still applies to the application of Iowa code § 85.23 as it relates to cumulative 
injuries.  
The long-standing rule of law since 1980 is that “the statute of limitations on a 
workers' compensation claim does not begin to run until the claimant knows or should 
recognize the nature, seriousness, and probable compensable character of his or her 
injury.” (Id. at 680-81) More precisely, cumulative injury is deemed to have occurred 
when both the fact of the injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant's 
employment would have become plainly apparent to a reasonable person. Id. at 681. 
This is called the manifestation point. For the claimant, the manifestation point would 
have been April 24, 2018. On that date, claimant testified he discussed his work duties 
with Physician Assistant Rueter and Mr. Rueter believed that the work injury could have 
been the cause of claimant’s neck pain and radicular symptoms necessitating surgery. 
Prior to that date, claimant had been told by his surgeon and the surgeon’s physician 
assistant that he was suffering from age-related degeneration. At one point, claimant 
believed that his back and leg pain were related to his prior knee arthroscopy. It was not 
until the claimant had an in-depth discussion about his work duties, specifically the fact 
that he was lifting large panels on a regular basis and constantly flipping the shield of 
his welding helmet by downward jerk of his head that claimant was aware his work 
activities contributed to an aggravation of pre-existing degenerative condition. 

GRIM V. DEXTER LAUNDRY 
Page 11 
 
 
The injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant’s employment 
manifested on April 24, 2018. Thus, claimant’s June 5, 2018, letter informing his 
employer of his belief that his neck surgery was necessitated by work related activities 
was within the 90-day time period set forth in Iowa code section 85.23. Claimant’s claim 
is not time barred by Iowa code section 85.23.  
By the same argument and by using the same date of manifestation, claimant’s 
petition filed on October 18, 2018, was within the two-year statute of limitations set forth 
in Iowa § 85.26. Like § 85.23, the 2017 modification to § 85.26 was the addition of the 
knew or should have known language. The date of occurrence of the injury is the 
manifestation date. In this case, it is found that the manifestation date is April 24, 2018. 
The next issue is one of extent. Another change to the workers’ compensation 
statute in 2017 was to Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v) which states as follows: 
v. In all cases of permanent partial disability other than those hereinabove 
described or referred to in paragraphs “a” through “u” hereof, the 
compensation shall be paid during the number of weeks in relation to five 
hundred weeks as the reduction in the employee’s earning capacity 
caused by the disability bears in relation to the earning capacity that the 
employee possessed when the injury occurred. A determination of the 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the disability shall 
take into account the permanent partial disability of the employee and the 
number of years in the future it was reasonably anticipated that the 
employee would work at the time of the injury. If an employee who is 
eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work or is 
offered work for which the employee receives or would receive the same 
or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the employee received at the 
time of the injury, the employee shall be compensated based only upon 
the employee’s functional impairment resulting from the injury, and not in 
relation to the employee’s earning capacity. Notwithstanding section 
85.26, subsection 2, if an employee who is eligible for compensation 
under this paragraph returns to work with the same employer and is 
compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment 
resulting from the injury as provided in this paragraph and is terminated 
from employment by that employer, the award or agreement for settlement 
for benefits under this chapter shall be reviewed upon commencement of 
reopening proceedings by the employee for a determination of any 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the employee’s 
permanent partial disability.  
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v). In the present case, claimant has returned to work without 
official restrictions. He does have some personal modifications in place, but there were 
no restrictions imposed by his surgeon. This may be, in part, due to the defendants’ 
refusal to accommodate the initial restrictions. Nonetheless, the facts are that claimant 

GRIM V. DEXTER LAUNDRY 
Page 12 
 
 
is currently working the same or similar job post-injury that he was working pre-injury 
and he is paid more post-injury than pre-injury. Under the 2017 statutory changes, 
regardless of the fact that claimant has sustained what would be considered a whole 
body injury, his loss can only be compensated based on the functional impairment 
resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the employee’s earning capacity.  
Dr. Pugely assigned a 27 percent whole person impairment and Dr. Bansal a 28 
percent whole person impairment while Dr. Abernathey assessed a 15 percent 
impairment. The treating physician and the IME physician retained by claimant are 
closely aligned and consistent with claimant’s injury and post-surgical complaints. Less 
weight is given to Dr. Abernathey’s opinions as the opinions deviate from the majority of 
the evidence in the record. It is determined that claimant’s functional loss is 28 percent 
of the whole person.  
As for the medical bills, defendants argue that because the claim was denied, 
claimant could not get authorization and further, because no authorization was 
obtained, it would only be speculation to determine whether the medical treatment he 
did receive was more efficacious than that which was authorized. If the defendants’ 
argument was accepted, employers would never be responsible for medical care of an 
injured worker so long as the claim was denied. The legislature never intended for that. 
In fact, in this grand bargain called workers’ compensation, one of the primary benefits 
to an employee for giving up certain rights is medical care. See Baker, 872 N.W.2d at 
678.  
One stark illustration of the difference is employers' obligation to promptly 
furnish reasonable medical services for the care of their employees' work-
related injuries. Iowa Code § 85.27(1), (4). Employers promptly furnishing 
such medical services for their injured workers are entitled to choose the 
physician who will perform the services. Id. § 85.27(4). In promptly 
furnishing reasonable medical care to injured employees under chapter 
85, employers are empowered to substitute their judgment for that of their 
injured employees on the important question of which medical 
professionals are best suited to diagnose and treat work-related 
injuries. Tortfeasors have no corollary control over the selection of their 
victims' medical providers. 
Id. (footnote removed.) 
The Iowa Supreme Court set forth the test to determine when unauthorized 
medical care was compensable in Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn 
[hereinafter Gwinn], 779 N.W.2d 193 (Iowa 2010).  
The duty of an employer to furnish medical care following notice of injury, 
prior to an order by the commissioner, is predicated on the employer's 
acknowledgement that the employee sustained an injury compensable 

GRIM V. DEXTER LAUNDRY 
Page 13 
 
 
under the workers' compensation statute. Iowa Code § 85.27. Once 
compensability is acknowledged, the statute contemplates the employer 
will furnish reasonable medical care and supplies following an injury and 
will subsequently pay the workers' compensation benefits described in the 
statute. Id. See generally id. §§ 85.33, 85.34. 
Id. at 203. In cases where the defendants deny liability, as they did in this case, they 
lose the right to control care. Id. at 204.  
Without the duty to furnish care, the employer has no right to control care. 
Thus, if the employer contests the compensability of the injury following 
notice, the statutory responsibility of the employer to furnish reasonable 
medical care to the employee or pay other employee benefits described in 
the workers' compensation statute is not imposed until the issue of 
compensability is resolved in favor of the employee. Likewise, the 
employer has no right to choose the medical care when compensability is 
contested. Instead, the employee is left to pursue his or her own medical 
care for the injury at his or her own expense and is free to pursue a claim 
against the employer to recover the reasonable cost of medical care upon 
proof of compensability of the injury. If the employee establishes the 
compensability of the injury at a contested case hearing, then the statutory 
duty of the employer to furnish medical care for compensable injuries 
emerges to support an award of reasonable medical care the employer 
should have furnished from the inception of the injury had compensability 
been acknowledged. 
Id. There is no requirement in this case that the care sought by the claimant be more 
efficacious than the care that the defendants would have provided had compensability 
been acknowledged. The more efficacious standard applies when the employer has 
accepted responsibility and offered care but the claimant seeks out additional, 
unauthorized care. Id. at 206. That is not the case here. In this case, the defendants 
denied the claim and in doing so give up the right to protest the lack of authorization. Id. 
at 204.  
Claimant is entitled to the full reimbursement of medical bills itemized in Exhibit 6 
and the mileage itemized in Exhibit 5.  
ORDER 
THEREFORE, it is ordered: 
That defendants are to pay unto claimant one hundred forty (140) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits at the rate of five hundred forty-six and 78/100 
dollars ($546.78) per week from January 10, 2018. 

GRIM V. DEXTER LAUNDRY 
Page 14 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
That defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
That defendants shall reimburse claimant for medical bills and mileage in 
Exhibits 5 and 6.  
That defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as 
set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
That defendants are to be given credit for benefits previously paid. 
That defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30.  Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a 
lump sum together with interest at the rate of ten percent for all weekly benefits payable 
and not paid when due which accrued before July 1, 2017, and all interest on past due 
weekly compensation benefits accruing on or after July 1, 2017, shall be payable at an 
annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal 
reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  
See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018). 
Defendants shall pay the costs of this action.  
Signed and filed this      21st       day of January, 2020. 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE 
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Nicholas Pothitakis (via WCES) 
Jason Wiltfang (via WCES) 
