Case Number: 20000273.01
Case Title:  CLICKNER, SCOTT V. PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Clickner Scott-20000273.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
SCOTT CLICKNER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
File No. 20000273.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                           
PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC., 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                        
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE CO. OF NA,    : 
Head Notes: 1108, 1402.20, 1402.30, 
 
 
  : 
 
          1402.40, 1803.1, 4000 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                 
 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant Scott Clickner filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against Prairie Farms Dairy, Inc., employer, and Indemnity 
Insurance Company of North America, insurer, for an alleged work injury date of 
November 12, 2019.  The case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing 
on February 24, 2022, in-person, in Des Moines, Iowa.  
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes claimant’s testimony, Joint Exhibits 1 through 3, 
Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 11, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through G. Prior to 
hearing, claimant submitted a written objection to Defendants’ Exhibit A. The 
undersigned entered an order overruling the objection on February 15, 2022, and 
allowing claimant additional time after hearing to obtain rebuttal evidence. As such, the 
evidentiary record was left open following hearing to allow for claimant to submit an 
additional exhibit. Claimant submitted Exhibit 2A on March 23, 2022, at which time the 
evidentiary record was closed. The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on April 15, 
2022, and the case was considered fully submitted on that date. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Jul-01  10:01:10     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

CLICKNER V. PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC. 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES1 
 
1. 
Whether claimant sustained an injury to his neck on November 12, 2019; 
 
2. 
If so, whether claimant has reached maximum medical improvement for his 
neck; 
 
3. 
The nature and extent of permanent partial disability claimant has sustained, 
if any; 
 
4. 
Payment of claimant’s Independent Medical Examination (IME); 
 
5. 
Alternate medical care; 
 
6. 
Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 
86.13; and 
 
7. 
Taxation of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
his demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 61-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
11) He is married and has three adult children. Claimant is a high school graduate, and 
later attended an apprenticeship program to become a journeyman electrician. (Tr., pp. 
11-12) In the past, claimant has worked as an over-the-road truck driver, and a 
maintenance technician for a correctional facility. (Tr., pp. 13-14; Claimant’s Exhibit 4, p. 
23) Between 2011 and 2017, claimant worked for two separate sand fracking/mining 
companies. He worked for Pattison Sand from 2011 to 2014, and again for a few 
months at the end of 2016 until January 2017. He also worked for Hi-Crush, Inc., from 
2014 to 2016. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 23) Claimant testified that he was an electrician and did 
electrical maintenance at both facilities, which consisted of diagnosing problems, 
troubleshooting and replacing electrical parts, and working on large motors and large 
equipment. (Tr., p. 14) He said the two jobs were similar other than Hi-Crush was an 
above-ground operation, while Pattison was underground. (Tr., p. 15) Claimant did not 
sustain any work-related injuries at any of his prior jobs. (Tr., pp. 13-16) 
                                                 
1 The parties included medical benefits as a disputed issue on the hearing report. However, claimant’s 
brief indicates that issue has since been resolved. (Claimant’s brief, p. 2) 

CLICKNER V. PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC. 
Page 3 
 
In February 2017, claimant started working at Prairie Farms Dairy, Inc., 
defendant employer. (Tr., p. 16) He was hired as a maintenance technician, which he 
described as involving troubleshooting and electrical work such as replacing motors, but 
also replacing other parts on machines that might break. The formal job description for 
claimant’s position indicates that employees are required to sit, stand, or walk for 
prolonged periods of time, and lift, bend, stoop, and push/pull exerting up to 100 pounds 
of force occasionally, 50 pounds frequently, and 20 pounds constantly in order to move 
objects. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 24) Claimant testified that he was required to pass a pre-
employment physical when he was hired, which involved strapping weights to his legs 
and walking up and down stairs, cardio testing, and carrying 40-pound weights across 
the floor and placing them on shelves overhead. (Tr., pp. 17-18) He was also required 
to do a lot of squatting, bending, and crawling. (Tr., p. 18) He was able to pass the 
physical with no accommodations.  
At the end of October or beginning of November in 2019, claimant sustained an 
injury while working. (Tr., p. 23) Claimant described that he was working on a gear drive 
on a cream cheese vat. (Tr., p. 19) The vat contains an agitator that spins to keep the 
cream cheese from getting lumps. The gearbox is approximately 150 to 200 pounds and 
mounted on top of the tank. A motor spins the gearbox, which in turn spins the agitator 
inside the 1,000-gallon tank. (Tr., p. 20) There is a walkway around the top of the tank, 
which is probably about 12-feet off the ground, and in order to remove the gearbox 
claimant had to get on top of the tank, unbolt the gearbox, and pull to lift it off.  Claimant 
described that when the injury happened, he was pulling on the gearbox and felt 
something in his right shoulder give. He continued working, as they were in the middle 
of the job, but he “definitely” felt pain. He does not remember if he heard a “pop,” but he 
was in a lot of pain, which he described as an intense burning pain in his shoulder. (Tr., 
pp. 20-21)  
Claimant completed his shift, which consisted of replacing the gearbox they had 
removed with a new one. After that, his shift was over and he was scheduled for the 
next seven days off work.2 (Tr., p. 21) He thought his shoulder would get better during 
his days off work, so he did not report an injury or seek medical care. (Tr., pp. 21-22) He 
testified that by the end of the seven days off, his shoulder did feel better, and he did 
not have the burning pain any longer. (Tr., p. 21) However, after returning to work, his 
pain slowly returned over a few days. (Tr., p. 23) By November 12, 2019, he was in a lot 
of pain, and reported the injury to his supervisor. The parties stipulated to that date as 
the date of injury since that was the day claimant reported it to his employer.  
Claimant completed an incident report for his employer. (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 16-21) His 
first medical appointment was on December 4, 2019 with Darcy Connelly, PA-C. (Joint 
Exhibit 1, p. 1) He reported right shoulder pain into his neck, that had been getting 
worse since the initial work incident had occurred. On physical examination he was 
noted to have limited range of motion of the right shoulder. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 2) He was 
prescribed medications and referred for physical therapy. He was also assigned 
                                                 
2 Claimant testified that his work schedule at the time was seven days off, eight days on. (Tr., p. 21) 

CLICKNER V. PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC. 
Page 4 
 
temporary work restrictions of not lifting more than 10 pounds with the right arm. (Jt. Ex. 
1, p. 3)  
Physical therapy records from December 9, 2019 note that claimant reported 
pain in the right upper shoulder reaching up into the trapezius muscle and into the back 
of his neck. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 11) He continued to report pain through the upper trapezius 
into the back of his neck over the course of several physical therapy visits. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 
12-14) 
At his follow-up visit with PA-C Connelly on December 26, 2019, claimant 
continued to have pain, and physical therapy had not made any difference. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 
5) On physical exam, he continued to show decreased range of motion, tenderness, 
pain, and decreased strength. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 6) It is also noted that he was “compensating 
with his trapezius muscle” and was reminded not to lean to the left when trying to raise 
his right arm. He was referred for an MRI and taken completely off work pending the 
results. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 7) He was also told to continue with physical therapy.  
At physical therapy, he continued to complain of pain through his upper trapezius 
into his neck, as well as pain in the anterior aspect of the shoulder. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 15-16) 
By January 6, 2020, he reported the pain up the back of his neck seemed to be the 
worst, and he was not having any success getting it to calm down. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 16) The 
therapist noted he had palpable stiffness and tightness in the pectoralis minor, upper 
trapezius, and levator scapula. He noted claimant may benefit from dry needling.  
Claimant’s MRI also took place on January 6, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 18) It showed 
severe tendinosis of the subscapularis, supraspinatus, and infraspinatus tendons, with 
calcific tendinosis at the infraspinatus and subscapularis tendons; high-grade partial-
thickness tears at the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and subscapularis; moderate 
acromial joint arthritis with mild subacromial and subdeltoid bursitis; moderate 
glenohumeral arthritis with thinning and irregularity of articular cartilage and small joint 
effusion; and possible anterior and posterior labral tears. Following the MRI, claimant 
continued with physical therapy until he could see an orthopedic surgeon. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 
17) 
Claimant saw John Rowe, M.D., on January 15, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 20) Dr. Rowe 
documented the mechanism of injury and claimant’s conservative treatment to date. He 
noted claimant denied prior right shoulder pain. Claimant complained of anterior right 
shoulder pain, loss of strength and range of motion in the shoulder, and neck and 
trapezius pain. Claimant also indicated that his pain did not usually radiate below the 
elbow, but he did have some numbness and tingling in his right hand that he did not 
recall having prior to the injury. Finally, he described some intermittent medial scapular 
pain.  
After physical examination and review of the MRI, Dr. Rowe’s assessment was 
right shoulder acute partial-thickness tears of the supraspinatus and subscapularis, 
superimposed on chronic tendinosis, as well as moderate pre-existing degenerative 
arthritis in the acromioclavicular and glenohumeral joint. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 24) Dr. Rowe 

CLICKNER V. PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC. 
Page 5 
 
recommended surgical intervention. With respect to causation, Dr. Rowe opined that 
claimant’s right shoulder injury and need for medical care arose out of and in the course 
of his usual and customary work, and that claimant’s pre-existing arthritis did not 
previously limit claimant’s ability to work. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 24-25) 
Claimant had surgery on February 6, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 26) Dr. Rowe performed 
a right shoulder arthroscopy with debridement of the glenohumeral joint and biceps 
tenotomy, coracoid and subacromial decompression, and an open distal clavicle 
excision. Following surgery, claimant experienced nonspecific chest pressure and 
dyspnea, and was admitted for observation and evaluation. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 28-34) He 
was discharged the following day, and his postoperative dyspnea was most probably 
related to the right interscalene block he received, which can block the phrenic nerve 
and cause paralysis of the hemidiaphragm. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 37) 
Claimant was seen for a physical therapy evaluation on February 10, 2020. (Jt. 
Ex. 2, p. 38) He reported continued pain in his upper trapezius and neck, as well as 
some numbness and tingling in his right thumb and fingers and tingling along the back 
of his arm and into his elbow. Claimant continued with physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 
39-43) He saw Dr. Rowe for a follow-up examination on March 11, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 
44) Claimant reported he was making progress with physical therapy with diminished 
pain, improving strength, and very slowly improving range of motion. After physical 
examination, Dr. Rowe noted that claimant was slowly improving after his right shoulder 
arthroscopy, and recommended continuing physical therapy twice per week for an 
additional four weeks, emphasizing range of motion as opposed to strengthening. (Jt. 
Ex. 2, p. 47) 
Following that appointment, claimant was not seen in-person at physical therapy 
again until April 15, 2020, due to COVID-19 precautions. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 48) He reported 
that he continued to work on his home exercise program on his own, however. He 
continued to have difficulty raising his arm, especially to the side, and had pain to 
palpation of his rotator cuff and the biceps tendon. The therapist’s assessment was that 
claimant continued to have significant pain, range of motion deficits, and strength 
deficits of the right shoulder. Claimant was to continue with both his home exercise 
program and in-person physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 49) 
Also on April 15, 2020, Dr. Rowe issued a letter to claimant’s employer indicating 
that claimant could return to work on April 20, 2020, with restrictions of not lifting greater 
than 40 pounds, and no work at or above shoulder level with the right upper extremity. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 50) Claimant then followed up with Dr. Rowe on May 20, 2020, and noted 
persistent pain at the limits of motion in all planes, along with some diminished range of 
motion. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 51) He denied pain into the right upper extremity below the elbow 
or any associated numbness or tingling. After physical examination, Dr. Rowe 
recommended a corticosteroid injection, in the hopes he could “quiet him down to his 
previous baseline.” (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 55) The injection was performed that day, and while 
claimant had some “immediate moderation” of his symptoms, it did not provide 
significant or lasting relief. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 56-57) 

CLICKNER V. PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC. 
Page 6 
 
At his next follow up on June 3, 2020, Dr. Rowe noted claimant continued to 
demonstrate “significant limitation of active and passive range of motion” in the right 
shoulder. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 60) Dr. Rowe discussed his opinion that claimant’s persistent 
symptoms were primarily related to the degenerative arthritis in his right shoulder, which 
he noted was asymptomatic prior to the work injury. Claimant indicated he was 
interested in the possibility of a right total shoulder replacement, as he had previously 
had a successful knee replacement. Dr. Rowe told claimant that he was “a little bit 
young,” and that a total shoulder replacement may not allow him to continue working. 
However, Dr. Rowe recommended a second opinion regarding further treatment 
options, and referred claimant to the Mayo Clinic in LaCrosse, Wisconsin. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 
60-61) He did not place claimant at maximum medical improvement (MMI), because his 
condition had not returned to his previous baseline.  
Claimant saw Charles Nolte, D.O., at the Mayo Clinic on June 18, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 
3, p. 67) Claimant reported continued right shoulder pain, as well as numbness into the 
right hand. He also complained of pain extending from the shoulder up the trapezius to 
the base of the neck. After reviewing medical records and examining claimant, Dr. 
Nolte’s assessment was adhesive capsulitis right shoulder; status post right shoulder 
surgery for diagnosis of impingement syndrome, AC joint arthritis, coracoid 
impingement syndrome, SLAP tear, and partial undersurface rotator cuff supraspinatus 
tear; and paresthesias multi-dermatomal right upper extremity. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 70) He 
opined that claimant’s biggest complaints were lack of function and pain in the right 
shoulder, and believed those were primarily related to adhesive capsulitis after surgery. 
He also thought the partial undersurface tearing of the rotator cuff could be 
symptomatic, but it was difficult to assess due to his loss of motion.  
Dr. Nolte recommended “aggressive stretching and therapies for up to 1 years 
(sic) time” for claimant’s shoulder. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 70) He stated that once full motion was 
achieved, there would be a high probability that claimant’s pain may resolve, unless it is 
related to the rotator cuff. If he continued to have pain once full motion was achieved, 
only then would he consider a rotator cuff repair. With respect to the numbness into 
claimant’s hand, Dr. Nolte recommended an EMG study. In the meantime, he provided 
claimant with temporary restrictions of not lifting more than five pounds, and no lifting 
above mid-chest or overhead. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 72) 
On June 23, 2020, Dr. Nolte changed claimant’s restrictions. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 73) He 
was still restricted from lifting above shoulder height, but he was allowed to lift up to 40 
pounds in front of his body as long as the weight was below chest level.  
Claimant returned to physical therapy on July 1, 2020, and the therapist noted his 
ongoing pain and loss of strength and range of motion in his shoulder. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 62) 
He also noted claimant had pain through the trapezius into his neck and noted 
“increased shoulder elevation and the trapezius substitution pattern when performing 
active range of motion in flexion and abduction.” (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 63) He was to continue 
with physical therapy two to three times per week for the next four weeks. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 
64) 

CLICKNER V. PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC. 
Page 7 
 
Claimant had an EMG study on July 14, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 74) The clinical 
interpretation showed electrophysiologic evidence of moderate right median neuropathy 
at the wrist, consistent with a clinical diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome. Claimant 
returned to Dr. Nolte on August 20, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 77) He reported ongoing 
discomfort in the shoulder despite “aggressive” therapies to improve his motion. Dr. 
Nolte noted that claimant’s adhesive capsulitis had improved, although he still lacked 
some motion. He opined that could be related to glenohumeral arthritis, and determined 
he would need to “start over” with diagnostic procedures, to include an MR arthrogram, 
in order to determine the source of claimant’s ongoing pain. He concluded that claimant 
was “clearly not capable of returning to work as he did prior to his injury,” and also noted 
claimant’s ongoing carpal tunnel syndrome would need to be corrected in the future. He 
maintained the 40-pound lifting restriction, and restricted claimant from using his right 
arm away from his body or above shoulder level until after the MRI. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 78-
79) 
Claimant was to have the MR arthrogram at the Mayo Clinic on September 3, 
2020, but it could not be performed due to claustrophobia. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 80) Instead, he 
had it done on September 14, 2020 at Crossing Rivers Health. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 65-66) 
Claimant then returned to Dr. Nolte on September 18, 2020, who reviewed the MRI and 
found glenohumeral arthritis and a partial undersurface tear of the supraspinatus tendon 
of approximately 40 percent. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 82) He did not see anything that required 
surgical management, and recommended a glenohumeral injection for both diagnostic 
and therapeutic reasons. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 83) The injection was performed that day, and Dr. 
Nolte noted that claimant’s arc of motion did not improve as expected. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 81-
83) He received a small amount of pain relief, but no significant improvement. (Jt. Ex. 3, 
p. 83) As such, Dr. Nolte recommended continued arc of motion exercises and work 
restrictions, and did not recommend shoulder arthroplasty. He referred claimant to an 
occupational health specialist for continued treatment. 
Claimant saw Brian Withers, D.O., in occupational medicine on September 23, 
2020. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 85) Dr. Withers noted claimant’s complaint of right shoulder pain with 
limited range of motion. He said that claimant reported no real pain in his shoulder at 
rest, but ongoing difficulty with range of motion, and increased pain symptoms when he 
reaches the extremes of range of motion. He also reported difficulty with heavy lifting, 
reaching away from the body, over shoulder height, and behind his back. After physical 
examination, Dr. Withers recommended a course of work hardening, and continuing 
with his work restrictions in the meantime. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 86) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Withers on December 2, 2020, after completing his 
course of work hardening. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 87) At that time, he reported his shoulder had 
mildly improved, but overall was about the same. He also reported “a fair amount of 
discomfort within the trapezius, and that seems to be what has been limiting a lot of his 
overhead work . . .” While he continued to have limited range of motion in his shoulder, 
his biggest complaint was the muscle spasms and pain within the trapezius muscle. On 
physical examination, Dr. Withers noted tenderness and muscle spasms palpated on 

CLICKNER V. PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC. 
Page 8 
 
the right side of the trapezius muscle. He also noted ongoing limitations with range of 
motion and pain in the shoulder. 
Dr. Withers’ assessment was adhesive capsulitis shoulder pain, and trapezius 
muscle pain and spasm. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 88) He assigned claimant restrictions of lifting up 
to 50 pounds, no heavy lifting over shoulder height, and keeping his work “relatively 
close and light.” He referred claimant to physical medicine and rehabilitation as he 
thought claimant might benefit from trigger point injections into the right trapezius. Other 
than that, he did not think there was any additional treatment for him with respect to his 
shoulder. 
Claimant had trigger point injections on January 14, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 89-90) 
He followed up with Dr. Withers on January 28, 2021, and reported he had some relief 
after the injections, but it lasted less than a day and then his symptoms were back to 
where they were before the injections. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 91) Dr. Withers noted that claimant 
denied numbness or tingling in his arms, hands, or fingers, other than sometimes when 
he was in bed. Dr. Withers thought that seemed to be more related to carpal tunnel. 
Claimant reported work “has been going fine,” and stated his pain was generally at a 
level 4 out of 10. He described the pain as “acute in the shoulder and most consistently 
in the trapezius muscle and it does extend up into the neck.” On physical examination, 
claimant continued to demonstrate some limited range of motion and pain in the 
shoulder, as well as pain in the right trapezius. Dr. Withers determined that claimant 
could return to work with no specific work restrictions, but recommended he not lift over 
50 pounds overhead, and keep his work fairly close to his body as much as possible. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 92) He also recommended claimant continue to do home exercises and 
stretches, and use ice or anti-inflammatories as needed.  
Using the 5th Edition of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Dr. Withers provided an impairment rating of 3 percent of the whole body 
for claimant’s shoulder, based on range of motion deficits. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 93-94) With 
respect to claimant’s restrictions, Dr. Withers clarified that he does not recommend 
anyone lift greater than 50 pounds overheard. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 95) He then stated that 
claimant has no work restrictions but the recommendation he gave was “pretty general 
information.”  
Claimant was laid off from his employment at Prairie Farms in March of 2021. 
(Tr., p. 42) He testified that his boss wanted him to return to maintenance, but he was 
told that job was no longer available, and he was terminated.  
Claimant attended an independent medical evaluation (IME) with Sunil Bansal, 
M.D., M.P.H., on May 21, 2021. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) Dr. Bansal’s report is dated September 
2, 2021. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 14) Dr. Bansal reviewed the medical records and interviewed 
claimant. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-9) Under “subjective,” Dr. Bansal stated that claimant reported 
injuries to his neck and right shoulder, and that he has had no specific treatment for his 
neck. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 9) Dr. Bansal also recorded that claimant has right shoulder pain and 
“constant pain in the right side of his neck that radiates down into his shoulder blade.” 

CLICKNER V. PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC. 
Page 9 
 
He stated that claimant indicated he cannot lift objects over 20 pounds overhead and 
cannot reach behind his back.  
On physical examination, Dr. Bansal noted tenderness to palpation over the 
cervical paraspinal musculature, greater on the right. He also noted spasms over the 
right trapezius. He provided range of motion measurements but did not indicate whether 
claimant’s range of motion was within normal limits. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 9-10) With respect to 
the right shoulder, testing showed some decreased range of motion when compared to 
the left shoulder. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10) Claimant also had tenderness to palpation on the 
right shoulder, greatest at the acromioclavicular joint. Finally, claimant had a loss of 
sensory discrimination over the right ring finger.  
With respect to claimant’s shoulder, Dr. Bansal agreed with Dr. Withers that 
claimant reached maximum medical improvement (MMI) for the right shoulder injury on 
January 28, 2021. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 11) Using the 5th Edition of the AMA Guides, Dr. Bansal 
assigned a 5 percent upper extremity impairment rating based on range of motion, and 
an additional 10 percent upper extremity rating related to claimant’s distal clavicle 
resection. Combined, he assigned permanent impairment of 15 percent of the upper 
extremity, which converts to 9 percent of the body as a whole.  
With respect to claimant’s neck, Dr. Bansal opined “cervical neck characteristic of 
discogenic pathology,” and he did not believe claimant had reached MMI for his cervical 
spine condition. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 12) He further opined that the cervical discogenic 
pathology was a result of the work incident on November 12, 2019, when claimant was 
pulling on the heavy part at work. He explained that claimant’s “constellation of neck 
and shoulder blade pain is related to a cervical discogenic problem.” (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 13) 
He went on to state that inflammation from discogenic disease can manifest clinically to 
the surrounding musculature, including the trapezius, and that muscle extends to the 
scapular spine, often felt as shoulder pain. While cervical discogenic pain is 
“conventionally” known to manifest as a pattern of upper extremity pain and numbness 
radiation, it is also known to manifest as shoulder blade pain. Ultimately, Dr. Bansal 
recommended an MRI of the cervical spine for further evaluation. Finally, Dr. Bansal 
recommended work restrictions of no lifting greater than 40 pounds occasionally, 20 
pounds frequently, and no lifting greater than 10 pounds overhead. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 14) 
In June of 2021, claimant was hired to work at 3M Manufacturing in Prairie du 
Chien. (Tr., p. 43) He continued to work there at the time of hearing. He was hired as an 
electrical technician. (Tr., p. 44) Claimant explained that the machines at 3M run on a 
program, and when machines malfunction his job is to plug the machine into a computer 
and diagnose the problem. Smaller repairs can be completed by the electrical 
technicians, but larger items are repaired by the mechanics. He testified that it is 
physically an easier job than his job at Prairie Farms, and he does more diagnostic work 
than actual repairs. He does not have to do any heavy lifting and does very little 
overhead lifting. (Tr., p. 45) He enjoys working at 3M, and earns the same if not a small 
amount more than he earned at Prairie Farms. (Tr., pp. 49-50) 

CLICKNER V. PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC. 
Page 10 
 
Dr. Withers was provided with a copy of Dr. Bansal’s IME report, and responded 
to a letter regarding same authored by defense counsel dated September 29, 2021. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, pp. 96-97) Dr. Withers stated that after reviewing Dr. Bansal’s report, his 
diagnosis of the shoulder remained the same, “but it is reasonable to add the discogenic 
pathology/pain to the diagnosis as he [claimant] had a fair amount of pain at the base of 
the neck and trapezius.” (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 96) He further stated that he did not disagree with 
Dr. Bansal’s finding of cervical discogenic pathology, and it is “reasonable that it 
contributed to Mr. Clickner’s limitations and symptoms.” (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 97) 
Claimant saw James Milani, D.O., CIME, on January 14, 2022, for an IME at 
defendants’ request. (Def. Ex. A) Claimant described his symptoms at that time to Dr. 
Milani as pain at the “tip of his shoulder,” pointing to the distal acromion/deltoid region. 
(Def. Ex. A, p. 2) He said his pain runs from that area of his shoulder over the trapezius 
muscle up to the area behind the right ear. Dr. Milani noted that in differentiating this 
pain, the pain originated in the shoulder and radiated to the neck, not vice versa. He 
also noted that he occasionally has pain down the arm to the elbow, originating in the 
shoulder. However, that pain does not occur often, only when the shoulder is very 
painful.  
Dr. Milani noted that claimant had been working at 3M since June of 2021, in a 
job that does not require as much lifting or manual activity. Claimant stated that he did 
not have any specific work restrictions, but that he was not lifting anything over 50 
pounds at work due to “general workplace restrictions.” (Def. Ex. A, p. 2) 
Dr. Milani reviewed medical records and examined claimant. (Def. Ex. A, pp. 3-6) 
On physical examination, he noted that claimant had tenderness in the posterior 
cervical muscles, right greater than left, and pain into the right trapezius muscle. (Def. 
Ex. A, p. 5) Claimant’s cervical range of motion was symmetrical, but he had some 
general decreased range of motion with side bending and rotation, most consistent with 
the degenerative disc/joint disease seen on imaging. He was able to perform range of 
motion without significant pain and no radicular symptoms. With respect to his right 
shoulder, claimant had tenderness to palpation along the lateral aspect of the acromion, 
as well as tenderness in the infraspinatus region of the scapula, the supraspinatus 
region, and in the trapezius muscle. Palpation of the AC joint was “quite tender” and 
reproduced some of his pain. Passive range of motion caused increased pain in the AC 
joint area and the subacromial region. (Def. Ex. A, pp. 5-6) Dr. Milani also noted that 
claimant had rotator cuff weakness with abduction, and the further his elbow gets from 
his body, the more pain he has in his shoulder and the weaker his shoulder feels. (Def. 
Ex. A, p. 6) 
Dr. Milani agreed that claimant was at MMI. (Def. Ex. A, p. 6) Using the 5th 
Edition of the AMA Guides, Dr. Milani provided a 5 percent upper extremity impairment 
rating based on range of motion, which is the same as both Dr. Bansal and Dr. Withers 
assigned for range of motion deficits. However, Dr. Milani did not agree with Dr. 
Bansal’s additional 10 percent rating based on the distal clavicle resection. (Def. Ex. A, 
pp. 6-7) Dr. Milani opined that the AMA Guides are unclear with respect to rating the 
distal clavicle resection, so he went to the “source/authorities” to clarify further. 

CLICKNER V. PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC. 
Page 11 
 
According to Dr. Milani, Dr. Doug Martin helps “contribute to the AMA Guides,” and Dr. 
Martin “clarified that you do not give a rating for distal clavicle resections when it is 
performed incidental to rotator cuff surgeries.” Rather, there is only a rating for the distal 
clavicle resection when there is a specific injury to the AC joint, which is “a rare 
occurrence.” (Def. Ex. A, p. 7) 
Dr. Milani states that he also communicated with Dr. Mohamed Ranavaya, who is 
the president of the American Board of Independent Medical Examiners and has taught 
how to use the Guides for “multiple years.” He stated that Dr. Ranavaya discussed 
ratings for distal clavicle resection with “the primary author of the AMA Guides, fifth 
edition chapter on upper limb,” and the underlying criteria is that the distal clavicle 
resection has to be “at least 2.5 cm to qualify for the rating in table 16-27, page 506.” 
Based on his independent research, Dr. Milani concluded that claimant’s specific right 
shoulder injury and surgery does not qualify for a rating of the AC joint and does not 
qualify for table 16-17 for a distal clavicle resection. 
With respect to claimant’s neck, Dr. Milani first noted that cervical discogenic 
pathology can cause pain down into the shoulder and scapula region. In claimant’s 
situation, he noted that both the mechanism of injury, as well as the symptoms that 
developed at the time of the injury are important factors to consider. With respect to the 
symptoms at the time of injury, Dr. Milani noted that claimant reported shoulder 
symptoms that would radiate from the shoulder to the neck at times. He stated that with 
cervical discogenic pathology, however, one would expect pain that radiated from the 
neck region to the shoulder and even into the arm. He further noted that in claimant’s 
case, specific shoulder diagnoses were found that explained the symptoms, and while 
claimant did eventually experience numbness and tingling in the upper arm, nerve 
testing found carpal tunnel, but no findings of cervical radiculopathy. He also noted that 
claimant’s shoulder symptoms got worse after surgery, indicating his continued pain 
was from the shoulder area, not referred from the neck. (Def. Ex. A, p. 7) 
Dr. Milani noted that having shoulder pain and holding the shoulder in a 
protective posture can cause tightness of the shoulder girdle muscles, leading to 
tightness and soreness in those muscles. He also noted that carpal tunnel syndrome 
can also cause referred pain up into the shoulder and neck area. Based on the 
mechanism of injury, reported symptoms at the time of injury, and timeframe of the 
reported symptoms, Dr. Milani opined that claimant did not sustain cervical discogenic 
pathology as a result of the work injury.  
Dr. Milani added some additional thoughts to his report. First, he noted that if a 
cervical MRI is performed, it will not be “normal” and will likely show multilevel 
degenerative disc disease and spondylosis. (Def. Ex. A, p. 8) However, he opined those 
findings would not be due to the work injury but due to personal and genetic make-up. 
He stated that the mechanism of injury will need to be considered again if there is 
further investigation into the cervical region, as well as specific anatomical findings and 
clinical symptoms. He also noted that from the mechanism of injury, the symptoms that 
were first reported and claimant’s continued symptoms, the most likely scenario is “the 
known shoulder pathology causing the symptoms and the possibility of median nerve 

CLICKNER V. PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC. 
Page 12 
 
compression at the wrist/carpal tunnel.” He next noted that the shoulder is a complex 
joint, and as a unit it involves the clavicle, scapula, humerus, and all the muscles 
involved in the rotator cuff and shoulder girdle. 
Dr. Milani defined the muscles making up the shoulder girdle as: “Trapezius 
muscle including the upper, middle, and lower portions; levator scapulae; rhomboid 
major; rhomboid minor; stratus anterior; deltoid; pectoralis major; and pectoralis minor.” 
Dr. Milani further explained that the muscles of the shoulder girdle help stabilize 
and strengthen the shoulder as a whole, working together with the scapula and allowing 
it to tilt and rotate. (Def. Ex. A, p. 8) This allows more motion than what the “ball and 
socket” of the glenohumeral joint provides, which means if the glenohumeral joint range 
of motion is impaired, as in claimant’s case, there is more strain on the shoulder girdle 
muscles. Additionally, while the shoulder girdle muscles are considered “proximal to the 
glenohumeral joint,” they are directly related to the shoulder function and have to be 
attached/anchored to the proximal body in order to make the shoulder function as it 
does. Therefore, Dr. Milani concluded that even though the muscles involved in the 
shoulder are proximal to the glenohumeral joint, they are still considered part of the 
shoulder, and claimant’s injury was an injury to the shoulder and no other body part. 
(Def. Ex. A, p. 8) 
Dr. Withers responded to a letter authored by defense counsel dated February 8, 
2022. (Def. Ex. B, p. 9) The letter asked Dr. Withers whether he continued to believe no 
further treatment was necessary, given that he added “discogenic pathology/pain” to his 
diagnoses. Dr. Withers stated no additional treatment was necessary related to the 
injury. He was also asked to review Dr. Milani’s IME report, and whether he agreed with 
Dr. Milani’s opinion that the cervical discogenic pathology was not caused by the work 
injury. In response, Dr. Withers stated that he “made a reasonable assumption,” but 
stated he would not be able to correlate any neck pathology for causation purposes.  
Claimant’s attorney also provided a copy of Dr. Milani’s IME report to Dr. Bansal, 
who issued a supplemental report on March 23, 2022. (Cl. Ex. 2A) Dr. Bansal reviewed 
the report and disagreed with Dr. Milani’s analysis. (Cl. Ex. 2A, p. 15.1) First, Dr. Bansal 
notes that claimant “clearly has radicular neck pain,” and his constellation of symptoms 
had been noted by multiple providers. He specifically noted Dr. Rowe’s note on January 
15, 2020, which indicated claimant had complained of trapezius pain, which usually did 
not radiate below his elbow, and that he also had some numbness and tingling in his 
right hand. (Cl. Ex. 2A, p. 15.2) Dr. Rowe also noted intermittent medial scapular pain. 
Dr. Bansal opined that claimant had not had an MRI to adequately assess his cervical 
symptoms. He further could not determine what “mechanism” Dr. Milani would consider 
clinically significant to aggravate cervical discogenic pathology, and pointed out that 
claimant was pulling on a “several hundred-pound tank” on the date of injury. 
Dr. Bansal noted that the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons lists 
repetitive activities that strain the spine as a risk factor for disc herniations, including 
jobs that require constant lifting, pulling, bending, or twisting. He also cited to a study 
that states disc pressure is increased 100 to 400 percent in the forward flexed spine 

CLICKNER V. PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC. 
Page 13 
 
position, which greatly increases the likelihood of disc bulging and annular tearing. (Cl. 
Ex. 2A, p. 15.2; citing Nachemson, “AL Disc Pressure Measurements”, Spine, 1981 
Jan-Feb; 6(1) 93-7). 
With respect to the impairment rating, Dr. Bansal notes that the AMA Guides 
contain no qualifier for the size of a distal clavicle resection in terms of assignment of 
impairment. He also notes that Dr. Douglas Martin “is neither a contributor or editor for 
the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.” In 
conclusion, Dr. Bansal stood by all opinions stated in his IME report. (Cl. Ex. 2A, p. 
15.2) 
Claimant testified that currently, his right shoulder bothers him all the time. (Tr., 
p. 36) He described a dull, throbbing pain on a daily basis, ranging between a level 4 
and 6 on a scale of 10. (Tr., pp. 36-37) With respect to his neck, he testified that it does 
not hurt every day; some days it is bad, and others it is okay. (Tr., p. 37) Often it wakes 
him up at night, and he has to sleep on his stomach with one arm off the bed to try to 
get comfortable. The more he works and the more he uses his arm, the worse his pain 
becomes. Before the work injury, claimant enjoyed fishing, hunting, and shooting guns 
for target practice, but he cannot do those things any longer. (Tr., p. 38) He used to play 
baseball and football and wrestle around with his grandchildren, which is now difficult 
due to pain and weakness in his shoulder and neck. (Tr., pp. 38-39) Finally, he is not 
able to do as much work around the house and yard as before the injury. (Tr., p. 39) He 
testified that about five or six years prior to the injury, he built an addition onto his home, 
and that is something he would not be able to do today. (Tr., pp. 39-40) In his current 
job at 3M, he is able to work within the restrictions Dr. Bansal recommended, and he 
also abides by those restrictions in his daily life. (Tr., p. 47) 
Claimant’s testimony regarding his neck pain was that his pain in his right 
shoulder is generally on the outside of his shoulder. (Tr., p. 53) The pain in his neck 
radiates “from the muscle above my shoulder through the back of my neck here and into 
the back of my head.” (Tr., p. 53) He testified that his treating doctors told him that his 
shoulder injury could cause the neck injury. (Tr., p. 55) Many of the medical records that 
reference claimant’s neck or trapezius pain indicate that he reported pain radiating up 
from his shoulder to the right trapezius muscle, up into his neck. (See Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 1, 6; 
Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 11-16, 41, 63; Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 67, 87, 91) There is also notation in the 
records that he was compensating or substituting for his right shoulder with his 
trapezius muscle, which correlates to how Dr. Milani explained the functioning of the 
shoulder girdle muscles. (See Jt. Ex. 1, p. 6; Jt. Ex. 2, p. 63; Jt. Ex. 3, p. 77; Def. Ex. A, 
p. 8) 
There is no evidence in the record that claimant sustained a separate, specific 
injury to his neck. While Dr. Bansal suggests claimant’s symptoms are characteristic of 
cervical discogenic pathology, he appears to have a misunderstanding that claimant has 
neck pain that radiates down into his shoulder blade. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 9; Cl. Ex. 2A) 
Claimant’s medical history and testimony indicate the opposite: that the pain originates 
in his shoulder and radiates up into his trapezius and neck. Further, while Dr. Bansal 
notes that cervical discogenic pain can manifest as shoulder pain, as Dr. Milani pointed 

CLICKNER V. PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC. 
Page 14 
 
out, claimant has known shoulder pathology, no findings of cervical radiculopathy, and 
carpal tunnel syndrome that accounts for the numbness and tingling in his right hand. 
(Def. Ex. A, p. 7) No physician has definitively diagnosed a neck injury, and Dr. Bansal’s 
suggestion of a cervical disc problem is speculative and based on a flawed 
understanding of claimant’s symptoms. I find Dr. Milani’s explanation of claimant’s 
trapezius and neck symptoms to be more convincing and supported by the other 
medical evidence and claimant’s testimony. As such, I find claimant has not carried his 
burden to prove he sustained an injury to his neck/cervical spine arising out of and in 
the course of his employment. 
With respect to claimant’s shoulder, however, I find Dr. Bansal’s impairment 
rating to be more appropriate. Neither Dr. Milani nor Dr. Withers included impairment 
related to the distal clavicle resection. The distal clavicle resection was a documented 
part of claimant’s shoulder surgery. The AMA Guides include a 10 percent impairment 
rating based on a distal clavicle resection, with no qualifier related to the size of the 
resection as Dr. Milani suggested. If the editors wished to include that qualification in 
the Guides, they could have. As such, I find Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating to be more 
appropriate. Claimant is entitled to 15 percent of the shoulder, or 60 weeks of 
permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue for consideration is whether claimant sustained an injury to his 
neck arising out of and in the course of his employment on November 11, 2019. 
Claimant contends he is entitled to industrial disability, because he sustained injuries to 
his cervical spine/neck, trapezius muscle, and related to the distal clavicle resection 
portion of his shoulder surgery. Defendants argue that claimant’s injury is limited to a 
scheduled shoulder injury.  
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the 
course of the employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); 
Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” 
refer to the cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, 
place, and circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 
(Iowa 1995). An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 

CLICKNER V. PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC. 
Page 15 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).  
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
I found that claimant did not prove that he sustained an injury to his neck/cervical 
spine arising out of and in the course of his employment. There is no evidence in the 
record that claimant sustained a separate, specific injury to his neck. No physician has 
definitively diagnosed a neck injury, and Dr. Bansal’s suggestion of a cervical disc 
problem is speculative and based on a flawed understanding of claimant’s symptoms, 
as discussed above. I found Dr. Milani’s explanation of claimant’s trapezius and neck 
symptoms to be more convincing and supported by the other medical evidence and 
claimant’s testimony. 
Because I found that claimant did not prove he sustained an injury to his 
neck/cervical spine, the issues of whether claimant has reached MMI for the neck and 
whether he is entitled to alternate medical care consisting of authorization for an MRI of 
the cervical spine are moot.  
The next issue to consider is whether claimant is entitled to industrial disability 
based on injury and/or impairment to his trapezius muscle or based on the distal clavicle 
resection. With respect to the trapezius muscle, claimant argues that the trapezius 
muscle is not included in the schedule, and as such, claimant’s injury should be 
compensated under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v).  
It is clear from the medical records and claimant’s credible testimony that he has 
experienced and continues to experience pain in his trapezius muscle. However, pain 
alone does not extend an injury from a scheduled member to the body as a whole. 
Lagos v. IBP, Inc., File No 5000782, (Arb., May 17, 2004); Brown v. Schoon 
Construction, Inc., File No. 913559 (App., December, 1992). Pain that is not 

CLICKNER V. PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC. 
Page 16 
 
substantiated by clinical findings is not a substitute for impairment. Waller v. 
Chamberlain Manufacturing, II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 419, 425. It is the 
situs of the impairment resulting from an injury that determines whether it is a scheduled 
member injury or a body as a whole injury. The anatomical situs of the impairment, not 
the situs of the injury, governs whether or not an injury is to the body as a whole. Payton 
v. Sheller-Globe Corp., File No. 895808 (App., April 30, 1993). 
In this case, while claimant complains of pain in his trapezius muscle and neck, 
there is no credible medical evidence to support an injury extending beyond his 
shoulder. As Dr. Milani noted, claimant had specific shoulder diagnoses that explained 
his symptoms. He also noted that claimant’s shoulder symptoms got worse after 
surgery, indicating his continued pain was from the shoulder area, not referred from the 
neck. Finally, Dr. Milani explained that having shoulder pain and holding the shoulder in 
a protective posture can cause tightness of the shoulder girdle muscles, which include 
the trapezius, leading to tightness and soreness in those muscles. Additionally, no 
physician assigned any permanent impairment based on claimant’s trapezius pain. The 
only impairment ratings are for claimant’s shoulder related to range of motion deficits 
and the distal clavicle resection. Therefore, I find claimant has failed to carry his burden 
to prove that his injury extends beyond the shoulder due to his trapezius pain. 
Finally, claimant argues that the distal clavicle resection constitutes an 
unscheduled injury, based on Rubalcava v. Siouxpreme Egg Prods., Inc., File No. 
5066865 (Arb., June 23, 2020). However, since that decision, the Commissioner has 
provided further analysis of a distal clavicle resection, and determined that any 
permanent disability resulting from a distal clavicle resection done in order to improve 
the function of the glenohumeral joint should be compensated as a shoulder under 
section 85.34(2)(n). Welch v. Seneca Tank, File No. 1647781.01 (App., Oct. 20, 2021). 
The Commissioner noted the analysis might be different if the claimant had a broken 
collarbone and the clavicle itself was injured. However, in Welch, as in this case, the 
claimant’s clavicle was altered in close proximity to the glenohumeral joint, as part of a 
shoulder surgery, in order to improve the function of the joint. As such, I find that 
claimant’s distal clavicle resection does not extend his injury beyond the shoulder. 
Claimant did not provide argument in his brief that his shoulder injury alone 
extends to the body as a whole, but the parts of claimant’s shoulder that were injured 
and subsequently surgically repaired have been found to be part of the shoulder. 
Chavez v. MS Technology LLC and Westfield Ins. Co., 972 N.W.2d 662 (Iowa 2022). As 
a result, I conclude claimant failed to prove that any of his injuries or conditions are 
compensable as unscheduled, whole body injuries under section 85.34(2)(v). Instead, 
claimant is entitled to compensation for his scheduled member shoulder under section 
85.34(2)(n). Claimant’s argument regarding his entitlement to industrial disability 
benefits under section 85.34(2)(v) is therefore moot. 
As discussed above, I found Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating to be the most 
accurate, as it was the only rating that included the distal clavicle resection. Neither Dr. 
Withers nor Dr. Milani assigned an impairment rating based on this table. Dr. Milani 
explained that he does not believe claimant’s specific right shoulder injury and surgery 

CLICKNER V. PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC. 
Page 17 
 
qualifies for a rating of the AC joint, which he believes to be a prerequisite to assigning 
a rating for a distal clavicle resection. He further believes the resection has to be at least 
2.5 centimeters to qualify for the rating. 
The legislature has mandated that determinations of functional impairment under 
the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act must be made solely by utilizing the AMA Guides 
adopted for use by the Commissioner. The Commissioner has adopted the Fifth Edition, 
which includes a 10 percent impairment rating based on a distal clavicle resection, with 
no qualifier related to the size of the resection as Dr. Milani suggested. If the editors 
wished to include that qualification in the Guides, they could have. Further, there is no 
indication in the Guides that a rating for a distal clavicle resection is only indicated when 
there is a specific injury to the AC joint. Table 16-27 on page 506 of the AMA Guides 
provides that 10 percent impairment is included for distal clavicle resection. The Guides 
specifically state that in the presence of decreased motion, motion impairment is 
derived separately and combined with the appropriate arthroplasty impairment in Table 
16-27. Neither Dr. Withers nor Dr. Milani followed the Guides in providing their 
impairment ratings. Only Dr. Bansal included the rating for the distal clavicle resection, a 
documented part of claimant’s surgery. As such, his opinion regarding permanent 
impairment of the shoulder is more accurate. Thus, I found claimant has sustained a 15 
percent impairment to his right shoulder.  
Permanent partial disability compensation for the shoulder shall be paid based 
on a maximum of 400 weeks. Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(n). Having adopted Dr. Bansal’s 15 
percent rating, I conclude claimant is entitled to 60 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits. 
The next issue to determine is whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits for 
failure to voluntarily pay additional permanency benefits upon receipt of Dr. Bansal’s 
IME report. Defendant voluntarily paid 20 weeks of PPD benefits after Dr. Withers 
issued his impairment rating in February 2021, based on his 5 percent shoulder rating. 
Defendants argue that they had a reasonable basis to pay that amount, and claimant is 
not entitled to penalty benefits. 
In Christensen v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 (Iowa 1996), and 
Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996), the supreme court 
said: 
Based on the plain language of section 86.13, we hold an 
employee is entitled to penalty benefits if there has been a delay in 
payment unless the employer proves a reasonable cause or excuse. A 
reasonable cause or excuse exists if either (1) the delay was necessary 
for the insurer to investigate the claim or (2) the employer had a 
reasonable basis to contest the employee’s entitlement to benefits. A 
“reasonable basis” for denial of the claim exists if the claim is “fairly 
debatable.” 
Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. 

CLICKNER V. PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC. 
Page 18 
 
 
In other words, when an employee’s claim for benefits is fairly debatable based 
on a good faith dispute over the employee’s factual or legal entitlement to benefits, an 
award of penalty benefits is not appropriate under the statute. Whether the issue was 
fairly debatable turns on whether there was a disputed factual dispute that, if resolved in 
favor of the employer, would have supported the employer's denial of compensability. 
Gilbert v. USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001). In this case, the employer 
reasonably relied on the impairment rating of the authorized treating physician, Dr. 
Withers, and paid the impairment rating he assigned. While I ultimately concluded Dr. 
Bansal’s rating was more accurate, defendants’ conduct in relying on Dr. Withers’ rating 
was not unreasonable. As such, claimant is not entitled to penalty benefits. 
Claimant seeks reimbursement for his IME with Dr. Bansal, pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.39. That section permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee’s choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated permanent disability and the employee believes that 
the initial evaluation is too low. The section also permits reimbursement for reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss occasioned by the 
employee attending the subsequent examination. 
  
Defendants made no argument in their brief regarding payment of claimant’s 
IME. I find that Dr. Withers, the employer-retained physician, provided an impairment 
rating on February 3, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 94) Claimant believed that evaluation to be too 
low, and retained Dr. Bansal to provide a subsequent examination, which took place on 
May 21, 2021. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) As such, defendants are responsible to reimburse 
claimant for the entirety of Dr. Bansal’s IME fee, totaling $2,951.00. (Cl. Ex. 10, p. 34) 
 Finally, claimant requests assessment of his costs related to this contested case 
proceeding. Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency. Iowa Code section 
86.40. In this instance, claimant was partially successful in his claim. Exercising the 
agency’s discretion, I conclude claimant’s request for costs should be granted. 
Defendants shall pay claimant’s costs in the amount of $107.88, representing the filing 
fee and charge for service by certified mail. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay claimant sixty (60) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits, commencing on the stipulated date of January 28, 2021, at the stipulated rate 
of seven hundred fifty-eight and 47/100 dollars ($758.47). 
Defendants shall be entitled to a credit for all permanent partial disability benefits 
previously paid, including overpayment of the benefit rate, as stipulated in the hearing 
report. 

CLICKNER V. PRAIRIE FARMS DAIRY, INC. 
Page 19 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for Dr. Bansal’s IME, pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.39, in the amount of two thousand nine hundred fifty-one dollars and 00/100 
($2,951.00). 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of one hundred seven 
and 88/100 dollars ($107.88). 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.  
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this _____1st ____ day of July, 2022. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Erin Tucker (via WCES) 
 
Thomas Wolle (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
