Case Number: 1662751.02
Case Title:  STOBER, JACOB V. DOLL DISTRIBUTING, LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Stober Jacob-1662751.02D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
JACOB STOBER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
    File No. 1662751.02 
 
 
  :  
 
 
vs. 
 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
DOLL DISTRIBUTING, LLC, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
and 
 
  :                           
 
 
  : 
FIRST DAKOTA INDEMNITY CO., 
  :  
 
 
  :              Headnotes:  1402.40; 1803;           
 
Insurance Carrier,  
  : 
 
                  2501; 2907; 3001 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Jacob Stober, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against Doll Distributing, LLC 
as the employer, and First Dakota Indemnity Company as the insurance carrier. This case 
came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on March 20, 2023. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing. On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made or 
discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 7, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 5, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through K. Claimant testified on his own behalf. No 
other witnesses testified at trial. The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the 
arbitration hearing.   
 
However, counsel for the parties requested an opportunity to file post-hearing 
briefs. This request was granted, and both parties filed briefs simultaneously on April 3, 
2023. The case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on that date. 
 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
 
1. 
Whether the February 27, 2019 work injury caused permanent disability. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Aug-24  15:24:22     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

STOBER V. DOLL DISTRIBUTING, LLC 
Page 2 
 
2. 
The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability, if any. 
 
3. 
The claimant’s average gross weekly earnings and corresponding weekly 
worker’s compensation rate. 
 
4. 
Whether claimant is entitled to payment, reimbursement, or satisfaction of 
past medical expenses, including medical mileage, contained in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 3. 
 
5. 
Whether costs should be assessed and, if so, in what amount. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Jacob Stober, claimant, is a 35-year-old man, who lives in DeSoto, Iowa. He 
graduated from high school in 2006, obtained a truck driving certificate from Indian Hills 
Community College, as well as an associate degree from Indian Hills in bio processing. 
Mr. Stober initially began his career working for Cargill in 2010. He worked in a refinery 
for Cargill, making corn syrup for use in food and beverages. He left that job because he 
was required to work rotating shifts and found it difficult and taxing, both physically and 
mentally.   
 
Mr. Stober next worked for Mahaska Bottling filling vending machines at 
warehouses, offices, and other locations. He worked for Mahaska Bottling until he started 
his employment with Doll Distributing in January 2017. 
 
Mr. Stober commenced his employment with Doll Distributing as a route driver. As 
a route driver for Doll Distributing, Mr. Stober worked 40 or more hours per week. He 
drove a semi and delivered beer and beverages to grocery stores, liquor stores, and 
convenience stores. He delivered cans, bottles, and kegs of beer to these various 
vendors.   
 
Claimant’s work duties at Doll Distributing required him to frequently lift cases of 
beer weighing 20-24 pounds. He also lifted and moved kegs of beer weighing between 
60-185 pounds. He was required to lift these kegs above head level occasionally and 
operated a two-wheeler to transport the various products. Mr. Stober developed a 
cumulative injury in his low back that culminated in him reporting his ongoing back pain 
to the employer on February 27, 2019. The employer accepted Mr. Stober’s work injury 
claim and provided him with medical care. 
 
Initially, the employer sent claimant to David T. Berg, D.O.  Dr. Berg evaluated Mr. 
Stober on March 6, 2019, documenting claimant’s complaints of back pain extending into 
his right leg. Dr. Berg diagnosed a thoracic and lumbar strain but permitted claimant to 
return to work with restrictions. Mr. Stober returned for care on March 13, 2019, with 

STOBER V. DOLL DISTRIBUTING, LLC 
Page 3 
 
ongoing back complaints and radiculopathy into the right leg. Dr. Berg ordered an MRI be 
performed on claimant’s low back. 
 
  The MRI performed on March 20, 2019 demonstrated a diffuse disc bulge at the 
L4-5 level, as well as moderately severe central spinal canal stenosis and a broad-based 
disc herniation at the same level. Following the MRI, Dr. Berg referred Mr. Stober to a 
back surgeon, Zachary G. Ries, M.D. Dr. Ries prescribed physical therapy for claimant. 
Unfortunately, the physical therapy was not helpful in resolving claimant’s symptoms. 
 
Dr. Ries recommended surgical intervention and performed a right L4-5 partial 
diskectomy decompression and L4-5 central decompression with bilateral nerve root 
decompression on May 7, 2019. Claimant testified that surgery relieved the majority of 
his symptoms. In August 2019, claimant received a call from Mahaska Bottling offering 
him a job opportunity.   
 
Claimant accepted the job because it was lighter and physically easier to perform.  
In his new position with Mahaska Bottling, claimant works full-time, loads his own truck, 
drives to and from deliveries, and performs all physical work to unload items. Claimant 
lifts up to 30 pounds, performs stocking duties, cleaning duties, driving, and works alone. 
He concedes he is physically capable of performing all job duties at Mahaska Bottling. In 
fact, in his deposition, Mr. Stober conceded he still feels safe lifting up to 100 pounds and 
that he has no current medical work restrictions. (Defendants’ Ex. D, p. 4) 
 
Having obtained alternate employment, Mr. Stober terminated his employment 
with Doll Distributing in August 2019. However, claimant continues to maintain his 
commercial driver’s license. He passed a DOT physical and renewed the license in 
September 2022. 
 
Claimant remained under Dr. Ries’ care through September 2019. On September 
11, 2019, Dr. Ries documented that claimant was doing well and at maximum medical 
improvement. He noted claimant’s job change to an easier position and noted that 
claimant reported he “is nearly back to baseline.”  Dr. Ries permitted claimant to return to 
work with no restrictions and follow-up only as needed. 
 
Claimant sought an independent medical evaluation, performed by Mark C. Taylor, 
M.D. on March 3, 2020. Dr. Taylor confirmed the diagnosis of a herniated disc at L4-5 
with a surgical discectomy and decompression. Dr. Taylor opines that Mr. Stober 
sustained a 12 percent permanent impairment of the whole person as a result of the 
February 17, 2019 injury and resulting surgery. (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 3) Dr. Taylor further 
opined that claimant requires no restrictions in his current employment, but also 
recommended that claimant avoid lifting or carrying more than 40-50 pounds at or above 
knee level on an occasional basis. He also recommended that claimant alternate his 
sitting, standing, and walking as needed for comfort and limit any squatting, bending, 
kneeling, and crawling to an occasional basis. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 3) 
 

STOBER V. DOLL DISTRIBUTING, LLC 
Page 4 
 
Mr. Stober continued full-time employment with Mahaska Bottling and required no 
medical care for his low back between September 2019 and March 2021. However, on 
March 29, 2021, Mr. Stober returned to Dr. Ries, reporting he developed recurrent right 
leg pain similar to what he experienced prior to surgery. Mr. Stober reported that the pain 
was getting severe, nearly as bad as it was preoperatively.   
 
Dr. Ries ordered a repeat MRI, which was performed on April 1, 2021. The MRI 
demonstrated a central and right disc protrusion at the L4-5 level, which potentially 
distorted the left L4 nerve root. Mr. Stober returned to Dr. Ries on April 19, 2021, 
explaining that his symptoms returned around Christmas 2020. Dr. Ries interpreted the 
MRI as demonstrating a recurrent disc herniation and recommended attempting epidural 
lumbar injections but maintained claimant working without restrictions. Claimant also 
sought chiropractic care on his own. 
 
Unfortunately, the injections provided only partial relief and claimant’s symptoms 
returned. By February 9, 2022, the pain specialist documented that claimant was “doing 
well” with resolution of his radicular pain. (Joint Exhibit 6, p. 83) The pain specialist 
documented that claimant had no weakness in his legs and that his primary complaint 
was back spasms that were intermittent. The physician anticipated maximum medical 
improvement (MMI) in the near future, and subsequently declared MMI on March 24, 
2022. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 87) 
 
Claimant testified that he requested additional care after March 24, 2022.  
However, he testified that defendants denied further care, arguing there was a break in 
the causal connection and that any ongoing symptoms are not related to the initial work 
injury. Indeed, defendants identify evidence within the medical records that suggest 
claimant may have sustained unrelated aggravations of his low back condition since 
September 2019. 
 
For instance, defendants point an instance in which claimant experienced 
increased back pain after staining his deck in April 2019. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 8) Defendants note 
that claimant worked at a golf tournament in June 2019, went fishing, and performed 
yardwork in June 2019. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 9-10) Defendants also note claimant went fishing 
and participated in a water balloon fight in July 2019. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 15-16) 
 
Again, in 2021, defendants identify comments documented in claimant’s medical 
records that suggest worsening of symptoms in his back. In July 2021, claimant reported 
to his physical therapist that he couldn’t walk or move after playing golf the prior weekend.  
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 19) A similar record from the pain specialist documents worsening after the 
golf tournament. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 76) Defendants point to a chiropractic record on July 12, 
2021, which notes that claimant had “recently gotten much[,] much worse.” (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 
88)  
 
Defendants also point out that claimant’s symptoms appear to “move” from his 
back to his hips in August and September 2021. Similarly, defendants note a record in 

STOBER V. DOLL DISTRIBUTING, LLC 
Page 5 
 
December 2021, in which claimant reportedly indicated that he had knee pain but reported 
no further radicular pain and noted that his “back hasn’t had any issues.” (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 53) 
 
Defendants rely upon the above evidence and dispute whether the recurrent disc 
herniation is related to the initial work injury. Two back surgeons have offered causation 
opinions related to the recurrent disc herniation. Dr. Ries signed a summary letter from 
defense counsel on October 8, 2021, noting “it is difficult… to now state whether the 
recurrent herniation and current symptoms are a complication of the original injury or the 
result of a further injury or aggravation.” (Def. Ex. B, p. 2) Claimant’s counsel then sent 
correspondence to Dr. Ries, and Dr. Ries agreed, “recurrent disc herniation at L4-5 is a 
known complication or risk of the surgery. Therefore, I would say recurrent disc herniation 
is related to original surgery.” (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 8)   
 
Defense counsel then sent further correspondence to Dr. Ries. Dr. Ries provided 
a written response dated November 29, 2022, indicating that activities such as golfing 
and performing home repairs can cause an aggravation or further injury. He further 
confirmed that claimant “pulled something and had onset of symptoms in 2021 due to 
activities unrelated to his 2019 work accident that required he seek medical treatment.”  
(Def. Ex. B, p. 5) 
 
Claimant again sought clarification from Dr. Ries on the causation issue. Dr. Ries 
followed up in a subsequent report dated February 7, 2023, noting that claimant “had a 
recurrent disc herniation. The original herniation weakened his disc and made him more 
prone to reherniating (sic) the disc, for which he received treatment.” (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 11) Dr. 
Ries further confirmed he knew of the “minor exacerbations” referred to by defendants 
but concluded that “the recurrent herniation was directly related to the February 27, 2019 
work injury.” (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 11) Dr. Ries opined that claimant sustained a 10 percent 
permanent impairment of the whole person as a result of his work injury. (Def. Ex. B, p. 
1) 
 
Defendants countered Dr. Ries’ causation opinion by requesting a record review 
and causation opinion from Trevor R. Schmitz, M.D. Dr. Schmitz did not evaluate 
claimant, but did have medical records and claimant’s MRI’s available for review. He 
authored a January 5, 2023 report. Dr. Schmitz considers the original injury as well as 
potential subsequent aggravations.  Interestingly, although defendants admitted the initial 
injury and provided medical and surgical treatment for that injury, Dr. Schmitz opines, 
“there is likely not significant evidence that his original disc herniation was related to work. 
Bending and lifting has not been shown to be associated with disc herniations.” (Def. Ex. 
A, pp. 4-5) 
 
Dr. Schmitz then proceeds to consider whether the subsequent incidents and 
redevelopment of symptoms are related to the original alleged work injury. Dr. Schmitz 
notes, “There is some question whether this L4-L5 level truly was reherniated (sic).” (Def. 
Ex. A, p. 5) Ultimately, Dr. Schmitz opines, "it appears as though Mr. Stover (sic) is 
participating in several events which are causing worsening low back pain including 
golfing and working on a smoker… There is no way one could relate his April 1, 2021, 

STOBER V. DOLL DISTRIBUTING, LLC 
Page 6 
 
MRI findings to his reported work injury.” (Def. Ex. A, p. 6) Dr. Schmitz further opines, 
“There was not really an original work accident, but rather just reports of no specific 
incident or injury and rather a lot of bending and lifting, which again have never been 
shown to be a risk factor for a herniated disc…. Regardless, assuming that the original 
disc herniation was related to his February 27, 2019, incident, certainly, his continued 
symptoms are more likely related to his overweight status and outside activities including 
working around the house and playing golf, which are well documented in his records.” 
(Def. Ex. A, p. 6)   
 
Considering the opinions of Dr. Ries and Dr. Schmitz, I ultimately find the causation 
opinion of Dr. Ries to be more convincing and accurate. I acknowledge that Dr. Ries 
provided some potentially contradictory statements and conclusions. However, ultimately, 
after considering all of the evidence, Dr. Ries opines that the re-herniation is related to 
claimant’s work injury. I accept that opinion as accurate. 
 
Dr. Ries had the benefit of performing surgery on claimant. He saw claimant 
multiple times both before and after the alleged aggravations occurred. He is in an 
advantageous position to assess the cause of claimant’s ongoing low back condition. 
 
By way of contrast, Dr. Schmitz has not examined claimant. He must rely upon the 
medical records of Dr. Schmitz and other providers to formulate his opinions. Dr. 
Schmitz’s opinions appear to contradict defendants’ own position and admission that the 
initial injury was work related. In fact, defendants admit that claimant sustained a work 
injury in the hearing report. Dr. Ries specifically diagnosed and surgically treated a 
herniated disc following that work injury. Similarly, I find Dr. Schmitz’s opinion that there 
may not be a re-herniation to be inaccurate and find Dr. Ries’ opinion to be most accurate 
on this point. 
 
While I acknowledge the medical records document some increase in symptoms 
after non-work-related activities, I ultimately accept Dr. Ries’ opinion that claimant 
sustained a work-related injury. I reject Dr. Schmitz’s opinion that the lifting and bending 
at work cannot be proven to be the cause of claimant’s disc herniation. Rather, I 
specifically find that claimant’s work activities resulted in the February 27, 2019 work 
injury (a fact to which defendants stipulate in the hearing report) and that the work injury 
resulted in a disc herniation requiring surgical intervention by Dr. Ries. I further accept 
Dr. Ries’ explanation that the original disc herniation rendered claimant prone to re-
herniation and that the current condition is directly related to the original work injury. 
Therefore, I find that claimant proved his ongoing condition is causally related to the 
February 27, 2019 work injury. 
 
Having found that claimant’s current condition is causally related to the underlying 
work injury, I note that two physicians have offered opinions about the permanent nature 
of the injury and claimant’s condition. Dr. Ries opines that claimant has achieved 
maximum medical improvement and sustained a 10 percent permanent functional 
impairment of the whole person as a result of the injury and subsequent back surgery. 

STOBER V. DOLL DISTRIBUTING, LLC 
Page 7 
 
(Def. Ex. B, pp. 1, 5) Mr. Stober does not believe he carries any work restrictions and 
feels comfortable lifting up to 100 pounds. 
 
Claimant also obtained an independent medical evaluation performed by Mark C. 
Taylor, M.D. on March 26, 202. Dr. Taylor opines that claimant sustained a 12 percent 
permanent functional impairment of the whole person as a result of his work injury. Dr. 
Taylor opines that claimant does not need restrictions for his subsequent employment. 
Yet, he also opines that claimant should comply with certain limitations outlined 
previously.   
 
Ultimately, I accept the opinions of Dr. Ries as most credible and consistent with 
claimant’s testimony and experience. Specifically, I find that claimant sustained a 10 
percent permanent functional impairment. I find that he requires no specific permanent 
work restrictions and is capable of performing his current employment without restrictions. 
I do find Dr. Taylor’s recommendations pertaining to future physical limitations to be 
reasonable, though not specially a permanent medical restriction. I find that claimant 
continues to experience some symptoms related to his initial work injury, but I accept Dr. 
Ries’ opinion that these symptoms likely can be managed conservatively and non-
operatively.   
 
Mr. Ries is a relatively young worker. There is no reason to believe he is close to 
retirement and has many years left of anticipated work life. Claimant’s injury was 
significant enough to require back surgery, though he has experienced a fairly good 
result. Claimant left his employment with Doll Distributing as a result of his low back injury 
and resulting symptoms. He now earns less than he did at the time of the work injury. 
Considering claimant’s age, proximity to retirement, the severity and situs of his injury, as 
well as his permanent impairment, permanent restrictions, motivation, educational 
background, employment background, ability to return to gainful employment, as well as 
all other factors of industrial disability, I find that claimant proved a 20 percent loss of 
future earning capacity as a result of his February 27, 2019 low back injury at Doll 
Distributing. 
 
Mr. Stober seeks an award of medical expenses for physical therapy charges 
contained in Claimant’s Exhibit 3. Defendants dispute entitlement to those therapy 
charges, as well as causal connection, reasonableness, and necessity of that physical 
therapy. I find that the physical therapy reflected by the charges contained in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 3 were the result of claimant’s treating physician’s recommendations, represented 
reasonable and necessary medical care for claimant’s low back injury. I find that the 
physical therapy was causally related to the initial injury based on the opinions of Dr. Ries, 
as noted, and explained above. 
  
The final disputed factual issue for resolution is claimant’s gross average weekly 
wages immediately prior to the February 27, 2019 injury date. Claimant’s post-hearing 
brief provides one paragraph of explanation or argument on this issue. Claimant’s brief 
urges three unspecified pay periods of wages be excluded as not typical or representative 
of claimant’s earnings and replaced in the calculation of gross weekly earnings.   

STOBER V. DOLL DISTRIBUTING, LLC 
Page 8 
 
Claimant introduced Claimant’s Exhibit 4, which is claimant’s rate calculation and 
some corresponding earnings statements. Claimant’s Exhibit 4 appears to seek to 
exclude and replace four pay periods. There is no explanation why the claimant’s rate 
calculation excludes four pay periods, but his brief only seeks to exclude three pay 
periods. Nor is there any explanation in claimant’s post-hearing brief which of the four 
challenged pay periods is now conceded as accurate. 
 
Defendants’ post-hearing brief does not mention or provide any argument on the 
issue of gross average weekly earnings. Defendants introduced Defendants’ Exhibit K, 
which provides a summary of defendants’ calculation of the weekly rate with some 
earnings statements. No testimony was elicited relative to the gross weekly earnings that 
is enlightening. 
 
Review of the parties’ calculations and summaries demonstrates that defendants 
utilized the seven pay periods and earnings immediately prior to the injury date, 
representing the 14-weeks immediately preceding the injury date. (Def. Ex. K, p. 1) 
Claimant brief urges exclusion of three unspecified pay periods while his exhibit urges 
exclusion of the earnings for pay periods ending February 16, 2019, January 5, 2019, 
November 24, 2018, and November 10, 2018, and replaces those pay periods with the 
pay periods ending December 8, 2018, October 27, 2018, October 13, 2018, and 
September 29, 2018. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 14) 
 
The initial challenge is to the pay period ending February 16, 2019. According to 
claimant’s own summary, that pay period includes 71.33 regular hours, 10.77 hours of 
overtime, 8 hours of paid time off (PTO), and 8 unpaid hours. No explanation is provided 
relative to the 8 hours of unpaid time or the reason for 8 hours of PTO utilized. However, 
claimant still worked more than 80 hours in that two-week period. Claimant provided no 
evidence to establish why there were unpaid hours, PTO, or how or why these earnings 
were not customary or typical for him. 
 
The second pay period challenged or excluded in Claimant’s Exhibit 4 is for the 
period ending January 5, 2019. During that period, claimant was paid for 76.71 hours of 
regular work and 16 hours of holiday pay (presumably for Christmas and New Year’s). 
No explanation is provided why this is not a customary pay period or earnings for claimant. 
Yet, he is paid for more than 91 hours during this pay period. 
 
The third challenged period is pay period ending November 24, 2018. Claimant’s 
summary notes that claimant worked 67.7 regular hours, 9.57 overtime hours, took 4.45 
hours of PTO, had 3.55 hours of unpaid time, and 8 hours of holiday pay (presumably 
Thanksgiving). Claimant was paid for more than 89 hours during this period. There is no 
explanation why claimant required PTO or why this pay period was unusual or not 
customary earnings for claimant. 
 
The final pay period claimant challenges in Claimant’s Exhibit 4 and seeks to 
exclude is November 10, 2018. During this pay period, claimant was paid for 80 regular 
hours of work, 8.51 hours of overtime, 3 hours of vacation, and 5 hours of paid time off. 

STOBER V. DOLL DISTRIBUTING, LLC 
Page 9 
 
Again, claimant offered no explanation why being paid for more than 96 hours of time was 
not customary for him or why he required vacation or PTO during this pay period. 
 
Ultimately, claimant seeks to replace the challenged earnings with pay periods that 
provide slightly more hours of pay in the form of overtime. Again, there is no explanation 
if those pay periods were the result of customary work, exceptional overtime 
opportunities, or why any of the earnings were not customary or usual for claimant. I find 
that claimant has not proven any of the challenged (three or four pay periods) were not 
usual, typical, or customary earnings. I find that the defendants’ rate summary and 
calculations are reasonable, usual, typical, and customary for claimant’s pre-injury 
earnings. Therefore, I find that claimant’s gross average weekly earnings prior to the 
February 27, 2019 injury date were $946.43. Pursuant to the parties’ stipulations, claimant 
was married and entitled to three exemptions on the date of injury. (Hearing Report) 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The initial disputed issue in this case is whether the ongoing low back condition is 
causally related to the admitted February 27, 2019 work injury. The claimant has the 
burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the injury is a proximate cause 
of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is proximate if it is a substantial 
factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only cause. A preponderance of the 
evidence exists when the causal connection is probable rather than merely possible. 
George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle 
Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 
N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an expert 
opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy of the 
facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The expert 
opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 
N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); Dunlavey v. 
Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, 
Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical testimony cannot be 
summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 
1994). 
 
In this case, I considered the competing medical opinions of Dr. Ries and Dr. 
Schmitz and ultimately found claimant proved his ongoing low back condition is causally 
related to the February 27, 2019 work injury. Therefore, I must consider the claim for 
permanent disability.  Defendants dispute whether the injury caused permanent disability. 
 

STOBER V. DOLL DISTRIBUTING, LLC 
Page 10 
 
Having accepted the medical opinion offered by Dr. Ries, I found that claimant 
sustained a 10 percent permanent functional impairment of the whole person as a result 
of the work injury, and that claimant left his employment with Doll Distributing as a result 
of his injury and difficulties continuing to perform those job duties. I conclude claimant 
proved his injury resulted in permanent disability. The parties stipulate that any permanent 
disability should be compensated with industrial disability benefits. (Hearing Report) 
 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained. Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows: "It is therefore plain that the 
Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of 
the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be given 
to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, loss of 
earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure to 
so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period. Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability bears 
to the body as a whole. Section 85.34. Pursuant to the 2017 statutory revision, I must 
also consider the number of years in the future it is reasonably anticipated claimant would 
continue to work at the time of his work injury. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). Having 
considered all of the factors of industrial disability outlined by the statute and the Iowa 
Supreme Court, I found that claimant proved a 20 percent loss of future earning capacity. 
I conclude this is equivalent to a 20 percent industrial disability. Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v). 
 
Industrial disability benefits are compensated as a relative percentage of 500 
weeks of benefits. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). Therefore, a 20 percent industrial 
disability entitles claimant to an award of 100 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). The parties stipulate that the permanent 
disability benefits should commence on September 11, 2019. (Hearing Report) 
 
The next dispute submitted by the parties is the proper weekly rate at which 
benefits should be paid. Claimant asserts his gross average weekly wages prior to the 
injury date were $966.38. Defendants dispute this and assert that the gross average 
weekly wages were $946.43.   
 
Section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the 
employee at the time of the injury. The section defines weekly earnings as the gross 

STOBER V. DOLL DISTRIBUTING, LLC 
Page 11 
 
salary, wages, or earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the 
employee worked the customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee was 
injured as the employer regularly required for the work or employment. The various 
subsections of section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings depending 
upon the type of earnings and employment. 
 
If the employee is paid on a daily or hourly basis or by output, weekly earnings are 
computed by dividing by 13 the earnings over the 13-week period immediately preceding 
the injury. Any week that does not fairly reflect the employee’s customary earnings is 
excluded, however. Section 85.36(6). 
 
In this case, defendants utilized claimant’s earnings for the 14 weeks immediately 
prior to his injury date. Claimant concedes that 14 weeks should be utilized given that he 
was paid biweekly. However, claimant asserts that either three or four of the biweekly 
earnings immediately preceding his injury date do not fairly reflect his customary 
earnings.  While his claim and challenge are not well-defined and the argument is 
confusing between his exhibit and his post-hearing brief, I considered claimant’s 
challenge and whether the pay periods he challenged in his exhibit are fairly 
representative of his weekly earnings prior to the date of injury. 
   
Ultimately, I found that there was not any good explanation why the variations in 
claimant’s earnings were not customary or typical of his pre-injury earnings. Instead, I 
found that the weekly earnings utilized by defendants immediately preceding the injury 
date were customary, typical, and fairly represented claimant’s earnings immediately 
preceding the injury date. Having reached that finding, I conclude that the calculations 
introduced by defendants at Defendants’ Exhibit K, page 1 are accurate. I conclude 
claimant’s average gross weekly earnings at the time of the injury were $946.43. Iowa 
Code section 85.36. 
 
The parties stipulated that claimant was married and entitled to three exemptions 
on the date of injury. (Hearing Report) Utilizing the Commissioner’s Ratebook spread 
sheet for the time period of July 1, 2018 through June 30, 2019, I conclude the applicable 
weekly worker’s compensation rate for claimant’s permanent partial disability award is 
$622.73.  
 
Mr. Stober also asserts a claim for past medical expenses contained in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 3. The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law. The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred for 
those services. The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where 
the employer has denied liability for the injury. Section 85.27. Holbert v. Townsend 
Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 
(Review-Reopening October 1975). 
 

STOBER V. DOLL DISTRIBUTING, LLC 
Page 12 
 
Having found that claimant’s ongoing low back condition is causally related to the 
February 27, 2019 work injury, I similarly found that the physical therapy charges incurred 
and reflected in Claimant’s Exhibit 3 were recommended by treating physicians and 
constituted reasonable and necessary medical treatment. Therefore, I conclude claimant 
established entitlement to payment, satisfaction, or reimbursement of all charges 
reflected in Claimant’s Exhibit 3. Iowa Code section 85.27. 
 
Finally, claimant seeks assessment of his costs. Costs are assessed at the 
discretion of the agency. Iowa Code section 86.40. In this instance, claimant has 
recovered permanent disability, as well as an award of past medical expenses. I conclude 
it is reasonable to assess claimant’s costs, if otherwise permissible. 
 
Claimant’s Exhibit 5 contains claimant’s request for costs. Specifically, claimant 
seeks assessment of his filing fee. This is a reasonable and permissible cost. 876 IAC 
4.33(7). I assess claimant’s expense for his filing fee in the amount of $100.30 against 
defendants. 
 
Mr. Stober also seeks assessment of two charges from Dr. Ries. Specifically, 
claimant seeks assessment of a $150.00 charge from Dr. Ries on July 13, 2022. This 
charge is documented at Claimant’s Exhibit 5, page 27. The physician’s statement reflects 
this charge was specifically for a correspondence payment request. 
 
Agency rule 876 IAC 4.33(6) permits assessment for “the reasonable costs of 
obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports.” The Iowa Supreme Court 
held that the cost of the physician’s report is a permissible cost under Rule 4.33(6) 
because it is offered in lieu of testimony. Des Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 
867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015). I conclude the $150.00 charge reflected in Dr. Ries’ July 
13, 2022 statement (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 27) is a permissible cost and should be assessed against 
defendants.  876 IAC 4.33(6). 
 
The final cost sought by claimant is a second charge from Dr. Ries. This charge is 
reflected in Claimant’s Exhibit 5, page 28. That statement reflects the charge is for an 
“Attorney Conference Payment Request.” The statement reflects the charge was for a 15-
minute conference with the physician. While the conference may have later resulted in a 
written report being provided by the physician, the specific charge sought was to pay Dr. 
Ries for his time to meet with claimant’s attorney. This is not a charge that is permitted 
under 876 IAC 4.33(6). I deny the request to assess the December 16, 2022 charge 
submitted by Dr. Ries. Therefore, in total, I assess claimant’s costs against defendants 
totaling $250.30. 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant one hundred (100) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits commencing on September 11, 2019. 

STOBER V. DOLL DISTRIBUTING, LLC 
Page 13 
 
 
All weekly benefits shall be payable at the weekly rate of six hundred twenty-two 
and 73/100 dollars ($622.73) per week. 
 
The employer and insurance carrier shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump 
sum together with interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant 
maturity published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the 
date of injury, plus two percent. See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology File No. 5054686 
(App. Apr. 24, 2018). 
 
Defendants are entitled to the credit against these benefits as stipulated to in the 
hearing report. 
 
Defendants shall pay any outstanding medical expenses, reimburse claimant or a 
third-party for any payments made, and shall otherwise indemnify and hold claimant 
harmless for all medical expenses contained in Claimant’s Exhibit 3. 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs totaling two hundred fifty and 30/100 
dollars ($250.30). 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this    24th     day of August, 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Jerry Jackson (via WCES) 
 
Caroline Westerhold (via WCES) 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days from 
the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal must be 
filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been granted, the notice of 
appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ 
Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal must be received by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be extended to 
the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
