Case Number: 22701029.01
Case Title:  HUBERT, NELLIE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Hubert Nellie-22701029.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
NELLIE HUBERT, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
           File No. 22701029.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
vs. 
 
  :               ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                          
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
 
 
 
 
     :          Head Notes: 1402.40; 3202; 3203               
 
Defendant. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Claimant Nellie Hubert filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.1 The case came before 
the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on January 8, 2024. Pursuant to an order of 
the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this case proceeded to a live video 
hearing via Zoom, with all parties and the court reporter appearing remotely. The 
hearing proceeded without significant difficulties. 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 11, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 7, and Second Injury Fund Exhibits AA through DD.  
Claimant testified on her own behalf. The evidentiary record essentially closed at 
the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on January 8, 2024, although the parties 
agreed claimant would file an amended version of Exhibit 7.2 The parties submitted 
post-hearing briefs on February 16, 2024, and the case was considered fully submitted 
on that date. 
ISSUES 
1. Whether claimant sustained a first qualifying injury to her left lower extremity; 
 
2. If so, the extent of functional loss to the left lower extremity; 
                                                                 
1 The claimant also filed a claim against John Deere Waterloo as the employer, but that claim was settled 
prior to hearing. 
2 Claimant’s exhibit 7 is the settlement agreement between claimant and the employer. The final, 
approved version was not yet available at hearing, so the parties agreed claimant would file the final 
version as an amended exhibit once it was received. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Jul-10  14:54:20     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HUBERT V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
 
3. Whether claimant sustained a second qualifying injury to her left upper 
extremity; 
 
4. If so, the extent of functional loss to the left upper extremity; 
 
5. If claimant is entitled to Second Injury Fund benefits, the extent of disability; 
 
6. The commencement date for benefits, if any are awarded; 
 
7. The extent of credit under Iowa Code section 85.64; and 
 
8. Taxation of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
her demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt her 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 50-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
9) She is married with five adult children.  She is a high school graduate, who earned 
average grades. (Tr., pp. 9-10) During high school, claimant played softball, and in 1991 
while playing second base another player slid into her and broke both bones in her 
lower left leg. (Tr., p. 26) Claimant was placed in a full-length leg cast for two weeks, 
followed by a walking cast.  
Following high school, she attended Hawkeye Community College for one year, 
working toward a medical secretary degree. (Tr., p. 10) She did not finish that degree, 
opting instead to join the United States Navy. Claimant served in the Navy from 1994 to 
1998 (Tr., p. 11) While in the Navy she went to avionics school and received a 
certificate of completion. (Tr., p. 10) Her work in avionics included troubleshooting circuit 
boards that were located inside identification boxes that came out of helicopters and E2 
planes. (Tr., p. 12) Claimant testified that her avionics training did not translate over to 
civilian life after she was honorably discharged from the Navy, and she has not used 
that training since.  
After the Navy, claimant provided daycare for some time, and took education 
classes at Job Care in order to keep her certificate. Claimant has also had several jobs 
working at fast food restaurants. (Second Injury Fund Exhibit AA, pp. 2-4) She has 
worked as a cook at a school, and also held various short-term or temporary positions 
doing office work. (SIF Ex. AA, p. 3) From 2017 to 2022, claimant worked for Acosta 
Sales and Marketing doing merchandising in WalMart and Sam’s Club stores.  (SIF Ex. 
AA, p. 2)  

HUBERT V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
In December of 2021, claimant injured her left lower extremity again when she 
slipped and fell on snow. (Tr., p. 27) She reported to her primary care physician, 
Matthew Smith, M.D., on December 30, 2021. (Joint Exhibit 2, p. 2) She complained of 
left ankle and foot pain after a fall a couple of days prior. Dr. Smith noted she was able 
to bear weight and the ankle was swollen. He ordered x-rays, with a plan to send to 
orthopedics if positive. Claimant reported to the hospital the same day for the x-rays. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 1) The record notes she broke two bones in her lower leg when playing softball 
when she was younger. X-rays of the foot showed calcaneal spurs and dorsal beaking 
of the distal talus. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 2) There was also minimal soft tissue swelling along the 
dorsum of the foot. There was no evidence of acute bony or joint abnormality. X-rays of 
the ankle showed a nondisplaced acute oblique fracture of the distal fibula. (Claimant’s 
Exhibit 1, p. 3) 
Claimant saw Roswell Johnston, D.O., on January 4, 2022, for her left ankle 
fracture. Dr. Johnston prescribed pain medication and gave claimant a CAM boot with 
crutches. She remained in the boot and on restrictions until her appointment on 
February 8, 2022. At that time, Dr. Johnston noted that the ankle showed no 
progression or loss of position of the fracture site. He opined the fracture was healing, 
and told claimant to continue with weightbearing and activities as tolerated. (Cl Ex 1, p. 
4) She was to return to work in two weeks with no restrictions. 
Claimant started working at John Deere on March 25, 2022. She passed the job-
related medical evaluation prior to beginning work and was medically cleared to work 
without restrictions. (SIF Ex. BB, p. 1; Tr., p. 50) She testified that she did tell John 
Deere about her left ankle, but did not request any accommodation for it. (Tr., pp. 50-
51) Her job was going to be as a forklift operator, but the first week and a half were 
spent in classroom training. (Tr., p. 13) After that, claimant started the actual forklift 
training, but was injured after only three or four days of training. (Tr., pp. 13-14) 
On April 6, 2022, claimant was injured while working at John Deere. She testified 
that she was going to pick up some pallets that had been stacked incorrectly. (Tr., p. 14) 
As she got out of the forklift to fix the pallets, her foot got caught and she fell to the 
concrete floor. (Cl Ex 2, p. 5) Claimant testified that she landed on her left arm, and 
shattered the radial cap of her left elbow. (Tr., p. 14)  
Records indicate that claimant was taken by ambulance to the hospital on the 
date of injury. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 1-3) The emergency room record indicates that claimant 
slipped getting out of a forklift, landing on her left elbow. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 3) X-rays taken 
that day showed a comminuted radial head fracture. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 7) Her left arm was 
placed in a sling, and she was prescribed pain medication. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 8) She was told 
to follow up with occupational health the following day, and an appointment was made 
with an orthopedic surgeon for the following week.  
Claimant reported to John Deere’s onsite health clinic on April 7, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 6, 
p. 3) It appears she was allowed to return to work with no use of the left arm until she 
could see orthopedics. She saw Stephanie Smith, ARNP, at Cedar Valley Orthopedic 
Surgery on April 11, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 1) She continued to have pain, along with 

HUBERT V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
numbness, tingling, and swelling in her left arm. ARNP Smith ordered a CT scan of the 
left elbow, as the fracture was intra-articular and difficult to fully assess on plain films. 
(Jt. Ex. 7, p. 2) She was to continue to wear the sling, and follow up after the CT to 
determine whether surgery would be needed. 
The CT took place on April 14, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 1) Claimant returned to Cedar 
Valley Orthopedic on April 15, 2022, where she saw Robert Bartelt, M.D. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 3) 
Dr. Bartelt’s assessment after reviewing the CT scan was closed nondisplaced fracture 
of head of left radius, and closed displaced fracture of coronoid process of left ulna. He 
applied a long-arm plaster splint. He noted that the CT scan showed findings consistent 
with “terrible triad” injury, meaning radial head injury plus coronoid process, and likely 
avulsion of the lateral ligaments. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 4) Dr. Bartelt anticipated she would 
benefit from surgery, but given the complexity he referred her to a dedicated elbow 
surgeon. She was to continue work with no use of the left arm in the meantime. 
Claimant saw Blake Eyberg, M.D., at Physicians’ Clinic of Iowa on April 19, 2022. 
(Jt. Ex. 9, p. 1) Dr. Eyberg confirmed a closed left terrible triad injury, including a 
comminuted radial head fracture and coronoid fracture. (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 2) He 
recommended open reduction internal fixation of the radial head versus a radial head 
replacement. He also noted that at the time of surgery he would assess the stability of 
the ligaments and need for potential repair. Finally, he explained that it was unlikely 
claimant would regain symmetric range of motion to her non-injured side following 
surgery.  
Claimant’s surgery took place on April 25, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 10) Ultimately, 
claimant had an open replacement and internal fixation of the radial head, and lateral 
collateral ligament repair. The operative note states that the radial head fracture had 
more than three fragments, and literature supports radial head arthroplasty in cases 
with more than three fragments, particularly in the setting of a terrible triad injury. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 11) Following surgery claimant was released with restrictions of no 
weightbearing in her left upper extremity, and told to follow up in two weeks. (Jt. Ex. 3, 
p. 12) 
 
Claimant’s first post-operative visit with Dr. Eyberg took place on May 9, 2022. 
(Jt. Ex. 9, p. 3) At that time claimant reported she was doing well although still having 
pain in the elbow. Dr. Eyberg placed her in a range of motion brace and sent her for 
“aggressive” physical therapy to work on flexion. (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 4) Physical therapy 
records note that claimant reported her elbow as very painful from being at work while 
wearing the elbow brace, as it pulled on her shoulder and elbow. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 1) She 
also reported being unable to take pain medications at work.  
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Eyberg on June 8, 2022, at which time her pain 
continued to improve and she reported doing well working with physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 
9, p. 5) Dr. Eyberg recommended she continue with aggressive range of motion therapy 
and provided a five-pound lifting restriction, although he stated he still recommended 
she do one-handed work at work. (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 6) At her next visit on July 20, 2022, she 

HUBERT V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
reported much improvement, although she still had pain in the elbow. (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 7) Dr. 
Eyberg noted claimant’s range of motion had significantly improved, as had her swelling 
and pain. (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 8) He released her to full weightbearing, but continued to 
recommend she perform one-handed activities at work as she had a very strenuous job, 
and he did want her overworking the elbow as it was still quite weak. He also had her 
continue with physical therapy. 
 
Claimant was terminated from employment at John Deere on August 24, 2022. 
(SIF Ex. CC, p. 7) Documents related to her termination indicate she had received some 
unacceptable ratings during her two probationary evaluations, and there had been many 
instances of her falling asleep on the job. (SIF Ex. CC, p. 5) Claimant testified that the 
majority of her time working for John Deere took place after her injury, when she was on 
light duty. (Tr., p. 18) Her light duty assignments involved looking for parts for about an 
hour every morning, and sometimes spending about 20 minutes working with carts to fill 
parts on the line. However, she said that most of her time was spent “sitting around 
waiting for them to give me something to do.” (Tr., p. 18) 
 
Claimant’s next follow up took place on September 1, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 9) At 
that time she reported her range of motion had been restored but she still had some 
pain in her elbow. She advised that she had been terminated from her job, and reported 
she was hoping to find something less active than being a forklift operator. Dr. Eyberg 
agreed that was a good idea and released her to return to work with a 15-pound lifting 
restriction “until she gets her feet underneath her,” and said she could advance to no 
restrictions when she felt comfortable. (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 10) He noted she continued to lack 
full extension in the arm but had full strength. At her physical therapy appointment on 
September 7, 2022, it is noted that she was to finish her last two scheduled visits and 
then work on her own for six weeks until seeing Dr. Eyberg again. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 5) 
 
Claimant testified that she was only off work after her termination from John 
Deere for about one week, after which she was hired to work at Casey’s. (Tr. p. 19) At 
the time of hearing, claimant continued to work at Casey’s as a morning opener. (Tr., p. 
23) She testified that she told Casey’s about her left elbow injury and limitations, and 
she has been provided with accommodations so she can handle the job. (Tr., p. 24) She 
does not have to help with unloading trucks, and does not have to lift anything over 20-
pounds. She also does not have to shovel snow, or do any other two-handed tasks. She 
testified that as a result, she works fewer hours. (Tr., pp. 24-25) 
 
Claimant’s final follow-up with Dr. Eyberg took place on October 13, 2022. (Jt. 
Ex. 9, p. 11) His record states that claimant had improved from her injury, but continued 
to have several complaints about range of motion, pain, and mechanical symptoms in 
her elbow. (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 11) He noted that she was working full-time at Casey’s with no 
restrictions, which is contrary to claimant’s testimony about her job. He felt her range of 
motion was acceptable and functional, and he placed claimant at maximum medical 
improvement (MMI) with no restrictions. (Jt. Ex. 9, p. 12) He noted he would be happy to 
prepare a permanent partial disability rating if requested. 
 

HUBERT V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
Following her appointment with Dr. Eyberg, claimant had a telephone visit with 
Rick Garrels, M.D., at John Deere Health Clinic. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 25) She told Dr. Garrels 
she had some loss of motion, as she was not able to fully extend, flex, or supinate. Dr. 
Garrels provided an impairment rating, without performing an examination, of one 
percent of the left upper extremity. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 24) Using the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, his rating was based on loss of 
flexion, with zero percent assigned for loss of pronation and supination. 
 
Claimant had a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) at her attorney’s request on 
October 11, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 1) The results were considered valid, and claimant was 
fully cooperative. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 2) Part of the evaluation included a physical 
examination. (Jt. Ex. 11, pp. 5-7) In that section, it was noted that claimant ambulates 
with an altered gait pattern, including an antalgic limp and decreased stride length with 
her left lower extremity. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 5) Additionally, she was noted to hold her left arm 
along her left side with her elbow flexed at about 90 degrees. Claimant’s range of 
motion was also measured for several parts of her body. For her left elbow/forearm, she 
demonstrated flexion of 130 degrees with increased pain in the elbow, and extension 
was within normal limits, although also with increased pain. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 6) Pronation 
of the left forearm was within normal limits, and supination was 65 degrees, with 
increased pain.  
 
Range of motion in claimant’s ankles was measured as follows: 
 
Ankle 
Normal 
Range of motion 
 
 
Right 
Left 
Plantar Flexion 
50 
WNL 
45 
Dorsiflexion 
20 
WNL 
5 
Inversion 
35 
WNL 
35 
Eversion 
15 
WNL 
10 
 
(Jt. Ex. 11, p. 6) 
 
At the beginning of the evaluation, claimant reported her elbow pain at a level 1 
of 10. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 2) As the examination progressed, she rated her elbow pain at a 7 
of 10 and her left ankle at level 3 of 10. The test results showed her to have some 
limitations with stairs, lifting floor to waist up to 20 pounds, waist to crown up to 10 
pounds, and front carry up to 20 pounds/50 feet. She demonstrated significant 
limitations with lifting floor to waist up to 30 pounds, waist to crown up to 15 pounds, 
and front carry up to 30 pounds/50 feet. She was unable to crouch. Based on the 
results, it was concluded that claimant’s capabilities are in the light category of physical 
demand up to 20 pounds on an occasional basis. (Jt. Ex. 11, pp. 2-3) 
 
Claimant had an independent medical evaluation with Sunil Bansal, M.D., which 
took place on November 6, 2023. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) Dr. Bansal’s report is dated November 
17, 2023. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 14) Dr. Bansal reviewed the medical records and performed a 
physical examination. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-10) On physical examination of the left elbow, he 

HUBERT V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
noted tenderness to palpation of the olecranon. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10) He also recorded 
diminished range of motion of the left elbow/forearm as follows: 
 
 
Range of Motion 
Extension 
22-degree lag 
Flexion 
117 degrees 
Pronation 
73 degrees 
Supination 
28 degrees 
 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10) The right elbow had full range of motion. 
 
 With respect to the left ankle, Dr. Bansal found tenderness to palpation over the 
lateral malleolus, along with swelling. He also found some diminished range of motion in 
the left ankle, as follows: 
 
 
Range of Motion 
Plantar Flexion 
30 degrees 
Dorsiflexion 
19 degrees 
Inversion 
17 degrees 
Eversion 
15 degrees 
 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10)  
 
Dr. Bansal answered several questions posed by claimant’s attorney. (Cl. Ex. 1, 
pp. 11-14) With respect to diagnoses, for the left elbow he provided “left elbow fracture, 
terrible triad injury,” and stated she was status post left radial head replacement, lateral 
collateral ligament repair. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 11) For the left ankle, his diagnosis was lateral 
malleolus fracture. With respect to claimant’s current condition, at the time of the IME 
Dr. Bansal noted claimant had several limitations with respect to her elbow. She was 
unable to place any weight on her elbow without pain. She was not able to turn or twist 
her left arm all the way, and was unable to sustain a firm grip on anything. She was only 
able to carry light objects, and said she could not carry a gallon of milk. With respect to 
her left ankle, she stated that it was stiff, and her pain increased with weather changes. 
She also reported difficulty walking on uneven ground or on an incline, as well as 
intermittent swelling. 
 
Dr. Bansal opined the left elbow injury and related radial head replacement were 
related to her work at John Deere, and provided an impairment rating using the AMA 
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 12) He 
provided a 7 percent upper extremity rating related to range of motion, using the 
measurements noted above, and added 8 percent upper extremity impairment for the 
left radial head arthroplasty, pursuant to Table 16-27. However, when he combined 
those amounts, he stated: “Combined total is 7 + 12 = 18% upper extremity impairment, 
or an 11% whole person impairment.” (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 12) This appears to be an error, as 
he only provided 8 percent for the arthroplasty, not 12 percent. Using the combined 
values chart on page 604 of the Guides, 8 percent combines with 7 percent for a 

HUBERT V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
combined value of 14 percent of the upper extremity, which converts to 8 percent of the 
body as a whole. 
 
With respect to the left ankle, Dr. Bansal assigned 14 percent impairment of the 
lower extremity due to diminished range of motion, including ankle dorsiflexion and 
plantar flexion. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 13) However, in providing his “calculation matrix,” the range 
of motion measurements he used are drastically different than those he provided under 
the physical examination portion of the report. He provided the following with respect to 
the impairment rating: 
 
 
Range of Motion 
% LE Impairment 
Plantar Flexion 
7 degrees 
7 
Dorsiflexion 
6 degrees 
7 
Inversion 
22 degrees 
0 
Eversion 
15 degrees 
0 
 
Dr. Bansal added the two 7 percent impairments together for a total of 14 percent 
of the lower extremity. However, if one were to use the values he provided under the 
physical examination section, the rating would be much lower. (See SIF Ex. DD, p. 2) 
There is no explanation for the discrepancy in Dr. Bansal’s report.  
 
Dr. Bansal concluded his report by agreeing with the permanent work restrictions 
outlined in the FCE, placing claimant in the light physical demand category. He agreed 
with Dr. Eyberg that claimant reached MMI on October 12, 2022, and he did not 
anticipate any additional future medical treatment. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 14) 
 
Claimant testified that she continues to have problems with both her left ankle 
and left elbow. With respect to her left ankle, she stated that she walks with a limp most 
of the time and puts most of her weight on her right leg, which makes her right leg hurt. 
(Tr., p. 29) Her altered gait also causes knee pain, and her ankle swells if she stands or 
walks for too long. Stairs, being on her legs too long, and too much walking cause her to 
have increased pain in the ankle. She also said she has balance issues due to her 
ankle, especially with stairs. (Tr., pp. 43-44) She testified that part of the reason she 
cannot work full time at Casey’s is due to her ankle, as it will swell if she is on it too 
long. (Tr., p. 49) She reported that while she was only hired to work at Casey’s part-
time, at first she worked 30 to 35 hours per week. (Tr., pp. 48-49) However, that had to 
be reduced due to her ankle swelling and elbow hurting. (Tr., p. 49) At the time of 
hearing, she was working 20 to 30 hours per week, on a six-day workweek, because 
she cannot stay on her feet for more than six hours per day without it swelling, and she 
is unable to unload trucks due to her elbow. (Tr., p. 25) Claimant is earning $13.35 per 
hour at Casey’s, and plans to continue working there unless something better comes 
along. (Tr., pp. 42-43) She testified that she knows the manager at Casey’s because 
her daughter worked there, and he was generous and gave her a job and 
accommodations as a favor. (Tr., p. 43)  
 

HUBERT V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
With respect to her left elbow, claimant testified that she still has trouble with 
dressing, laundry, holding her grandson, and carrying groceries. (Tr., p. 44) She also 
has trouble even carrying light items due to her balance being off. She is not able to do 
pushups, which was important to her from her time in the military. (Tr., pp. 44-45) She 
often takes Tylenol for her legs and ices her arm or props it up on a pillow to ease the 
strain. (Tr., p. 45) She testified that if she did not have the position at Casey’s, she 
believes she would have difficulty finding a job due to her left elbow and left ankle 
injuries combined. (Tr., p. 47) 
 
In addition to the ankle and elbow injuries, claimant has several unrelated 
personal health conditions, including diabetes with neuropathy, hyperlipidemia, and 
morbid obesity. (Jt. Ex. 2) She was also hospitalized in March of 2023 due to a small 
bowel obstruction. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 7) 
 
In order to prove she is entitled to benefits from the Second Injury Fund, claimant 
must prove a first qualifying injury, a second compensable injury, and permanent 
disability as to both the first and second injuries, as discussed in more detail below. 
With respect to claimant’s alleged first injury to her left lower extremity, while claimant 
has proven she sustained an injury to her left leg in 1991 and left ankle in 2021, she has 
failed to prove she sustained any permanent disability to the left leg. The only 
impairment rating in evidence for the left leg is Dr. Bansal’s, and it contains errors and 
inconsistencies that cannot be overlooked. His range of motion measurements provided 
in the physical examination section are wildly different from those he used to calculate 
the impairment rating. Additionally, both sets of left ankle measurements in Dr. Bansal’s 
report are quite different from those obtained during claimant’s FCE less than one 
month prior. As the Fund points out in its brief, section 17.2f of the Guides states as 
follows: 
 
17.2f Range of Motion 
Lower extremity impairment can be evaluated by assessing the range of 
motion of its joints, recognizing that pain and motivation may affect the 
measurements. If it is clear to the evaluator that a restricted range of 
motion has an organic basis, three measurements should be obtained and 
the greatest range measured should be used.  If multiple evaluations 
exist, and there is inconsistency of a rating class between the 
findings of two observers, or in the findings on separate occasions 
by the same observer, the results are considered invalid.   
 
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 5th edition, p. 533.  (emphasis 
added). 
 
The inconsistencies between the findings in the FCE report and Dr. Bansal’s 
report are too large to be ignored, and there is no explanation provided. This is best 
illustrated by a comparison chart, similar to that provided by the Fund in its brief: 

HUBERT V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 10 
 
Source: 
FCE  
Bansal IME, physical 
examination  
Bansal IME, 
discussion/impairment 
rating  
Date: 
October 11, 2023 November 6, 2023 
November 6, 2023 
Citation: 
Jt. Ex. 11, p. 7 
Cl. Ex. 1, p. 10 
Cl. Ex. 1, p. 13 
Plantar Flexion 
45 degrees 
30 degrees 
7 degrees 
Dorsiflexion 
5 degrees 
19 degrees 
6 degrees 
Inversion 
35 degrees 
17 degrees 
22 degrees 
Eversion 
10 degrees 
15 degrees 
15 degrees 
    
 
Given the discrepancies, I find Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating with respect to the 
left ankle is not reliable or valid under the Guides. As such, claimant has failed to 
demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that she sustained any permanent 
disability as a result of her left lower extremity injuries. 
 
In addition, there are issues with both impairment ratings for claimant’s left elbow 
injury. Dr. Garrels provided his rating without performing a physical examination, based 
on Dr. Eyberg’s range of motion recordings. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 26) He also did not include any 
additional impairment for the radial head arthroplasty, with no explanation. As such, I do 
not find Dr. Garrels’ rating to be a reliable indication of claimant’s permanent functional 
disability. While Dr. Bansal included impairment for the radial head arthroplasty, he 
again made an error in calculating the total upper extremity impairment. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 
12) While this error is potentially due to a typographical error, given the other errors and 
discrepancies in Dr. Bansal’s report, overall, it cannot be considered reliable. As neither 
impairment rating in the record provides a reliable impairment rating based on the 
Guides, I find that claimant has not demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence 
that she is entitled to benefits from the Fund. As a result, all remaining issues are 
rendered moot. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.904(3).   
The claimant alleges entitlement to Fund benefits based upon injuries to her left 
lower extremity in 1991 and 2021, and due to a compensable loss to her left upper 
extremity on April 6, 2022. The Fund disputes that the Second Injury Compensation Act 
applies to this case for various reasons, including failure to prove a qualifying first injury; 
failure to prove a second qualifying injury, and, in the alternative, failure to establish 
industrial loss if first and second qualifying injuries are proven. 
Iowa Code 85.64 governs Second Injury Fund liability. Before any liability of the 
Fund is triggered, three requirements must be met. These requirements are: 1) The 
employee must have lost or lost the use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye; 2) The 
employee must sustain a loss or loss of use of another specified member or organ 

HUBERT V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 11 
 
through a compensable injury; and 3) Permanent disability must exist as to both the 
initial injury and the second injury.   
The Second Injury Fund Act exists to encourage the hiring of handicapped 
persons by making a current employer responsible only for the amount of disability 
related to an injury occurring while that employer employed the handicapped individual, 
as if the individual had no preexisting disability. See Anderson v. Second Injury Fund, 
262 N.W.2d 789 (Iowa 1978); 15 Iowa Practice, Workers’ Compensation, Lawyer, 
Section 17:1, p. 211 (2014-2015). While the Second Injury Fund may be entitled to a 
credit for the compensable value of the previously disabled scheduled member, the 
Second Injury Fund is not entitled to credit for any prior unscheduled injuries. See 
e.g.  Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Kratzer, 778 N.W.2d 42 (Iowa 2010).   
The Fund is responsible for the industrial disability present after the second injury 
that exceeds the disability attributable to the first and second injuries. Iowa Code 
85.64. Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467 (Iowa 1990); Second 
Injury Fund v. Neelans, 436 N.W.2d 355 (Iowa 1989); Second Injury Fund v. Mich Coal 
Co., 274 N.W.2d 300 (Iowa 1970). The second injury may be a bilateral injury. Second 
Injury Fund of Iowa v. George, 737 N.W.2d 141 (Iowa 2007). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable, 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).   
 
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.” Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011). The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.” Id. The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part. Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156. When considering 
the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination 
occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the 
nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and 
practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  
Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). Supportive lay testimony may be used 
to buttress expert testimony, and therefore is also relevant and material to the causation 
question.   
 
The claimant has the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that 
she sustained some permanent disability resulting from both the initial injury and the 
second injury. Second Injury Fund v. Bergeson, 526 N.W.2d 543, 547-48 (Iowa 1995). 
For industrial disability to result from two scheduled injuries, the claimant must prove the 

HUBERT V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 12 
 
first and second injuries combine to contribute to the industrial loss. Second Injury Fund 
v. Shank, 516 N.W.2d 808, 813 (Iowa 1994) 
The first question is whether the claimant lost the use of one of the enumerated 
members, specifically, in this case, the left leg. Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation 
Act, permanent partial disability is compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a 
scheduled member under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or as an unscheduled 
injury pursuant to the provisions of section 85.34(2)(v). The extent of scheduled 
member disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is determined by using 
the functional method. Functional disability is “limited to the loss of the physiological 
capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 
(Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998). 
In 2017, the legislature modified Iowa Code section 85.34 regarding permanent 
disabilities. Iowa Code section 85.34(x) permanent disabilities states: 
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
medical association, as adopted by the workers' compensation 
commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency 
expertise shall not be utilized in determining loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or 
paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not loss of 
earning capacity. 
Iowa Code section 85.34 (x) (emphasis added). 
This agency has adopted the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 
Fifth Edition, published by the American Medical Association for determining the extent 
of loss or percentage of impairment for permanent partial disabilities. See 876 IAC 2.4.   
This agency is bound by statute to only consider the functional disability ratings 
issued by the various medical providers. The Commissioner has addressed the 2017 
legislative changes to Iowa Code section 85.34(x). He stated,  
 
Though the legislature indicated only impairment ratings with a basis in 
the Guides are to be utilized for determining the extent of scheduled 
member impairment, the legislature did not set forth what can and cannot 
be considered by the agency when addressing the credibility, 
persuasiveness, and accuracy of two or more competing ratings. In other 
words, deputy commissioners still have to weigh evidence to determine 
which rating is most convincing. See Ramirez v. Arconic, Inc., File No. 
5066573 (Arb., Dec., Jan. 30, 2020) (“However, the new statute does not 
appear to prohibit using lay testimony in aiding to ascertain which of the 

HUBERT V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 13 
 
two ratings in this case is more convincing or credible.”) 
 
Bryan Heeren v. Derby Trucking LLC, File No. 5067250, (App., Dec. 30, 2020). 
 
This agency has cautioned against impairment ratings that do not comply with 
the Guides.  See Hill v. Vermeer Corp., File No. 5066032 (App. January 30, 2020).  
Given the discrepancies set forth above between Dr. Bansal’s rating and the AMA 
Guides’ instructions, I cannot accept Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating for claimant’s left 
lower extremity because it does not comply with the Guides. Additionally, Dr. Bansal’s 
report contains multiple errors and unexplained discrepancies that make it unreliable as 
an expert opinion. Therefore, I conclude claimant failed to demonstrate by a 
preponderance of the evidence that she sustained any permanent impairment or 
functional loss to her left lower extremity. As such, claimant has not proven a first 
qualifying injury under Iowa Code section 85.64 and is not entitled to benefits from the 
Fund.  
 
 
In addition, I did not find either impairment rating for claimant’s left elbow to be 
reliable. Therefore, even if claimant’s left lower extremity injury was a qualifying first 
injury, she did not prove a second qualifying injury that would entitle her to benefits. 
Claimant has not demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that she is entitled 
to benefits from the Fund. As a result, all remaining issues are rendered moot. 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
Claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings. 
 
The parties shall bear their own costs. 
 
Signed and filed this __10th __ day of July, 2024. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Eric Loney (via WCES) 
Jennifer Beckman (via WCES) 
 

HUBERT V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 14 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
