Case Number: 20012896.01
Case Title:  FULLER, ANGELA V. BIMBO BAKERIES USA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Fuller Angela-20012896.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ANGELA FULLER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                    File No. 20012896.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
BIMBO BAKERIES USA, INC., 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE CO. OF 
  :  
NORTH AMERICA, 
  : 
 
 
  :           Head Note Nos.:  1803, 1108 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
The claimant, Angela Fuller, filed a petition for arbitration on June 8, 2021, 
against Bimbo Bakeries, employer, and Indemnity Insurance Company of North 
America, insurance carrier.  The claimant was represented at hearing by Mark Sullivan.  
The defendants were represented by Peter Thill. 
The claimant originally filed two petitions.  File No. 22001389.01 was dismissed 
at the outset of the hearing. 
The matter came on for hearing on July 15, 2022, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom 
videoconferencing.  The record in the case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 11; 
Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 9; and Defense Exhibits A through E and G through J.  
The claimant testified at hearing and was the only witness.  Jennifer Nevers was also 
present.  Michele Proesch served as the court reporter for the proceedings.  The matter 
was fully submitted on September 23, 2022, after helpful briefing by the parties. 
ISSUES & STIPULATIONS 
The parties were able to narrow the issues during the course of the hearing.1  
The following issues and stipulations were submitted.  The parties stipulated that 
claimant worked for defendant and sustained an injury which arose out of and in the 
course of her employment on July 9, 2020.  The parties further agree that the injury was 
                                                 
1 During the course of the hearing, claimant dismissed the petition in File No. 22001389.01.  At the end of the 
hearing, she also dismissed a claim for an alleged arm sequala injury.  (Tr., p. 122) 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Jan-26  09:29:06     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

FULLER V. BIMBO BAKERIES USA 
Page 2 
a cause of both temporary and permanent disability.  The claimant is seeking temporary 
disability benefits as set forth in paragraph 4 of the Hearing Report.  The defendants 
dispute claimant has any entitlement to any further temporary benefits.  Claimant is 
seeking permanent disability benefits as well.  The defendants deny they are 
responsible for any further disability benefits, however, the parties stipulate that 
claimant’s disability is “industrial.”  The parties do not agree upon a commencement 
date for permanency. 
The parties stipulate to all elements comprising the rate of compensation and 
affirmative defenses have been waived.  Claimant is seeking past medical expenses as 
set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 8.  Claimant is seeking alternate care as well.  The 
claimant is also seeking payment for an independent medical examination under Iowa 
Code section 85.39. The parties stipulate that claimant was paid weekly benefits set 
forth in Defendants’ Exhibit A. 
Under paragraph 10 of the Hearing Report, defendants listed that they dispute 
medical causation of claimant’s current health conditions to the low back and leg to the 
July 9, 2020, work injury.  Claimant objected to the inclusion of this as an issue since 
defendants had not listed causation as an issue prior to the submission of the hearing 
report.  I overruled this objection and allowed defendants to submit this as an issue.  
The defendants seem to have admitted that her work injury did indeed cause some level 
of permanent disability, however, they do not believe that her current, ongoing 
symptoms at the time of hearing are entirely related to her work injury.  I interpret this 
primarily as an apportionment issue and/or as a defense for past and future medical 
expenses. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant Angela Fuller was 51 years old as of the date of hearing.  Her 
demeanor was pleasant and appropriate.  She testified live and under oath at the video 
hearing.  I find Ms. Fuller to be generally credible.  She was a reasonably good 
historian.  Her testimony generally matches up with other portions of the record.  There 
was nothing about her demeanor which led me to believe she was dishonest in her 
testimony. 
Ms. Fuller began working for Bimbo Bakeries in March 2018 as a sanitor.  The 
job description for this position is in the record.  (Defendants’ Exhibit B, page 5)  The 
primary function of her job was to clean equipment.  Ms. Fuller testified in some detail 
regarding her work history prior to starting at Bimbo.  While her work history was varied 
and interesting, she primarily had earned her living as a waitress or bartender, at times 
with substantial earnings.  (Transcript, pages 26-27)  She has also performed some 
work through temporary staffing agencies and in manufacturing.  There were periods of 
time in her adult life when she was not in the workforce due to personal circumstances, 
including family and legal challenges.  Ms. Fuller testified that her job at Bimbo Bakeries 
was the best job she ever held.  She earned over $21.00 per hour and had good 
benefits which were quite valuable to her. 

FULLER V. BIMBO BAKERIES USA 
Page 3 
The parties have stipulated that Ms. Fuller sustained an injury which arose out of 
and in the course of her employment on July 9, 2020.  Ms. Fuller testified in detail at 
hearing about the injury.  The injury itself is well-documented.  (Def. Ex. C)  Ms. Fuller 
was pushing a heavy cart filled with dough when the accident occurred.  She injured her 
low back.  She did not immediately receive treatment as she initially did not think the 
accident severe. 
After attempting some chiropractic care at first, she presented to the emergency 
room at Finley Hospital on October 14, 2020.  (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 9)  Ms. Fuller then started 
treatment as directed by her employer, with Tri-State Occupational Health and was 
quickly referred for neurosurgical consultation with Chad Abernathey, M.D.  After a full 
medical workup he diagnosed right S1 radiculopathy, right L5-S1 disk extrusion.  He 
confirmed her condition was causally connected to her work injury.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 49)  On 
January 28, 2021, Dr. Abernathey performed a lumbar microdiskectomy.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 
55)  The surgery was generally successful.  Ms. Fuller continued with follow ups with Dr. 
Abernathey and underwent a fairly significant amount of physical therapy beginning in 
February 2021.  (Jt. Ex. 7)  While the surgery was generally successful, the therapy 
notes documented fairly significant ongoing symptoms in her low back, right gluteus and 
down her right lower extremity into her foot which caused difficulty sleeping. 
On July 21, 2021, Dr. Abernathey assigned a permanent impairment rating of 7 
percent of the whole body.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 52)  In total, Ms. Fuller was paid healing period 
benefits from October 20, 2020, through July 21, 2021.  At the time this rating was 
given, Dr. Abernathey had not actually seen her since March 2021.  Ms. Fuller was 
under the impression that she was supposed to have work hardening before being 
released, which never happened.  In any event, she was released to work and Dr. 
Abernathey did not provide any formal work restrictions at that time.  Her employer, 
however, did not return her to work, although she remained on the payroll up through 
the date of hearing.2  (Tr., pp. 69-71) 
Ms. Fuller returned to Dr. Abernathey in October 2021, with reports of increased 
low back pain and instances of her back “locking up.”  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 53)  A repeat MRI 
was performed.  (Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 80-81)  Dr. Abernathey had no additional treatment 
recommendations. 
Two other physicians provided medical opinions in this case.  Robin Sassman, 
M.D., provided opinions following the claimant’s independent medical examination (IME) 
and Jonathan Fields, M.D., provided opinions following a defense IME.  Both of these 
physicians reviewed numerous appropriate records and examined Ms. Fuller. 
On June 15, 2022, Dr. Sassman diagnosed lumbar spine radiculopathy and 
                                                 
2 Claimant testified that she has not returned to work (or received a paycheck) at Bimbo since she went off work in 
October 2020.  She testified that she has stayed in touch with Bimbo in hopes of returning to work at some point.  
She testified that she was eventually told to stop contacting Bimbo about returning to work and that, after her 
evaluation, with Dr. Fields, she was told by her attorney that her employment was going to end at some point in 
time.  (Tr., pp. 69-70)   

FULLER V. BIMBO BAKERIES USA 
Page 4 
opined that she was not at maximum medical improvement for this condition.  (Cl. Ex. 2, 
p. 19)  She opined that further pain management treatment should be pursued.  She did 
directly causally connect this condition to Ms. Fuller’s July 9, 2020, work injury. She 
opined that, in the absence of further treatment, the date of maximum medical 
improvement would be one year after the surgery, January 28, 2022.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 19)  
In the absence of further treatment, Dr. Sassman assigned a 24 percent whole body 
impairment rating.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 20)  Dr. Sassman also recommended permanent 
restrictions of no lifting, pushing or pulling more than 20 pounds and alternate sitting 
and standing.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 22) 
Dr. Fields diagnosed “L5-S1 right paracentral disc herniation with severe right 
lateral recess stenosis.”  (Def. Ex. H, p. 36)  He also opined that this condition and “her 
current low back and leg symptoms are consistent with this reported injury.”  (Def. Ex. 
H, p. 36)  He opined that she was unable to meet the job requirements for Bimbo 
Bakeries and assigned restrictions of, “Avoid forward bending and twisting. No climbing 
ladders.”  (Def. Ex. H, p. 36)  He did not recommend additional medical treatment. (Def. 
Ex. H, p. 37) 
At the time of hearing, Ms. Fuller had obtained employment with Joann’s Fabric 
and Crafts.  She works as a cashier and also cuts fabric and stocks merchandise.  The 
work is part-time and pays $10.00 per hour without benefits.  I find Ms. Fuller is highly 
motivated.  After she was released by Dr. Abernathey, she regularly checked with 
Bimbo Bakeries to see about returning to work.  Until the time of hearing – after her 
fitness for duty evaluation with Dr. Fields – she had not been told that her employment 
with Bimbo would be terminated. 
Ms. Fuller has continued to be symptomatic which causes her numerous deficits 
in her activities of daily living, including sleep difficulties.  Her testimony on this topic 
was consistent with her reports to the evaluating physicians.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 14) 
Having reviewed the evidence in the case, I find that Ms. Fuller did sustain an 
injury which arose out of and in the course of her employment.  The injury to her low 
back resulted in both temporary and permanent disability and caused the need for her 
surgery, as well as the treatment set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 1.  I find that she 
reached maximum medical improvement on July 21, 2021.  She is unable to return to 
work for the employer in this case and she is not well-suited to return to hospitality work. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The primary question submitted is the extent of claimant’s industrial disability.  
The parties stipulated that the disability is industrial. 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co., 
219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the Legislature 
intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning capacity and 

FULLER V. BIMBO BAKERIES USA 
Page 5 
not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of the total 
physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34. 
The refusal of defendant-employer to return claimant to work in any capacity is, 
by itself, significant evidence of a lack of employability.  Pierson v. O’Bryan Brothers, 
File No. 951206  (App. January 20, 1995).  Meeks v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., File 
No. 876894, (App. January 22, 1993); See also, 10-84 Larson’s Workers’ 
Compensation Law, section 84.01; Sunbeam Corp. v. Bates, 271 Ark. 609 S.W.2d 102 
(1980); Army & Air Force Exchange Service v. Neuman, 278 F. Supp. 865 (W.D. La. 
1967); Leonardo v. Uncas Manufacturing Co., 77 R.I. 245, 75 A.2d 188 (1950).  An 
employer who chooses to preclude an injured worker’s re-entry into its workforce likely 
demonstrates by its own action that the worker has incurred a substantial loss of 
earning capacity.  As has previously been explained in numerous decisions of this 
agency, if the employer in whose employ the disability occurred is unwilling to 
accommodate the disability, there is no reason to expect some other employer to have 
more incentive to do so.  Estes v. Exide Technologies, File No. 5013809 (App. 
December 12, 2006). 
I find that claimant has sustained a substantial loss of earning capacity as a 
result of her work injury.  Ms. Fuller was 51 years old as of the date of hearing.  Her job 
for Bimbo Bakeries is the best job she has ever held, earning over $21.00 per hour with 
valuable fringe benefits.  She now has a permanent impairment in her lower back which 
is still highly symptomatic.  Her impairment rating is between 7 and 24 percent.  She 
described disabling symptoms of pain, loss of range of motion down her right leg which 
causes difficulty bending, twisting, climbing and walking.  It also interferes with her 
sleep. 
Her employer arranged a fitness for duty examination for her with Dr. Fields and 
she was deemed unable to return to her employer, at least in her previous position.  At 
the time of hearing, the employer had not offered any position to her.  Her restrictions 
are no bending, twisting or climbing ladders.  In spite of her employment being in limbo 
since the time Dr. Abernathey released her in July 2021, Ms. Fuller obtained 
appropriate employment.  The best she could find was part-time work at $10.00 per 

FULLER V. BIMBO BAKERIES USA 
Page 6 
hour at a fabric store.  I find it is likely that she will secure more hours and better pay in 
the future, her actual loss of earnings at the time of hearing exceeds 60 percent. 
Because of her symptoms and formal medical restrictions, Ms. Fuller is no longer 
well-suited for manufacturing work or her primary past employment in hospitality, 
particularly as a waitress in a busy location.  Having considered all of the appropriate 
factors of industrial disability, I find that claimant has sustained a 65 percent loss of 
earning capacity.  I conclude that this entitles her to 325 weeks of compensation 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) (2021). 
The next issue is the commencement date for benefits.  The claimant argues that 
the defendants have used an incorrect commencement date for payment of benefits.  
The issue is whether the claimant reached MMI on July 21, 2021.  Claimant argues her 
MMI date is January 27, 2022, based upon Dr. Sassman’s report. 
Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an injured 
worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has returned to 
work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 
312N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or 
intermittent.  Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
I find that both the opinion of Dr. Abernathey and Dr. Sassman are flawed.  Dr. 
Abernathey did not appear to have any basis for assigning MMI other than it was 
approximately six months after the surgery.  In my experience reviewing these cases, 
this does appear to be somewhat standard for this type of surgery.  The problem is that 
when Dr. Abernathey placed her at MMI, he had not even seen her since March 2021.  
Dr. Sassman’s opinion, however, is, at least equally flawed.  Dr. Sassman’s actual 
opinion is that claimant was still not at MMI as of the date of her evaluation in June 
2022.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 19)  She then opined that in the absence of further treatment, she 
would place MMI at the arbitrary date of one year after the surgery.  For reasons which 
will be detailed below, I agree with Dr. Sassman that the evidence supports a finding 
that claimant may benefit from some additional treatment and it may actually improve 
her condition.  In this record, however, the greater weight of evidence supports the 
finding that Ms. Fuller’s condition actually plateaued around the July 2021, date. 
The next issue is whether the claimant is entitled to payment of past medical 
expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 1. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 

FULLER V. BIMBO BAKERIES USA 
Page 7 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Claimant is entitled to an order of reimbursement only if she has paid treatment 
costs; otherwise, to an order directing the responsible defendants to make payments 
directly to the provider.  See, Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988).  Defendants 
should also pay any lawful late payment fees imposed by providers.  Laughlin v. IBP, 
Inc., File No. 1020226 (App., February 27, 1995). 
I find that all of the medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 1 are 
causally related to her work injury.  The only available defense is whether the treatment 
was authorized.  The defendants have never formally denied this claim and have a 
statutory obligation to direct her medical care. 
I find that Ms. Fuller reported her injury immediately to her immediate supervisor 
in July 2020.  When claimant initially filled out paperwork related to her work injury, she 
declined medical treatment.  (Def. Ex. C, p. 13)  When her condition did not improve, 
and in fact worsened, she quite reasonably changed her mind.  Prior to asking the 
employer to authorize care, however, she had sought chiropractic care on her own.  
Again, this is understandable and otherwise reasonable, the fact remains that all of her 
medical visits to the chiropractor were unauthorized.  It appears in this record that once 
Ms. Fuller requested treatment for the condition, an appointment at Tri-State 
Occupational Health was quickly authorized.  (Def. Ex. J, p. 53)  Therefore, all of the 
unauthorized treatment with the chiropractor, as well as the visit to Grand River Medical 
Care, is deemed unauthorized and is not compensable. 
The claimant, however, also sought emergency treatment at Finley on a couple 
of separate occasions prior to seeking treatment.  I find that this care is reimbursable 
under the emergency care provisions under Iowa Code section 85.27. 
Therefore, I find that all of the medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 1 
are reimbursable with the exception of the chiropractic visits set forth therein. 
The next issue is whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care. 
Under Iowa law, the employer is required to provide care to an injured employee 
and is permitted to choose the care.  Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 
562 N.W.2d 433 (Iowa 1997). 
[T]he employer is obliged to furnish reasonable services and supplies to 
treat an injured employee, and has the right to choose the care. . . .  The 
treatment must be offered promptly and be reasonably suited to treat the 
injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.  If the employee has 
reason to be dissatisfied with the care offered, the employee should 
communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if 

FULLER V. BIMBO BAKERIES USA 
Page 8 
requested, following which the employer and the employee may agree to 
alternate care reasonably suited to treat the injury.  If the employer and 
employee cannot agree on such alternate care, the commissioner may, 
upon application and reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow 
and order other care. 
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment – and seeking alternate care – 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable.  See Iowa 
R. App. P. 14(f)(5); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995).  
Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.  Id.  The 
employer’s obligation turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability.  Id.; 
Harned v. Farmland Foods, Inc., 331 N.W.2d 98 (Iowa 1983).  In Pirelli-Armstrong Tire 
Co., 562 N.W.2d at 433, the court approvingly quoted Bowles v. Los Lunas Schools, 
109 N.M. 100, 781 P.2d 1178 (App. 1989): 
[T]he words “reasonable” and “adequate” appear to describe the same 
standard. 
[The New Mexico rule] requires the employer to provide a certain 
standard of care and excuses the employer from any obligation to provide 
other services only if that standard is met.  We construe the terms 
"reasonable” and “adequate” as describing care that is both appropriate to 
the injury and sufficient to bring the worker to maximum recovery. 
The commissioner is justified in ordering alternate care when employer-
authorized care has not been effective and evidence shows that such care is 
“inferior or less extensive” care than other available care requested by the 
employee.  Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124; Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co., 562 N.W.2d at 
437. 
The defendants are not currently offering the claimant any medical treatment on 
the basis of the opinion of Dr. Fields.  “In my medical opinion, no further medical care is 
needed at this time with regard to her low back condition.”  (Def. Ex. H, p. 37)  I interpret 
Dr. Fields opinion to primarily address her condition from a surgical perspective. 
The claimant has testified that her symptoms have worsened since she was 
released by Dr. Abernathey.  While I have no basis to dispute the opinions of Dr. 
Abernathey and Dr. Fields that further surgery is not an option, I find that Dr. Sassman’s 
treatment recommendation for a referral to pain management to be compelling.  “Ms. 
Fuller may benefit from an evaluation by a pain management specialist to determine if 
an epidural steroid injection or a specific medication regimen would be beneficial.”  (Cl. 
Ex. 2, p. 19) 
Defendants shall authorize evaluation and treatment with a pain management 
specialist. 

FULLER V. BIMBO BAKERIES USA 
Page 9 
It is noted that defendants argue that Ms. Fuller has developed left-sided 
symptoms in her low back and the defendants are not responsible for this.  The 
defendants, however, have never denied any portion of this claim up until they filed the 
Hearing Report in this matter.  There is still no denial in the agency’s compliance filings.  
There is no basis in this record for finding any type of intervening or superseding cause 
of this condition at this time. 
The next issue is payment of the IME. 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).   
The claimant had a number of other body parts examined and evaluated as part 
of her examination with Dr. Sassman.  I find that all of this was reasonable at the time 
the evaluation was performed.  There is no meaningful way in this case to apportion out 
the expenses related to the claims dismissed by the claimant.  Furthermore, it is 
apparent from the records submitted that the vast majority of Dr. Sassman’s time was 
spent reviewing and examining the claimant’s low back.  She has prevailed on this 
claim.  The defendants are responsible for the IME costs set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 
3. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED 
Defendants shall pay the claimant three hundred and twenty-five (325) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits at the rate of five hundred and fifty-three and 
08/100 ($553.08) per week commencing July 21, 2021. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall be given credit for the thirty-five (35) weeks previously paid. 
Defendants are responsible for the medical expenses set forth in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 1, with the exception of chiropractic bills and Grand River Medical Group in a 

FULLER V. BIMBO BAKERIES USA 
Page 10 
manner consistent with this decision. 
Defendants shall authorize an evaluation and treatment with a pain management 
specialist. 
Defendants shall reimburse the IME expenses set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 3. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants in the amount of one hundred and no/100 dollars 
($100.00). 
Signed and filed this _26th _ day of January, 2023. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Mark Sullivan (via WCES) 
Peter Thill (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal pe riod 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
