Case Number: 21701057.01
Case Title:  GARRIGUS, LUCAS V. A. Y. MCDONALD INDUSTRIES, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Garrigus Lucas-21701057.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
LUCAS GARRIGUS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
              File No. 21701057.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :   
A. Y. MCDONALD INDUSTRIES, INC.,   : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
TWIN CITY FIRE INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
     Headnotes: 1108, 1402.30, 2907 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
Claimant Lucas Garrigus filed a petition in arbitration on September 27, 2021, 
alleging he sustained a cumulative injury to his respiratory system, while working for 
Defendant A.Y. McDonald Industries, Inc. (“A.Y. McDonald”) on November 1, 2019.  
A.Y. McDonald and its insurer, Defendant Twin City Fire Insurance Company (“Twin 
City”), filed an answer on October 5, 2021.  Garrigus filed a motion to amend on April 
11, 2022, alleging he also sustained anxiety and depression caused by the work injury.  
An arbitration hearing was held via Zoom video conference on March 16, 2023.  
Attorney Zeke McCartney represented Garrigus.  Garrigus appeared and testified.  
Attorney Jane Lorentzen represented A.Y. McDonald and Twin City.  Jackie Bettcher 
appeared and testified on behalf of A.Y. McDonald and Twin City.  Joint Exhibits (“JE”) 
1 through 5 and Exhibits 1 through 9 and A through L were admitted into the record.  
The record was held open through May 26, 2023, for the receipt of Exhibit M and post-
hearing briefs.  Exhibit M was received and admitted into the record.  The briefs were 
received and the record was closed. 
The parties submitted a hearing report listing stipulations and issues to be 
decided.  A hearing report order was entered at the conclusion of the hearing accepting 
the parties’ stipulations and the issues to be decided.  A.Y. McDonald and Twin City 
raised the affirmative defense of lack of timely notice under Iowa Code section 85.23 
and waived all other affirmative defenses.   
At the time of the hearing the parties disputed the rate.  Before the record was 
closed the parties agreed upon the stipulated rate referenced below. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Jul-11  07:50:05     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

GARRIGUS V. A. Y. MCDONALD INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 2 
 
STIPULATIONS 
1. 
An employer-employee relationship existed between A.Y. McDonald and 
Garrigus at the time of the alleged injury. 
2. 
At the time of the alleged injury Garrigus’ gross earnings were $1,080 per 
week, he was married and entitled to three exemptions, and the parties believe the 
weekly rate is $703.09.  
3. 
Costs have been paid. 
ISSUES 
1. 
Did Garrigus sustain an injury, which arose out of and in the course of 
employment with A.Y. McDonald, on November 1, 2019? 
2. 
Is the alleged injury a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery? 
3. 
Is Garrigus entitled to temporary benefits from March 23, 2020, through 
August 31, 2020, and a running award of temporary benefits from October 1, 2020? 
4. 
Is Garrigus entitled to payment of medical expenses, including medical 
mileage?  
5. 
Is Garrigus entitled to recover the cost of an independent medical 
examination (“IME”) under Iowa Code section 85.39? 
6. 
Is Garrigus entitled to alternate care under Iowa Code section 85.27? 
7. 
Is Garrigus entitled to an award of costs set forth in Exhibit 4? 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Garrigus lives with his wife and daughter in Dubuque. (Transcript, page 14)  At 
the time of the hearing he was 36. (Tr.:14)  Garrigus was a smoker and he quit smoking 
in 2017 when his wife became pregnant. (Tr.:23-24)   
A.Y. McDonald hired Garrigus in July 2013. (Tr.:15)  Garrigus worked as a 
casting inspector for 100 days and then he bid into a utility position at A.Y. McDonald in 
the foundry. (Tr.:15)  The foundry manufactures brass parts for gas and water works. 
(Tr.:15)  Garrigus described the work as hot and dirty. (Tr.:16)  He reported he worked 
with sand, molten brass, molten metal with lead and without lead, zinc, core sand, and 
other additives. (Tr.:16)  Garrigus relayed there is silica, formaldehyde, and dirt in the 
foundry. (Tr.:16)   
During Garrigus’ employment, A.Y. McDonald required employees to wear 
respirators while performing certain jobs. (Tr.:17)  Garrigus was required to wear a 

GARRIGUS V. A. Y. MCDONALD INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 3 
 
respirator a majority of the time when he worked in the plant. (Tr.:17-19)  During his 
employment A.Y. McDonald performed regular pulmonary function testing on Garrigus. 
(Tr.:16)  Erin Kennedy, M.D., an occupational medicine physician, reviewed the tests 
and determined whether Garrigus could be certified to wear a respirator. (JE 5)  
Garrigus relayed that before 2019 he never had a non-normal test at work. (Tr.:17)   
Garrigus’ counsel inquired whether he had “any history of any significant 
respiratory difficulties” before he worked for A.Y. McDonald and he relayed he had not, 
noting he had only sought treatment for a brief cold. (Tr.:15)   
Garrigus reported between 2013 and 2018 he hacked up stuff and he would blow 
black stuff out of his nose daily before showering after working in the plant. (Tr.:19)  
Garrigus testified he noticed sediment or material on the inside of his respirator every 
day and he washed his respirator on a daily basis. (Tr.:20)   
Garrigus testified in 2019 he was experiencing a lot of congestion in his chest 
and nasal issues. (Tr.:20)  Garrigus reported he had a cold that seemed like it would not 
go away, so he sought medical treatment. (Tr.:21, 27)   
Garrigus and his wife purchased a home in July 2019. (Tr.:22, 57)  He reported 
the home inspection showed the home did not have mold, but he thought there was 
dust in the carpet, so he replaced the carpet throughout the entire home within two 
weeks of moving in with his family. (Tr.:22)   
On November 4, 2019, Garrigus sought treatment on his own with Duane Caylor, 
M.D., a family medicine provider with Medical Associates, complaining of chest 
tightness, wheezing, and coughing for the past three days. (JE 1:1; Tr.:51)  Dr. Caylor 
examined Garrigus, assessed him with acute bronchitis and acute bronchospasm, 
prescribed an albuterol inhaler, doxycycline hyclate, and a prednisone taper. (JE 1:2)   
Dr. Kennedy ordered testing to determine Garrigus’ levels of lead and zinc from 
work on November 12, 2019. (JE 2:52)  Dr. Kennedy documented that his levels for zinc 
and lead were slightly elevated. (JE 2:52)   
The Monday after Thanksgiving Garrigus’ wife opened a daycare in their home. 
(Tr.:24)  His wife cares for four children in the bottom half of their home. (Tr.:25)   
Garrigus returned to Medical Associates on January 27, 2020, and he was 
examined by Kim Ehlers, ARNP. (JE 1:3)  Garrigus complained of a persistent cough, 
shortness of breath, and wheezing. (JE 1:3)  Ehlers assessed Garrigus with a cough 
and prescribed Zithromax and a prednisone taper. (JE 1:4)   
Garrigus returned to Ehlers on February 5, 2020, complaining of a constant 
cough, shortness of breath, and wheezing. (JE 1:6)  Ehlers noted his chest x-ray was 
negative, he worked in a foundry and wore a respirator, and always had normal 
pulmonary function tests. (JE 1:6)  Garrigus relayed he recently purchased a new home, 
he had been sleeping in the basement that may have had mold, and he recently 

GARRIGUS V. A. Y. MCDONALD INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 4 
 
replaced the carpet. (JE 1:6)  Ehlers assessed Garrigus with an upper respiratory 
infection and noted if he had a third recurrence she may refer him to an allergist. (JE 
1:7)   
Garrigus denied telling Ehlers there was mold in the home during his 
appointment. (Tr.:31)  Garrigus testified the carpet was dusty and had not been 
cleaned.  (Tr.:31)  He relayed the carpet was bothering him, so he and his wife decided 
to replace all of the carpet. (Tr.:31) 
On February 19, 2020, Garrigus attended an appointment with Robert Russo, 
PA-C with Medical Associates, complaining of right ear pain. (JE 1:8)  Russo noted 
Garrigus was on azithromycin for a persistent upper respiratory infection. (JE 1:8)  
Russo diagnosed Garrigus with right acute otitis media and prescribed Augmentin. (JE 
1:9)   
Garrigus returned to Ehlers on March 3, 2020, complaining of a cough, shortness 
of breath, and wheezing. (JE 1:10)  Ehlers assessed Garrigus with a chronic cough, 
noted she would refer him to an allergist if he had another occurrence, and noted he 
would continue to follow up with an ear nose and throat specialist for his right ear 
issues.  (JE 1:11)   
On March 23, 2020, Garrigus attended an appointment with Kelsey Hill, ARNP 
with Medical Associates, complaining of a sore throat, cough, and chest congestion for 
the past four days and body aches for the past 24 hours. (JE 1:13)  Hill noted Garrigus 
had several illnesses of bronchospasm requiring steroids and antibiotics since 
November and had no history of asthma. (JE 1:13)  Hill assessed Garrigus with a 
cough, prescribed a prednisone taper, doxycycline monohydrate, and a Ventolin inhaler, 
restricted him from working through March 27, 2020, and referred him to an allergist. 
(JE 1:14-15)   
Ehlers recommended Garrigus limit his exposure to COVID-19 and not work in 
the workplace in March and April 2020. (JE 1:16-17)   
On April 9, 2020, Garrigus attended a telehealth visit with Ehlers. (JE 1:18)  
Ehlers noted he had been treated for walking pneumonia and he had intermittent 
respiratory infections ongoing for the last four months. (JE 1:19)  Ehlers documented 
Garrigus had been treated several times with antibiotics and prednisone and while he 
felt better after treatment, his symptoms returned with wheezing. (JE 1:19)  Ehlers 
assessed Garrigus with a cough, continued his prescriptions, and recommended he 
follow up with an allergist. (JE 1:19)   
Garrigus returned to Ehlers for a telehealth visit on April 17, 2020. (JE 1:20)  
Ehlers assessed him with an upper respiratory infection, prescribed Advair, and noted 
he was waiting for an appointment with an allergist. (JE 1:21)   
On May 1, 2020, Garrigus returned to Ehlers and reported he was improving 
since being off Advair and stating he was hesitant to return to work due to COVID-19. 

GARRIGUS V. A. Y. MCDONALD INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 5 
 
(JE 1:25)  Ehlers continued to recommend Garrigus limit his exposure to COVID-19 and 
not work in the workplace, but noted he could work from home through June 1, 2020. 
(JE 1:22-23, 29)   
On May 5, 2020, Garrigus attended a telehealth appointment with Brad 
McClimon, M.D., an allergist, complaining of a cough, shortness of breath all winter, and 
chest tightness. (JE 1:26-27)  Dr. McClimon assessed Garrigus with cough/wheezing 
symptoms concerning for the development of asthma and questionable allergic rhinitis, 
continued his prescription medications, and recommended treatment in the future with 
additional testing in the clinic. (JE 1:27) 
Garrigus attended a telehealth appointment with Dr. McClimon on May 22, 2020, 
reporting he was doing better on Advair and relaying he moved to a new house in July. 
(JE 1:30)  Dr. McClimon recommended skin testing and a pulmonary function test. (JE 
1:30)  
On May 27, 2020, Garrigus attended an in-person appointment with Dr. 
McClimon for allergy skin testing. (JE 1:31)  The nurse who administered the test noted 
positive wheals for dog, cat, cattle, horse, and mites. (JE 1:35)  Dr. McClimon also 
recommended Garrigus limit his exposure to COVID-19 and not work in the workplace, 
but noted he could work from home. (JE 1:37)   
Garrigus and his wife have two cats that live in their home. (Tr.:23)  The cats 
have resided in the home with Garrigus since 2015. (Tr.:23)   
Garrigus attended a follow-up appointment with Dr. McClimon on June 5, 2020. 
(JE 1:38)  Dr. McClimon noted his skin testing was positive for animal dander and dust 
mite. (JE 1:38)  Dr. McClimon listed an impression of probable asthma, not controlled, 
and allergic rhinitis, prescribed a prednisone burst and taper with repeat spirometry, and 
continued his Advair and Singulair. (JE 1:39) 
On July 1, 2020, Garrigus returned to Dr. McClimon reporting improvement with 
his medication and noting mild exertion like walking into the parking lot creates 
tightness. (JE 1:40)  Dr. McClimon discussed treatment options and switched Garrigus 
from Advair to Breo, continued his Singulair, and recommended additional testing. (JE 
1:41)   
During a follow-up appointment on August 4, 2020, Garrigus reported he was 
using his rescue inhaler less and he was experiencing less chest tightness, coughing, 
and wheezing. (JE 1:42)  Dr. McClimon documented Garrigus relayed he was able to 
mow the lawn with only mild wheezing after mowing. (JE 1:43)  Dr. McClimon stated 
Garrigus had maximized therapy for his asthma and recommended Dr. Kennedy be 
consulted about scheduling a stress test. (JE 1:44)  Garrigus agreed on cross-
examination Dr. McClimon never told him his lung condition was work-related. (Tr.:54)   
On September 10, 2020, Garrigus attended an appointment with Benjamin 
Kumor, M.D., a family medicine physician with Grand River Medical Group, to establish 

GARRIGUS V. A. Y. MCDONALD INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 6 
 
care. (JE 3:75; Tr.:52)  Garrigus reported he had been experiencing lung problems 
since November 2019. (JE 3:75)  Dr. Kumor examined Garrigus, assessed him with 
asthma, persistent and not controlled, and obesity, and referred him to a pulmonologist. 
(JE 3:76)   
A.Y. McDonald sent Garrigus a letter on November 3, 2020, terminating his 
employment for failure to provide documentation from his physician taking him off work 
due to his medical condition. (Ex. E:59)   
In his answers to interrogatories, Garrigus reported that after his termination he 
worked for FedEx Freight from 2020 to 2021 as a fork truck driver until he started his 
own business. (Ex. K:111)  Garrigus relayed he operates GT Power Washing where he 
power washes things for people, and since November 2021, he has also worked for 
Grub Hub as a delivery driver. (Ex. K:111)   
On March 24, 2021, Patrick Hartley, a pulmonologist with the University of Iowa 
Hospitals and Clinics (“UIHC”), conducted an IME for A.Y. McDonald and Twin City. 
(Ex. A)  Dr. Hartley examined Garrigus and reviewed his medical records. (Ex. A)  Dr. 
Hartley noted pulmonary function testing performed at the UIHC the date of his 
evaluation revealed: 
a mild ventilatory defect which is not clearly obstructive or 
restrictive, with reduced forced vital capacity (FCV) and forced expiratory 
volume in the first second (FEV1) with normal FEV1/FVC.  There is no 
significant change following inhaled beta agonist bronchodilator.  Lung 
volumes by plethysmography reveal a reduced total lung capacity (TLC) 
and normal residual volume.  The diffusing capacity (DLCO) is normal. 
(Ex. A:4)  Dr. Hartley assessed Garrigus with a respiratory disorder, unspecified, and 
occupational exposure in the workplace. (Ex. A:6)   
On April 19, 2021, Garrigus attended an appointment with Braden Powers, M.D., 
a pulmonologist with Grand River Medical Group on a referral from Dr. Kumor, for an 
initial evaluation of dyspnea. (JE 3:79)  Dr. Powers noted Garrigus had been seen in 
Pulmonary Medicine at the UIHC. (JE 3:79)  Dr. Powers examined Garrigus, reviewed 
his pulmonary function tests and labs, assessed him with severe persistent asthma 
without complication and occupational exposure in the workplace, prescribed Spiriva, 
continued his Singulair, Breo, and Albuterol inhaler, noted Garrigus reported being 
exposed to silica sand/dust, formaldehyde and cadmium fumes at A.Y. McDonald, and 
stated he would defer to Dr. Hartley at the UIHC on any additional work-up or testing. 
(JE 3:80-81) 
Garrigus attended an appointment with Paige Ortiz, ARNP, with Grand River 
Medical Group Urgent Care on November 23, 2021, complaining of a fever, chest 
congestion, and cough for four days. (JE 3:82)  Ortiz tested Garrigus for COVID-19 and 
the test was positive. (JE 3:83)  Ortiz assessed Garrigus with a fever, chest congestion, 
cough, and COVID-19. (JE 3:83)   

GARRIGUS V. A. Y. MCDONALD INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 7 
 
On January 17, 2022, Garrigus returned to Dr. Kumor. (JE 3:89)  Garrigus’ wife 
relayed she believed her husband has had anxiety since his lung problems started a 
few years ago. (JE 3:89)  Dr. Kumor assessed Garrigus with anxiety and essential 
hypertension and prescribed sertraline and lorsartan potassium. (JE 3:90)   
On June 7, 2022, Garrigus’ counsel sent a letter to Dr. Powers asking whether he 
agreed with a referral to the Mayo Clinic and whether his work-related exposure was 
more likely than not a substantial contributing factor regarding his ongoing condition and 
symptoms. (Ex. B:46)  Dr. Powers responded, writing, “I did not recommend referral to 
Mayo Clinic.  This was at the patient’s request to his PCP, Dr. Kumor.  He requested 
another opinion other than mine regarding his lung disease.  See my note for details of 
my recommendations.” (Ex. B:47)  Garrigus agreed on cross-examination Dr. Powers 
never told him whether or not his lung condition is work-related. (Tr.:53-54)   
Garrigus attended a follow-up appointment with Dr. Kumor on March 1, 2022, 
reporting he believed the medication was helping with his mood and he did not feel as 
irritable or anxious and he had less intrusive thoughts. (JE 3:91)  Dr. Kumor refilled his 
medications. (JE 3:92)   
On September 14, 2022, Garrigus attended an appointment with Brian Gross, 
M.D., a pulmonologist with Pulmonary Associates, complaining of feeling wheezy and 
reporting he had more bad than good days. (JE 4:95)  Dr. Gross examined Garrigus, 
noted he did not sound wheezy, but his spirometry was abnormal, he diagnosed 
Garrigus with asthma and shortness of breath, and recommended additional testing. (JE 
4:97)   
Garrigus returned to Dr. Gross on December 15, 2022, reporting he was short of 
breath with exertion and he has a productive cough with yellow sputum. (JE 4:107)  Dr. 
Gross discussed treatment options and noted his asthma was not well controlled. (JE 
4:108)   
Dr. Hartley sent Defendants’ counsel a supplemental IME report on January 13, 
2023, acknowledging his initial report was incomplete and did not include his opinion 
regarding diagnosis, causation, or any associated work-related impairment. (Ex. A:21)  
Dr. Hartley noted Garrigus’ pulmonary function testing performed the date of his IME 
revealed a mild ventilatory defect that he could not classify as clearly either obstructive 
or restrictive, and that he had reduced total lung capacity, and normal diffusing capacity. 
(Ex. A:21)  Dr. Hartley noted he had not been provided with any chest imaging studies 
for review, but it is very unlikely a worker in his mid-30s would have radiographic 
evidence of silicosis, or other dust-related parenchymal lung disease, in the absence of 
significantly elevated levels of fibrogenic dust in the work environment, or immunological 
sensitization to the dust. (Ex. A:22)   
Dr. Hartley opined: 
Mr. Garrigus has probable asthma for which he is followed by his 
allergist Dr. McClimon, and has allergies to a number of environmental 

GARRIGUS V. A. Y. MCDONALD INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 8 
 
allergens.  Based on the information available, I cannot state within a 
reasonable degree of medical certainty that his occupational exposures 
while working at A.Y. McDonald have caused, or materially aggravated, 
his underlying airway disease. 
It is my opinion, that Mr. Garrigus does not have any respiratory 
impairment, attributable to his occupational exposures at A.Y. McDonald. 
As with any patient with underlying airway hyperreactivity, it would 
be prudent to limit his exposure to irritant or fibrogenic dusts in the work 
environment.  He reports that he uses a respirator at work, to which he is 
fit tested annually, as required by OSHA.  This should provide adequate 
respiratory protection and decrease the likelihood of exacerbating his 
asthma.  If he has difficulty tolerating a tight-fitting air purifying respirator, 
due to his asthma, he could be provided with a powered air purifying 
respirator (PAPR) which would likely result in a lower “work of breathing.”  
(Ex. A:22)   
On January 18, 2023, Garrigus’ counsel sent Dr. Gross a check-the-box letter 
asking for his opinion. (Ex. 9)  Dr. Gross sent an undated response agreeing with the 
statement, “[i]t is my opinion that the work exposure from AY McDonald was a 
substantial contributing factor in exacerbating Mr. Garrigus’s underlying respiratory 
condition.” (Ex. 9:51)  Dr. Gross stated it was “too soon to say” whether Garrigus was at 
maximum medical improvement because he started a new medication in January and 
he stated it was too soon to assign a permanent impairment rating under the AMA 
Guides 5th Edition, noting “I don’t have this reference.” (Ex. 9:51)  Dr. Gross 
recommended an inhaler, nebulizer, and Dupixent. (Ex. 9:51)   
Garrigus testified he continues to have ongoing problems every day with 
tightness in his chest, a dry cough, and shortness of breath. (Tr.:46)  Garrigus relayed 
at the time of the hearing “it feels like my lungs are kind of cleared out.  It’s not as gritty, 
I guess you could say, where it’s – you know, it’s hard to explain.  Like it’s not as 
congested as far as stuff coming out or – you know, yeah,” in comparison to early 2020. 
(Tr.:46)  While his condition is better, Garrigus reported he has never returned to his 
baseline before the fall of 2019. (Tr.:46)   
Garrigus relayed since he developed his pulmonary problems he cannot run 5Ks 
anymore with his wife, play sand volleyball, or swim in the river. (Tr.:48)  He reported 
when he chases his daughter around he becomes winded. (Tr.:48)   
 
 
 

GARRIGUS V. A. Y. MCDONALD INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 9 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
I. 
Arising Out of and in the Course of Employment 
Garrigus alleges his work at A.Y. McDonald caused him to develop a work-
related respiratory condition and his respiratory condition caused him to develop 
depression and anxiety.  A.Y. McDonald and Twin City reject his assertion.   
To receive workers’ compensation benefits, an injured employee must prove, by 
a preponderance of the evidence, the employee’s injuries arose out of and in the course 
of the employee’s employment with the employer.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 
N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 1995).  An injury arises out of employment when a causal 
relationship exists between the employment and the injury.  Quaker Oats v. Ciha, 552 
N.W.2d 143, 151 (Iowa 1996).  The injury must be a rational consequence of a hazard 
connected with the employment, and not merely incidental to the employment.  Koehler 
Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held, an 
injury occurs “in the course of employment” when: 
it is within the period of employment at a place where the employee 
reasonably may be in performing his duties, and while he is fulfilling those 
duties or engaged in doing something incidental thereto.  An injury in the 
course of employment embraces all injuries received while employed in 
furthering the employer’s business and injuries received on the employer’s 
premises, provided that the employee’s presence must ordinarily be 
required at the place of the injury, or, if not so required, employee’s 
departure from the usual place of employment must not amount to an 
abandonment of employment or be an act wholly foreign to his usual work.  
An employee does not cease to be in the course of his employment 
merely because he is not actually engaged in doing some specifically 
prescribed task, if, in the course of his employment, he does some act 
which he deems necessary for the benefit or interest of his employer. 
Farmers Elevator Co., Kingsley v. Manning, 286 N.W.2d 174, 177 (Iowa 1979).  
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 
N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa 1997).  When considering the weight of an expert opinion, the 
fact-finder may consider whether the examination occurred shortly after the claimant 
was injured, the compensation arrangement, the nature and extent of the examination, 
the expert’s education, experience, training, and practice, and “all other factors which 
bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 
366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985). 

GARRIGUS V. A. Y. MCDONALD INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 10 
 
It is well established in workers’ compensation that “if a claimant had a 
preexisting condition or disability, aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or ‘lighted up’ by 
an injury which arose out of and in the course of employment resulting in a disability 
found to exist,” the claimant is entitled to compensation.  Iowa Dep’t of Transp. v. Van 
Cannon, 459 N.W.2d 900, 904 (Iowa 1990).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held, 
a disease which under any rational work is likely to progress so as 
to finally disable an employee does not become a “personal injury” under 
our Workmen’s Compensation Act merely because it reaches a point of 
disablement while work for an employer is being pursued.  It is only when 
there is a direct causal connection between exertion of the employment 
and the injury that a compensation award can be made.  The question is 
whether the diseased condition was the cause, or whether the 
employment was a proximate contributing cause. 
Musselman v. Cent. Tel. Co., 261 Iowa 352, 359-60, 154 N.W.2d 128, 132 (1967). 
Two physicians have given causation opinions, Dr. Hartley, a pulmonologist who 
conducted an IME for Defendants, and Dr. Gross, a pulmonologist who began treating 
Garrigus in 2022.  
Dr. Hartley is a pulmonologist at the UIHC, a premier medical institution.  Dr. 
Hartley examined Garrigus on one occasion and diagnosed him with an unspecified 
respiratory disorder. (Ex. A:6)  Dr. Hartley reviewed all of Garrigus’ medical records, 
including the regular testing performed by Dr. Kennedy over the course of his 
employment.  (Ex. A)  Dr. Hartley opined Garrigus has probable asthma and a number 
of environmental allergies, and based on the information available he could not “state 
within a reasonable degree of medical certainty that his occupational exposures while 
working for A.Y. McDonald have caused, or materially aggravated, his underlying airway 
disease,” and opined Garrigus does not have any respiratory impairment, attributable to 
his occupational exposures at A.Y. McDonald. (Ex. A:22) 
Dr. Gross first treated Garrigus in September 2022, nearly two years after his 
employment ended with A.Y. McDonald. (JE 4:97)  Garrigus complained of feeling 
wheezy.  On exam, Dr. Gross found he did not sound wheezy, but his spirometry was 
abnormal and he diagnosed Garrigus with asthma and shortness of breath, and 
recommended additional testing. (JE 4:97)  Garrigus returned to Dr. Gross on 
December 15, 2022, where he again discussed treatment options. (JE 4:108) 
Dr. Gross sent an undated response to a check-the-box letter Garrigus’ counsel 
sent on January 18, 2023, agreeing with the statement, “[i]t is my opinion that the work 
exposure from AY McDonald was a substantial contributing factor in exacerbating Mr. 
Garrigus’s underlying respiratory condition.” (Ex. 9:51)  Dr. Gross responded it was “too 
soon to say” whether Garrigus was at maximum medical improvement because he 
started a new medication in January. (Ex. 9:51)  In his brief opinion, Dr. Gross did not 
identify what Garrigus had been exposed to in the workplace that exacerbated his 

GARRIGUS V. A. Y. MCDONALD INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 11 
 
underlying respiratory condition. (Ex. 9:51)  He did not explain how he reached his 
conclusion.  I do not find his opinion persuasive.   
In January 2022, Dr. Kumor, Garrigus’ treating family physician, diagnosed him 
with anxiety and prescribed sertraline. (JE 3:90)  Dr. Kumor did not provide an opinion 
finding Garrigus’ respiratory condition caused Garrigus to develop a mental health 
condition or materially aggravated, accelerated, or lit up a mental health condition.  No 
medical provider has opined Garrigus’ respiratory condition caused him to develop a 
mental health condition or materially aggravated, accelerated, or lit up a mental health 
condition.   
I do not find Garrigus has met his burden of proof he sustained a work injury 
arising out of and in the course of his employment with A.Y. McDonald.  Given this 
finding, the issues of timely notice, entitlement to temporary benefits, payment of 
medical expenses and medical mileage, and alternate care are moot. 
II. 
IME 
On the hearing report Garrigus checked that he was seeking to recover the cost 
of an IME under Iowa Code section 85.39.  Garrigus’ post-hearing brief does not 
address the cost of the IME.  His exhibits do not contain a charge for an IME.  Garrigus 
was not successful in this case.  I do not find Garrigus has established he is entitled to 
recover the cost of an IME in this case.  
III. 
Costs 
In his post-hearing brief, Garrigus states he seeks to recover costs totaling 
$583.80.  He did not itemize the costs.  Exhibit 4 is his Statement of Costs.  Exhibit 4 
includes the $103.00 filing fee. (Ex. 4:15-16)  No other costs are identified in Exhibit 4.  
It is unclear what the remaining “costs” are that total $480.80. 
Iowa Code section 86.40 (2019), provides, “[a]ll costs incurred in the hearing 
before the commissioner shall be taxed in the discretion of the commissioner.”  Rule 
876 IAC 4.33(6), provides: 
 
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by 
Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) costs of persons reviewing 
health service disputes.  

GARRIGUS V. A. Y. MCDONALD INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 12 
 
I did not find Garrigus met his burden of proof he sustained an injury arising out 
of and in the course of his employment.  Using my discretion, I do not find Defendants 
should be responsible for Garrigus’ costs.   
ORDER 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, THAT: 
 
Claimant shall take nothing in this case.   
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 Iowa Administrative Code 3.1(2) and 11.7. 
Signed and filed this      11th      day of July, 2023. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           HEATHER L. PALMER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
 
Zeke McCartney (via WCES) 
 
Jane Lorentzen (via WCES) 
 
Adam Kiel (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed 
via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ 
Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by 
the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
