Case Number: 24700617.01
Case Title:  CLAYTON, II, ROBERT V. WATERLOO WAREHOUSING & SERVICE CO., INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Clayton Robert-24700617.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ROBERT CLAYTON, II, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
            File No. 24700617.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
WATERLOO WAREHOUSING &  
  : 
       
SERVICE CO., INC., 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
 
 
 
  :                   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
    
GRINNELL MUTUAL REINSURANCE 
  : 
COMPANY, 
  : 
    HEAD NOTES: 1108.50, 1402.30, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
        2401, 2907 
  
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
Robert Clayton, II, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Waterloo Warehousing & Service Co., Inc., employer, and 
Grinnell Mutual Reinsurance Company, insurance carrier, as defendants.  The hearing 
was held on June 4, 2025. Pursuant to an order from the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner, this case was heard via videoconference using Zoom with all parties 
and the court reporter appearing remotely.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  Those 
stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision, 
and no factual issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed in 
this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Robert Clayton, II, Austin Schafer, and Ryan Daniels testified live at the hearing. 
The evidentiary record also includes Joint Exhibits 1-8, Claimant’s Exhibits1-8, and 
Defendant’s Exhibits A-H.  All exhibits were received into the record without objection.  
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on July 9, 2025, at which time the case 
was deemed fully submitted.  
ISSUES 
The parties identified the following disputed issues on the hearing report: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Nov-03  14:10:29     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

CLAYTON V. WATERLOO WAREHOUSING & SERVICE CO., INC. 
Page 2 
 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of 
his employment with Waterloo Warehousing & Service Co., Inc., on May 8, 
2023.  
 
2. Whether the case is barred due to lack of timely notice under Iowa Code section 
85.23. 
 
3. Whether the alleged injury resulted in any permanent disability; and if so, 
 
4. The nature and extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits. 
 
5. Whether the claimant is entitled to temporary disability or healing period 
benefits because of the alleged injury. 
 
6. Whether defendants are entitled to a credit for the payment of short-term 
disability benefits.  
 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to payment of the medical expenses in Claimant’s 
Exhibit 7. 
 
8. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
examination pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
 
9. Assessment of costs.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds as follows: 
 
At the time of the hearing the claimant, Robert Clayton, II (hereinafter “Clayton”), 
was 58 years old. (Hearing Transcript, p. 12).  He graduated from high school in 1985. 
(Claimant’s Exhibit 6, p. 32).  After high school, Clayton went to work for the Wapsie 
Valley Creamery as a cheese flipper. (Cl Ex. 1, p. 2).  He worked at the Wapsie Valley 
Creamery for seven years. (Id.).   Clayton’s work history after that is spotty. (Id.).  In his 
discovery answers, Clayton indicated he has done factory work for Ralston Foods, 
Wayne Engineering, and Greenline Polymer Plastic. (Id. at 2-3).  He also worked as a 
yard manager for Ryder Logistics. (Id. at 2).   
 
 
In 2013, Waterloo Warehousing & Service Co., Inc. (hereinafter “Waterloo 
Warehousing”), hired Clayton to drive a forklift loading and unloading semis. (Cl Ex. 6, 
p. 33; Cl Ex. 1, p. 3).  He was still working for Waterloo Warehousing at the time of the 
arbitration hearing in June 2025. (Tr., pp. 12-13).  Waterloo Warehousing stores and 
ships parts for John Deere. (Id. at 50).   
 
 

CLAYTON V. WATERLOO WAREHOUSING & SERVICE CO., INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
Clayton alleges he suffered a work-related injury to his left shoulder on May 8, 
2023. (See Petition).  At the hearing, Clayton testified that he primarily uses his left 
hand and arm to steer his forklift at Waterloo Warehousing. (Tr., p. 16). He explained 
that the forklift steering wheel has a knob, so he only needs one arm to steer. (Id.).  He 
uses the other arm, his right, to manipulate the controls for tilt, forward motion and to 
bring the forklift up and down. (Id.).  Clayton testified that he drove the forklift full-time, 
40 hours per week. (Id. at 17).  He stated that he started experiencing left shoulder pain, 
which got so bad that he could no longer work in April 2023.  (Id.). He said that he was 
loading and unloading trailers on April 13, 2023, when he noticed he was no longer able 
to steer with his left arm. (Id. at 18). Clayton testified that he finished up his shift using 
his right arm to steer, reported the left shoulder issue to Austin, the on-site shipping 
clerk, and sought medical treatment the next day. (Id.).  Clayton specifically testified, 
 
A. I told him [Austin] I couldn’t drive the forklift anymore. My shoulder 
hurt too bad, and I had to finish using my right arm – right hand to 
steer with my left – or to finish turning, and he just told he to take 
it easy and not do nothing.  
Q.  And did you tell him it was because of the driving of the forklift?  
A.  Yes, I did at the time.  
 
(Id. at 19).  This testimony differs from his deposition testimony.  In his deposition, he 
testified as follows: 
 
Q. Did you ever report a work injury to your employer for your left shoulder? 
A. Yes, I did, to Austin. 
Q. What did you tell Austin?  
A.  That I couldn’t steer the forklift anymore, my shoulder is wore out.  
Q.  When did you report something to Austin? 
A.  It would have been, like, in April of ’23.  
Q. And I want to try to understand what you just said. Correct me if I’ve 
stated it incorrectly.  But it sounds like what you told Austin maybe in 
April of 2023 is that your left shoulder pain was making it difficult to drive 
your forklift? 
A. Yes, that’s correct. 
Q. Has any doctor ever told you that they thought your left shoulder had 
worn out because of your forklift driving?  
A.  I don’t know if any doctors ever said that.  That’s the way I felt. 
Q. Did you ever ask your employer or its work comp carrier to authorize any 
of your treatment for your left shoulder? 
A. Just when I told Austin, I guess.  
Q. Well, I mean, what did you – what did you tell Austin? 
A. Just that when my – I couldn’t steer anymore.  I told Austin that, 
and he said just take it easy and don’t do nothing for the next – a 
half hour is all I had left.  
Q. But did you ever ask Austin to send you to a doctor for work comp? 
A. No, no.  

CLAYTON V. WATERLOO WAREHOUSING & SERVICE CO., INC. 
Page 4 
 
 
(Cl Ex. 6, p. 40).   
 
 
According to the medical records, Clayton did seek treatment on April 14, 2023, 
at the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC) with Megan Pearson, PA-C. (JE 
8, p. 71).  That, however, is not the first treatment note in the hearing record addressing 
Clayton’s shoulder complaints.  There are records from Matthew Smith, M.D, Clayton’s 
personal physician, indicating Clayton was diagnosed with bilateral shoulder pain in 
2020.1 (JE 1, p. 1, Tr., p. 31).  On June 20, 2022, he saw Dr. Smith for increased right 
shoulder pain. (JE 1, p. 2).  According to the treatment note, Clayton fell and hurt his 
right shoulder that winter. (Id.). There is a record from Covenant Clinic indicating 
Clayton slipped and fell on ice on February 11, 2022, injuring his right shoulder. (JE 2, 
p. 6).  The June 20, 2022  treatment note also mentions that Clayton performed 
repetitive movements with his bilateral upper extremities at work. (JE 1, p. 2).  Dr. Smith 
diagnosed right shoulder pain and referred Clayton for an orthopedic evaluation. (Id. at 
3).   
 
 
On June 27, 2022, Clayton was evaluated by Todd Johnston, M.D., at Cedar 
Valley Ortho Agility Center. (JE 3, p. 10).  He told Dr. Johnson that he had shoulder pain 
before the fall, but the fall made his pain worse. (Id.).  Dr. Johnston took x-rays and 
diagnosed right shoulder pain and a suspected tear of the infraspinatus tendon. (Id. at 
12). He also ordered an MRI. (Id.).  The MRI was taken on July 21, 2022. (Id. at 13).  It 
showed a complete tear of the rotator cuff. (Id. at 14).  Dr. Johnston recommended and 
performed a cortisone injection on July 21, 2022. (Id.).   
 
 
Clayton returned on September 15, 2022. (JE 3, p. 15).  His right shoulder was 
feeling better, but his left shoulder was starting to bother him. (Id.).  He had left shoulder 
pain in the middle of his deltoid that woke him up at night. (Id.).  Clayton requested an 
injection in his left shoulder. (Id.).  Dr. Johnston diagnosed a right rotator cuff tear and 
acute left shoulder pain. (Id.).  He performed bilateral shoulder injections. (Id.).  On 
September 20, 2022, Clayton also presented to the Covenant Clinic for bilateral 
shoulder pain. (JE 4, p. 18).  He was evaluated by Richard Naylor, D.O. (Id.).  Dr. 
Naylor ordered an x-ray of the left shoulder. (Id. at 20).  It showed a slightly high-riding 
humeral head and moderate acromioclavicular joint arthritis. (Id.).  Dr. Naylor diagnosed 
left shoulder pain. (Id.).  He recommended a diagnostic scope of Clayton’s right 
shoulder and an MRI of the left. (Id.).  
 
 
 
The left shoulder MRI took place on October 12, 2022. (JE 5, p. 24).  It showed a 
full thickness rotator cuff tear of the supraspinatus tendon and mild AC joint 
osteoarthritis, as well as a subacromial/subdeltoid bursitis. (Id.).  On October 18, 2022, 
Dr. Naylor performed a right shoulder scope. (See id. at 25-26). Dr. Naylor determined 
that Clayton’s right rotator cuff tear was not repairable. (Id.).   
 
                                                                 
1 According to Clayton’s expert report, he also underw ent a left elbow  surgery with Dr. Patterson at the University of Iow a 
Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC) on September 15, 2016. (Cl Ex. 3, p. 7).   

CLAYTON V. WATERLOO WAREHOUSING & SERVICE CO., INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
Clayton had a follow-up appointment with Dr. Naylor on November 9, 2022. (JE 
4, p. 21).   According to Dr. Naylor’s treatment note, Clayton’s left shoulder had a large 
full-thickness rotator cuff tear located medial to the greater tuberosity with the tendon 
torn and retracted to the level of the medial humeral head. (Id. at 22).  The MRI also 
showed severe supraspinatus infraspinatus tendinopathy, mild AC joint osteoarthritis, 
and mild subacromial/subdeltoid bursitis. (Id. at 22-24).  Dr. Naylor and Clayton 
discussed his potential treatment options. (Id. at 22).  Clayton told Dr. Naylor he did not 
wish to proceed with surgery. (Id.).2   
 
 
On December 15, 2022, Clayton presented to Dr. Smith for ongoing left shoulder 
pain. (JE 1, p. 4).  According to the treatment note, Clayton had decreased range of 
motion in his left shoulder and got teary-eyed when talking about his left shoulder 
issues. (Id.). Dr. Smith diagnosed left shoulder pain, performed a Lidocaine injection to 
the shoulder joint and provided pain pills for short-term use. (Id.).   
 
 
On January 18, 2023, Clayton was evaluated by Brendan Patterson, M.D, at 
UIHC for left shoulder pain. (JE 8, pp. 63-67).  Clayton told Dr. Patterson that his left 
shoulder pain started approximately six months ago without trauma. (Id. at 65).  The 
note indicates his shoulder pain and range of motion had gotten progressively worse 
since.  (Id.).  Dr. Patterson noted that Clayton did manual labor and was having trouble 
lifting objects greater than 20 pounds. (Id.).  Dr. Patterson order x-rays. (Id. at 63, 65). 
They showed proximal migration of his humeral head, which can be indicative of a 
rotator cuff tear. (Id. at 66).  Dr. Patterson discussed potential surgical options with 
Clayton. (Id. at 67).  Clayton indicated he wanted to pursue conservative treatment. 
(Id.).  Dr. Patterson recommended physical therapy. (Id.).  On February 14, 2023, Dr. 
Patterson filled out FMLA paperwork indicating Clayton would need to miss work 
intermittently for left shoulder treatment. (Ex. C, pp. 6-9).   
 
 
Clayton returned to Dr. Patterson on March 29, 2023. (JE 8, p. 68).  Dr. 
Patterson’s note indicates Clayton had been attending physical therapy for his left 
shoulder since January 2023, but he had not noticed any improvement. (Id.).3   
Clayton indicated he was interested in proceeding with surgery. (Id. at 68-70).   
 
 
On April 14, 2023, Clayton returned for a pre-operative physical at UIHC with 
Megan Pearson, PA-C. (JE 8, p. 71).  The note from this visit indicates that Clayton’s 
left shoulder pain developed in November 2022. (Id.).  He reported increased pain with 
getting dressed and lifting objects. (Id.).  He also noted decreased range of motion due 
to pain. (Id.).  Clayton again expressed his interest in proceeding with surgery. (Id.).  He 
was cleared for surgery with Dr. Patterson. (Id. at 73).  This is the last treatment note 
before Clayton’s alleged date of injury.   
 
                                                                 
2 On November 15, 2022, an unsigned report w as submitted to Standard Insurance Company stating Clayton could not 
return to w ork until November 30, 2022, because he had a left shoulder injury and had recently undergone right shoulder surgery. 
(JE 6, pp. 27-28).    
3 A note from Clayton’s physical therapist, dated February 21, 2023, also indicates Clayton fell on the ice, reaggravating 
his left shoulder condition. (JE 7, p. 39).   

CLAYTON V. WATERLOO WAREHOUSING & SERVICE CO., INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
On May 9, 2023, Dr. Patterson performed a left shoulder arthroscopic rotator cuff 
repair with arthroscopic biceps tenodesis, modified superior capsular reconstruction, 
and extensive debridement. (JE 8, pp. 74-77).  Dr. Patterson’s postoperative report 
noted that the tears in Clayton’s supraspinatus and infraspinatus were irreparable. (Id. 
at 75).   
 
 
Clayton’s first post-operative appointment took place on May 24, 2023, with 
Megan Pearson, PA-C. (JE 8, p. 78).  Clayton was doing well, but still wearing an 
abduction sling. (Id.).  Following that appointment, Pearson sent Standard Insurance a 
report stating Clayton could not return to work yet. (Id. at 79).  This note indicates 
Clayton’s left shoulder condition was not work-related. (Id.).   
 
 
On June 21, 2023, Clayton had a follow-up appointment with Dr. Patterson. (JE 
8, p. 80).  The note indicates Clayton was doing well post-operatively, but needed to 
remain off work because he was physically unable to drive the forklift. (Id.).  Clayton’s 
next appointment with Dr. Patterson took place on August 2, 2023. (Id. at 81).  Dr. 
Patterson notes that Clayton was also attending physical therapy. (Id.).  He still noted 
mild shoulder pain and limited range of motion. (Id.).  Dr. Patterson indicated Clayton 
should continue with physical therapy. (Id.).  He also stated Clayton could start lifting up 
to 15 pounds with his left arm. (Id.).  Dr. Patterson, however, noted this was not 
compatible with his job duties at Waterloo Warehousing, so Clayton remained off work 
following this appointment. (Id. at 81-82).  
 
 
Clayton had another follow-up appointment with Dr. Patterson on November 1, 
2023. (JE 8, p. 83).  Dr. Patterson’s note indicates Clayton was progressing well, but 
still having shoulder discomfort. (Id.).  Clayton did not feel ready to return to work as a 
forklift driver. (Id.). Dr. Patterson provided a note indicating Clayton should remain off 
work until his next follow-up appointment. (Id. at 84). Clayton’s next appointment took 
place on February 2, 2024. (Id.).  On that date, Dr. Patterson released him to return to 
work without restrictions. (Id. at 85).  Dr. Patterson’s treatment note states Clayton’s 
pain was well controlled and his shoulder functionality improved from his pre-surgery 
status. (Id.).  This is the last treatment note from Dr. Patterson in the hearing record. 
(Id.).  
 
 
At the hearing, Clayton testified that May 8, 2023, was his last day of work at 
Waterloo Warehousing before the left shoulder surgery. (Tr., p. 20).  He was off work 
from the date of his surgery through February 2, 2024, when Dr. Patterson released him 
to return without restrictions. (Id. at 20-21).  During part of that time period, Clayton was 
paid short term disability benefits by Standard Insurance. (Id. at 24).  According to the 
defendants’ exhibits, Clayton was paid $8,500 in short term disability benefits from May 
16, 2023, through November 1, 2023. (Ex. E, p. 15).  Clayton testified that he did not 
receive any short-term disability benefits for the last two months of his shoulder-related 
leave. (Tr., p. 24).  It appears Clayton returned to full duty work at Waterloo 
Warehousing on February 5, 2024. (See id.).   
 

CLAYTON V. WATERLOO WAREHOUSING & SERVICE CO., INC. 
Page 7 
 
 
On August 2, 2024, Clayton filed a petition with the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation alleging he suffered a work-related injury to his left shoulder on May 8, 
2023. (See Petition).  In their answers to interrogatories, defendants allege the petition 
was their first notice of Clayton’s alleged work injury. (Ex. F, pp. 18-19).  On August 8, 
2024, Clayton told Dr. Smith that his left shoulder was doing well. (JE 1, p. 5).  On 
October 9, 2024, defendants sent Clayton a letter denying his workers’ compensation 
claim. (Cl Ex. 4, p. 24).  The letter stated there was no evidence Clayton reported the 
alleged work injury within 90 days as required under Iowa law. (Id.).   
 
 
On March 27, 2025, Clayton attended an independent medical exam (IME) with 
Farid Manshadi, M.D., at his attorney’s request. (Cl Ex. 3, p. 7).  Dr. Manshadi issued 
an IME report on April 4, 2025.  (Id.).  In it, he diagnosed Clayton with a massive full-
thickness irreparable tear of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus and an upper border 
full-thickness tear of the subscapularis, status post arthroscopic surgery, biceps 
tenodesis and debridement, with remaining weakness of the left elbow flexor and 
reduced active range of shoulder motion. (Id. at 9).  Dr. Manshadi opined that Clayton’s 
employment with Waterloo Warehousing “was a substantial factor in bringing about the 
condition and symptoms” in his left shoulder. (Id.).  He also indicated that driving the 
forklift truck materially aggravated Clayton’s underlying arthritis. (Id.). He assigned 
Clayton 11 percent permanent impairment of the left upper extremity for loss of range of 
motion in the shoulder joint, citing to pages 475-479 and Table 16-35 of the AMA 
Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. (Id. at 10).  Dr. 
Manshadi also assigned an additional 2 percent permanent impairment for left elbow 
weakness from the left biceps’ tenodesis, for a total of 13 percent impairment to the left 
upper extremity. (Id.).  Dr. Manshadi’s measures for those ratings were as follows:  
 
 
Forward Flexion  
115 degrees 
 
Extension  
 
65 degrees 
 
Abduction  
 
91 degrees 
 
External Rotation 
39 degrees 
 
Internal Rotation 
55 degrees 
 
Adduction 
 
48 degrees 
 
(Id. at 9).  He did not assign any permanent impairment for Clayton’s arthritis 
aggravation.  (Id.).  Dr. Manshadi suggested restrictions of avoid any activity that 
requires repetitious reaching, avoid shoulder height and overhead activities with his left 
side, and no lifting more than 20 pounds to waist level on the left side and 10 pounds 
overhead on an occasional basis. (Id. at 10).   
 
 
On April 18, 2025, defendants’ counsel met with Dr. Patterson to discuss 
Clayton’s left shoulder treatment. (Ex. H, p. 26).  After the meeting, defendants 
requested a follow-up report from Dr. Patterson. (Id.).  According to that report, Dr. 
Patterson treated Clayton for his shoulder concerns from January 18, 2023, through 
February 2, 2024. (Id.).  During that time, Dr. Patterson does not recall Clayton ever 
claiming that operating the steering wheel on his forklift aggravated his left shoulder 
pain. (Id.).  Dr. Patterson indicated that the condition he treated in Clayton’s left 

CLAYTON V. WATERLOO WAREHOUSING & SERVICE CO., INC. 
Page 8 
 
shoulder can occur without any specific activity or injury. (Id. at 27).  Dr. Patterson did 
not attribute Clayton’s left shoulder condition to his work activities as a forklift driver. 
(Id.).  Finally, Dr. Patterson confirmed that he did not treat Clayton’s right shoulder and 
therefore, has no comment on the source of that condition. (Id.).   
Clayton relies upon the causation opinion of Dr. Manshadi to prove his claim.  I 
do not find his opinion persuasive.  In his report, Dr. Manshadi opines that Clayton’s 
employment with Waterloo Warehousing “was a substantial factor in bringing about the 
condition and symptoms” in his left shoulder. (Cl Ex. 3, p. 9).  He also states that 
Clayton’s forklift driving materially aggravated his underlying arthritis. (Id.).  These are 
conclusory statements for which Dr. Manshadi provides no explanation or supporting 
rationale.  He does not address how exactly Clayton’s rotator cuff tears occurred or why 
Clayton’s job duties caused or contributed to the injury.  Additionally, there is no 
indication that Dr. Manshadi ever received a formal description of Clayton’s job at 
Waterloo Warehousing or had any in-depth conversations with Clayton about his job.  
Dr. Manshadi’s discussion of Clayton’s work duties consists of two sentences, which 
boil down to, Clayton steered the forklift with his left hand using a knob. (Id. at 7).  In a 
cumulative injury claim, a medically supported diagnosis, detailed and complete job 
description, and clearly articulated mechanism of injury are essential evidence.  Dr. 
Manshadi’s report does not contain those elements.  Given this, the undersigned 
declines to adopt it.  
 
At the hearing, Clayton testified he was still working for Waterloo Warehousing 
as a forklift driver without restrictions. (Tr., pp. 24-25, 41).  He, however, indicated that 
he experiences left shoulder pain when he loads and unloads lots of trailers, and has 
residual strength and range of motion deficits. (Id. at 25).  He also stated his ongoing 
shoulder pain affects his ability to hunt and use power tools at home. (Id. at 26).  
Clayton testified that Waterloo Warehousing has six different warehouses in the 
Waterloo area. (Id. at 30).  Clayton has worked at several of those warehouses, but was 
assigned to the Wagner Warehouse where Austin Schafer worked as a shipping clerk at 
the time of his alleged injury. (Id.).  Clayton testified Austin locked and unlocked the 
warehouse doors, but was not in charge of managing or disciplining the workers. (Id. at 
31).   
 
 
Austin Schafer testified at the hearing. (Tr., p. 48).  Schafer also works for 
Waterloo Warehousing. (Id.).  He is a shipping and receiving clerk.  In 2023, he was 
assigned to the Wagner Warehouse; he worked with Clayton. (Id. at 48-49). As a 
shipping and receiving clerk, Schafer is responsible for directing forklift operators to 
unload shipments off incoming trucks, as well as load shipments onto outgoing trucks. 
(Id. at 49).  He also handles the paperwork for those shipments. (Id.).  Schafer, 
however, testified that he does not supervise or manage the other two employees at 
Waterloo Warehousing. (Id. at 50).  Schafer testified that there is a collection box in his 
office that employees use to submit paperwork to supervisors and the human resources 
department. (Id. at 51).  He stated that he is not involved in reporting or managing work 
injuries.  (Id. at 53).   
 

CLAYTON V. WATERLOO WAREHOUSING & SERVICE CO., INC. 
Page 9 
 
Schafer testified that he does not recall having a conversation with Clayton about 
his left shoulder in April 2023.  (Tr., p. 52).  Schafer stated that Clayton also did not 
report that he thought driving the forklift was causing his left shoulder pain. (Id.).  He 
indicated that if Clayton had told him that information, he would have informed human 
resources and involved higher management. (Id. at 53).  However, on cross-
examination, Schafer admitted that Clayton had previously complained about shoulder 
pain, but he didn’t say it was related to his work. (Id. at 54-55).  Schafer also 
acknowledged that the forklift drivers do not have access to email at work, and he 
sometimes functions as a middle man between the on-site workers and human 
resources because the collection box is in his office. (Id.). 
 
Ryan Daniels also testified at the hearing. (Tr., p. 57). Daniels is the vice 
president of Waterloo Warehousing, as well as a part owner of the business. (Id.).  
Daniels stated Waterloo Warehousing’s management team consist of two vice 
presidents and a president. (Id. at 58).  Daniels stated the other vice president, Jason 
Hemmen, acted as the pseudo supervisor at the Wagner Warehouse, stopping by to 
check in with the three employees stationed there daily. (Id. at 58, 70).  Daniels testified 
that Austin Schafer was not the supervisor of the Wagner Warehouse; his job duties did 
not include accepting or processing workers’ compensation claims. (Id. at 59-61).  He 
indicated the management team is responsible for those reports, as well as HR issues 
and discipline. (Id. at 61).  He, however, acknowledged that Schafer was the only 
employee at the Wagner Warehouse with access to a company computer. (Id. at 59).   
 
Daniels testified that Waterloo Warehousing was informed of Clayton’s alleged 
injury when they received his Original Notice and Petition in the mail in August 2024. 
(Tr., p. 62).  Daniels believes that if Schafer had known about Clayton’s alleged injury, 
he would have informed management of the alleged injury. (Id. at 64).  Then 
management would have sent Clayton to the occupational health department, as is 
customary. (Id. at 63).  Daniels, however, acknowledged that Waterloo Warehousing 
was aware of Clayton’s left shoulder condition on May 8, 2023, because they filed a 
claim with Standard Insurance on his behalf that day. (Id. at 68; see also Cl Ex. 5, p. 
28).  Daniels, however, indicated Waterloo Warehousing did not know Clayton was 
alleging the shoulder condition was caused by his forklift driving at that time. (Id. at 68-
69).   
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 

CLAYTON V. WATERLOO WAREHOUSING & SERVICE CO., INC. 
Page 10 
 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995).  An injury arises out of employment when a causal relationship exists between 
the injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311.  The injury must be a 
rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  Expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410, 420 
(Iowa 2001); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995).  Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-912 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
When an expert's opinion is based upon an incomplete or incorrect history, it is 
not necessarily binding on the commissioner or the court. It is then to be weighed, 
together with other facts and circumstances, the ultimate conclusion being for the finder 
of the fact.  Musselman v. Central Telephone Company, 261 Iowa 352, 360,154 N.W.2d 
128, 133 (Iowa 1967); Bodish v. Fischer, Inc., 257 Iowa 516, 133 N.W.2d 867, 870 
(1965).  The commissioner as trier of fact has the duty to determine the credibility of the 
witnesses and to weigh the evidence, together with the other disclosed facts and 
circumstances, and then to accept or reject the opinion.  Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 853. 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that Clayton failed to meet his 
burden of proof to show he sustained a cumulative injury to his left shoulder that arose 
out of and in the course of his employment with Waterloo Warehousing on May 8, 2023.  
Clayton’s claim relies upon the causation opinion of Dr. Manshadi.  However, as 
explained above, Dr. Manshadi’s opinion is conclusory; it lacks a detailed description of 
Clayton’s job duties, nor does it contain any explanation or rationale for how Clayton’s 

CLAYTON V. WATERLOO WAREHOUSING & SERVICE CO., INC. 
Page 11 
 
job duties caused his alleged injury.  Dr. Manshadi’s opinion does not have supporting 
evidence in the record.  It is not adopted.  Clayton has not met his burden of proof in 
this case.   
Alternatively, Waterloo Warehousing is asserting a notice defense in this case.  
Iowa Code section 85.23 requires an employee to give notice of the occurrence of an 
injury to the employer within 90 days from the date of the occurrence, unless the 
employer has actual knowledge of the occurrence.  The purpose of the 90-day notice or 
actual knowledge requirement is to give the employer an opportunity to timely 
investigate the facts surrounding the injury. The actual knowledge alternative to notice is 
met when the employer, as a reasonably conscientious manager, is alerted to the 
possibility of a potential compensation claim through information which makes the 
employer aware that the injury occurred and that it may be work related. Dillinger v. City 
of Sioux City, 368 N.W.2d 176, 181 (Iowa 1985); Robinson v. Dep't of Transp., 296 
N.W.2d 809, 811 (Iowa 1980), overruled on other grounds by Orr v. Lewis Central 
School Dist., 298 N.W.2d 256, 257-258 (Iowa 1980); see also Johnson v. International 
Paper Co., 530 N.W.2d 475, 477 (Iowa Ct. App. 1995); McPhee v. Eagle Iron Works, 
2001 WL 194776 (Iowa 2001).  Failure to give notice is an affirmative defense which the 
employer must prove by a preponderance of the evidence. DeLong v. Highway Comm'n, 
229 Iowa 700, 295 N.W. 91, 92 (1940). 
Clayton alleges that Waterloo Warehousing had notice of his injury on 
approximately April 13, 2023. (Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, pp. 3-4).  As proof of this 
notice, Clayton points to his hearing testimony and his deposition testimony. (Id.).  From 
this testimony, it appears that Clayton told Austin Schafer, a shipping clerk at Waterloo 
Warehousing, that his left shoulder hurt and it was affecting his ability to drive the 
forklift. (See Tr., p. 19; Cl Ex. 6, p. 40).  In his hearing testimony, Schafer confirmed that 
Clayton had previously complained about shoulder pain. (Tr., p. 54-55).  What is less 
clear, however, is whether Clayton ever notified anyone he thought his left shoulder 
condition was caused by his work at Waterloo Warehousing prior to filing his petition on 
August 2, 2024.  
 
Defendants’ notice defense arises from Iowa Code section 85.23.  That Code 
section states as follows:  
 
Unless the employer or the employer's representative shall have 
actual knowledge of the occurrence of an injury received within ninety days 
from the date of the occurrence of the injury, or unless the employee or 
someone on the employee's behalf or a dependent or someone on the 
dependent's behalf shall give notice thereof to the employer within ninety 
days from the date of the occurrence of the injury, no compensation shall 
be allowed.  For the purposes of this section, “date of the occurrence of the 
injury” means the date that the employee knew or should have known that 
the injury was work-related.  
 
Iowa Code § 85.23 (2022).  “[T]he notice requirement of section 85.23 protects the 
employer by insuring he is alerted ‘to the possibility of a claim so that an investigation 

CLAYTON V. WATERLOO WAREHOUSING & SERVICE CO., INC. 
Page 12 
 
can be made while the information is fresh.’” Dillinger, 368 N.W.2d at 180 (citation 
omitted). The employer has the burden to show an employee failed to meet the ninety-
day notice provision. IBP, Inc. v. Burress, 779 N.W.2d 210, 219 (Iowa 2010). 
 
Under the statute, an employee must give the employer notice of an injury within 
ninety days, unless the employer has actual knowledge of the injury. Dillinger, 368 
N.W.2d at 179.  “Actual knowledge must include information that the injury might be 
work-connected.” Johnson, 530 N.W.2d at 477.  The actual knowledge requirement 
necessitates more than the employer being aware of the employee’s illness or 
condition.  Id. The actual knowledge provision requires an employer have “actual 
knowledge of the reasonable possibility of an injury that was work-connected.” Dillinger, 
368 N.W.2d at 181; See also Ross v. American Ordnance, 895 N.W.2d 923 (Table), *3 
(Iowa Ct. App. 2017).   
 
I find there is insufficient evidence Clayton informed Waterloo Warehousing that 
his left shoulder condition was allegedly caused by his forklift driving within the 90-day 
notice period.  Clayton’s hearing testimony and deposition testimony do not match.  At 
the hearing, Clayton agreed with his attorney’s assertion that he had notified Austin 
Schafer that his left shoulder pain was caused by his forklift driving on April 13, 2023. 
(See  Tr., p. 19).  However, during his deposition testimony, Clayton only stated that he 
told Schafer he couldn’t steer the forklift anymore because his shoulder was worn out. 
(Cl Ex. 6, p. 40).  He did not explicitly testify to informing Schafer that his left shoulder 
was injured driving the forklift.  Clayton’s deposition testimony aligns with the other 
evidence in the hearing record.  For example, it matches Schafer’s hearing testimony.  
At the hearing, Schafer testified that Clayton complained about left shoulder pain at 
work, but did not specifically inform him that his left shoulder symptoms were caused by 
forklift driving. (Tr., pp. 52-55). Schafer stated that if Clayton had alleged the left 
shoulder condition was a work injury, he would have informed human resources and 
gotten management involved. (Id. at 53).  In his testimony, Ryan Daniels agreed that if 
Schafer had known about Clayton’s alleged injury, he would have informed 
management of the alleged injury. (Id. at 64).  Then management would have sent 
Clayton to the occupational health department, as is customary at Waterloo 
Warehousing. (Id. at 63).  Clayton’s deposition testimony, as well as Schafer and 
Daniel’s hearing testimony support defendants’ assertion that Clayton did not timely 
inform Waterloo Warehousing that his left shoulder condition was allegedly caused by 
his forklift driving.  
 
In addition to witness testimony, this conclusion also has support in the medical 
records and timeline of events.  Clayton has received treatment for left shoulder 
complaints since September 2022. (See JE 3, p. 15).  In October 2022, he underwent 
an MRI that confirmed he had a full thickness rotator cuff tear and AC joint arthritis. (JE 
4, p. 20).  In November 2022, Clayton directed Megan Pearson, PA-C, at UIHC, to 
submit a report to Standard Insurance for short-term disability benefits.  (JE 6, pp. 27-
28).  The form indicates Clayton was unable to work because of his recent right 
shoulder surgery and left shoulder condition. (JE 6, pp. 27-28).  In December 2022, 
Clayton underwent a left shoulder injection with Dr. Smith. (JE 1, p. 4).  In January 

CLAYTON V. WATERLOO WAREHOUSING & SERVICE CO., INC. 
Page 13 
 
2023, Clayton sought additional treatment with Dr. Patterson. (JE 8, pp. 63-67).  Dr. 
Patterson had previously performed a left elbow surgery for Clayton in 2016. (Cl Ex. 3, 
p. 7).  On January 18, 2023, Dr. Patterson recommended surgery, but Clayton wanted 
to try conservative treatment. (JE 8, p. 67).  On February 14, 2023, Clayton had Dr. 
Patterson submit FMLA forms to Waterloo Warehousing indicating he was going to miss 
work intermittently for left shoulder care. (Ex. C, pp. 6-9).  On March 29, 2023, Clayton 
told Dr. Patterson that he wanted to proceed with left shoulder surgery. (JE 8, pp. 68-
70).  Clayton was then scheduled for a pre-operative physical on April 14, 2023. (Id. at 
71).  According to the timeline above, Clayton already knew he had a rotator cuff tear,  
needed shoulder surgery, and had a pre-operative physical scheduled for that surgery 
before his alleged conversation with Schafer.   
 
At the hearing, Clayton testified that he notified Schafer about his left shoulder 
condition on April 13, 2023, because he had just “got to where I couldn’t steer anymore 
with my left arm.” (Tr., p. 18).  He said he notified Schafer of the issue and then sought 
out medical care. (Id.).  He, however, did not request that Waterloo Warehouse cover 
the cost of that medical care, nor is there any evidence in the hearing record suggesting 
that Clayton notified Schafer that he was already scheduled to attend a pre-operative 
physical the next day, or that he had already been recommended for shoulder surgery. 
(See Cl Ex. 6, p. 40).  Additionally, Clayton did not contact the human resources 
department, which he has prior experience doing, or talk to his supervisor Jason 
Hemmen.  Instead, he attended a pre-operative physical that he already had scheduled, 
returned back to work at Waterloo Warehouse until May 8, 2023, and then proceeded to 
undergo surgery with Dr. Patterson on May 9, 2023.   
 
Putting aside the question of whether Schafer was the correct individual to report 
a work injury to, the timeline of events supports defendants’ assertion that Clayton only 
told Schafer he had left shoulder pain, but did not explain that he thought he injured his 
left shoulder while driving a forklift at Waterloo Warehousing.  There was almost a 
month between the alleged conversation with Schafer and Clayton’s shoulder surgery. 
According to the hearing evidence, during that time period there is no correspondence 
between the parties about Clayton’s alleged injury or scheduled medical care, and 
certainly no documentation indicating anyone at Waterloo Warehousing knew Clayton 
was alleging his left shoulder condition was work-related.  In short, there is none of the 
evidence typically present when an employee has reported a potential work injury.    
 
Given the above, I find there is insufficient evidence that Clayton informed 
Waterloo Warehouse that his left shoulder condition was allegedly caused by his forklift 
driving within 90 days of the injury as required by Iowa Code section 85.23.  Clayton did 
not properly notify defendants of his alleged injury prior to filing his petition on August 2, 
2024.  His claim is time barred.  
 
Clayton failed to prove he sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course 
of his employment on May 8, 2023.  Additionally, his claim is time barred under Iowa 
Code section 85.23.  Given this, the remaining issues concerning entitlement to 
temporary and permanent benefits, medical expenses and credits are rendered moot.  

CLAYTON V. WATERLOO WAREHOUSING & SERVICE CO., INC. 
Page 14 
 
 
  Clayton is seeking reimbursement for his IME with Dr. Manshadi. A claimant’s 
right to reimbursement for an IME exam is controlled by Iowa Code section 85.39. This 
section permits an employee to be reimbursed for a subsequent examination by a 
physician of the employee’s choice where an employer-retained physician has 
previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes that the initial 
evaluation is too low. Iowa Code section 85.39(2).  However, this right to reimbursement 
is also dependent upon the claimant’s success at hearing. Iowa Code section 85.39(2), 
states, 
An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined to be compensable under this 
chapter or chapter 85A or 85B. An employer is not liable for the cost of such 
an examination if the injury for which the employee is being examined is 
determined not to be a compensable injury.  
Id.  
Defendants are not liable for this claim.  Clayton has not established the 
prerequisites for reimbursement of Dr. Manshadi’s evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.39.  
Clayton also asserts a claim for costs.  Specifically, Clayton seeks 
reimbursement for his filing fee and deposition transcript.  Costs are to be assessed at 
the discretion of the deputy commissioner hearing the case. See 876 IAC 4.33; Iowa 
Code § 10A.328.  Clayton failed to prove a compensable claim; therefore, I conclude 
that none of his costs should be assessed. I conclude that each party should bear its 
own costs. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
Claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings. 
  
Each party shall bear their own costs. 
  
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
 
 

CLAYTON V. WATERLOO WAREHOUSING & SERVICE CO., INC. 
Page 15 
 
Signed and filed this _3rd _ day of November, 2025. 
 
   
__________________________ 
         AMANDA R. RUTHERFORD 
              DEPUTY WORKERS’  
    COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
John S. Pieters 
 
(via WCES) 
Aaron Oliver  
 
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be rece ived 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
