Case Number: 20004806.02
Case Title:  GETISO, MITIKU V. TYSON FRESH MEATS INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Getiso Mitiku-20004806.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MITIKU YACOB GETISO, 
  : 
            File No. 20004806.02 
 
 
  : 
          
 
Claimant, 
  : 
        
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
    REVIEW-REOPENING DECISION 
 
 
  :                 
TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC.   
  : 
       
 
 
  :  
   Head Notes:  1402.40, 1803, 2501,                           
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
  : 
 
 
    2905, 2907 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Mitiku Yacob Getiso, filed a petition in arbitration against defendant 
Tyson Fresh Meats, Inc. alleging he sustained an injury to his left foot and ankle on April 
21, 2020.  An arbitration hearing was held on June 9, 2022.  The undersigned issued an 
arbitration decision on November 29, 2022, finding the claimant sustained 13 percent 
impairment of the left lower extremity.  On appeal, the commissioner affirmed the 
undersigned’s finding with respect to permanent partial disability benefits. 
On October 3, 2023, Mr. Getiso filed a review-reopening petition against Tyson 
Fresh Meats, Inc., alleging that he sustained a change of condition which warrants an 
increase of his compensation.  He asserts that his compensation should be increased 
based on a low back sequela injury and the worsening of his left foot and ankle 
condition. 
The review-reopening hearing was held on November 26, 2024.  The evidentiary 
record consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 8, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 9, and 
Defendant’s Exhibits A through F.  Claimant testified on his own behalf.  No other 
witnesses provided testimony. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing.  On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.   
All parties filed their post-hearing briefs on or before January 16, 2025, at which 
time the case was deemed fully submitted to the undersigned.   
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Jun-30  18:07:33     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

GETISO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 2 
1. Whether claimant sustained a change in condition causally related to the 
original work injury; 
2. Whether the alleged injuries caused permanent disability and, if so, the nature 
and extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits, if any; 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of medical expenses; 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care; and  
5. Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the record, the 
undersigned finds:  
 
On April 21, 2020, Mitiku Getiso was injured while performing janitorial work.  
More specifically, Mr. Getiso was attempting to shut off a hose that was left on by a co-
worker when the hose moved and poured 180-degree water into his left boot. (Exhibit 6, 
page 187)  Mr. Getiso sustained third degree burns of the foot and ankle.  The initial 
arbitration hearing occurred on June 9, 2022.  On November 29, 2022, the undersigned 
issued a decision, awarding permanent partial disability benefits equivalent to 13 
percent of the left lower extremity. 
 
Mr. Getiso contends he sustained a change of condition since June 9, 2022, 
which warrants an increase of his compensation.  He asserts that his compensation 
should be increased based on a low back sequela injury and a worsening of his left foot 
and ankle condition. 
This decision will first address Mr. Getiso’s low back sequela claim.  Defendant 
submits that Mr. Getiso’s low back condition was known or knowable at the time of the 
June 9, 2022, arbitration hearing.  As such, defendant asserts Mr. Getiso’s claim is 
barred by the doctrine of res judicata. 
Indeed, a review of the evidentiary record reveals that Mr. Getiso received 
medical treatment for low back pain he causally related to the work injury between April 
21, 2020, and the June 9, 2022, arbitration hearing. 
On September 17, 2020, Mr. Getiso presented for his 28th physical therapy 
appointment with Sports Rehab & Professional Therapy. (Joint Exhibit 1, page 1)  The 
assessment provides, “There has been a dramatic change in the status of patient’s 
foot/ankle since his August 17th appointment[.]” (Id.)  For context, Mr. Getiso’s biggest 
complaints were itchiness in his foot and minimal joint pain at the August 17, 2020, 
appointment. (Id.)  He also demonstrated a normal gait on August 17, 2020.  However, 
at the September 17, 2020, appointment Mr. Getiso’s shoes were barely tied due to the 
pain he was experiencing and he demonstrated an antalgic gait. (Id.) 

GETISO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 3 
 
Just over one month later, Mr. Getiso complained of low back pain with 
radiculopathy down his legs. (JE5, p. 40)  Christopher Baumbach, M.D. assessed back 
pain with radiculopathy and referred Mr. Getiso to physical therapy to address the 
same. (Id.)   
 
Mr. Getiso presented for a physical therapy session on December 3, 2021. (JE6, 
p. 63)  The record specifically provides that the reason for the session was “back pain.”  
The record further provides, “He also has intermittent low back pain, which he states the 
doctor told him may be related to his leg pain.” (Id.)  On December 6, 2021, Mr. Getiso 
reported 4-5 out of 10 pain in the mid back. (JE6, p. 68)  Ten days later, he reported 
that his pain was “still very severe” and he feared that physical therapy would not be 
able to help with his pain. (JE6, p. 72) 
On January 7, 2022, Mr. Getiso reported that his low back pain was feeling much 
improved. (JE6, p. 78)  However, he had to end his session early on January 17, 2022, 
due to increased low back and left lower extremity pain. (JE6, p. 81)  On January 27, 
2022, Mr. Getiso similarly reported that he was struggling with his home exercise 
program due to the pain levels in his back and left lower extremity. (JE6, p. 82) 
An MRI of the lumbar spine, dated March 8, 2022, returned normal with no 
significant degenerative changes or signs of nerve impingement. (JE7, p. 160)  The MRI 
was ordered in response to Mr. Getiso noting a five-month history of low back pain with 
left leg radiculopathy.  This MRI is referenced in the initial arbitration decision. (Ex. 6, p. 
192) 
 
On March 17, 2022, Mr. Getiso presented to Cassandra Swann, PA-C and 
reported a five-month history of low back pain with radiating left leg pain. (JE5, p. 50; 
JE8, p. 188)  He relayed that three months of physical therapy did not provide much 
benefit. (JE8, p. 188)  Ms. Swann reviewed the lumbar spine MRI and told Mr. Getiso 
that the results did not explain the shooting pain in his left leg. (Id.)  She recommended 
a referral to an orthopedic physician to further evaluate the pain. (Id.) 
 
At his March 24, 2022, deposition, Mr. Getiso testified that he was having back 
pains. (Ex. A, Depo. Tr., pp. 18-19)  He testified that he reported the low back pain to 
his primary care physician who subsequently recommended physical therapy. (Ex. A, 
Depo. Tr., p. 18)  Mr. Getiso’s testimony is consistent with the medical records in 
evidence. 
On February 14, 2023, Mr. Getiso told physical therapy that he had back pain 
since his work injury in 2020.  He reported that he has pain when he sits for a long time 
and with any kind of movement. (JE6, p. 89)  He noted that therapy had previously 
improved his pain but did not completely resolve it. (Id.)  The physical therapist opined, 
“I believe his back pain is likely stemming from his leg, but it is difficult to discern due to 
language barrier and patient sensitivity.” (JE6, p. 91) 
 
A March 27, 2023, physical therapy record provides, “He reports he has had 
back pain since his accident in 2020 where his foot was severely burned.” (JE6, p. 93; 
See JE6, pp. 94, 122) 

GETISO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
At the November 26, 2024, review-reopening hearing, Mr. Getiso confirmed that 
he had low back pain prior to the June 9, 2022, arbitration hearing.  He testified, “Well, I 
had that problem before the hearing. What I said was it changed, it got worse because 
of my daily movement after the hearing.” (Hr. Tr., p. 51)  I find Mr. Getiso’s claim for a 
low back sequela injury was known or knowable at the time of the arbitration hearing. 
However, despite all of his treatment and testimony, Mr. Getiso chose not to assert a 
low back claim at the time of the June 9, 2022, arbitration hearing.  Therefore, I find that 
his low back claim cannot be considered in this review-reopening proceeding. 
 
I now turn to the alleged worsening of Mr. Getiso’s left foot and ankle condition.  
Mr. Getiso asserts that since the June 9, 2022, hearing, he has developed new 
symptoms of excessive sweating, temperature and color variations, environmental 
temperature sensitivity, and swelling in the affected area.  Based on these complaints, 
Mr. Getiso was diagnosed with polyneuropathy and Chronic Regional Pain Syndrome 
(CRPS).  Defendant asserts Mr. Getiso’s CRPS cannot give rise to a body as a whole 
claim because he does not meet the AMA Guides criteria for CRPS.  Defendant’s 
argument rests on the fact the physicians in this case did not utilize the diagnostic 
criteria provided in the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition.   
Emma Edwards, PA-C, of Innovative Pain & Spine Specialists, first evaluated Mr. 
Getiso on November 9, 2020. (JE4, p. 19)  He complained of sharp, shooting, and 
burning type pain in the dorsal surface of his left foot that had been present since the 
date of injury. (Id.)   He reported constant pain that was worse with standing, walking, 
and having socks or shoes touching the area. (Id.)  He denied any swelling, color 
changes, or temperature changes of the foot. (Id.)  He expressed a desire to return to 
work; however, he reported that he was unable to do so because he could not wear his 
work boot secondary to pain. (Id.)  Ms. Edwards assessed Mr. Getiso with neuropathic 
pain and a history of third-degree burn. (JE4, p. 20)  She explained that Mr. Getiso 
sustained “quite a significant burn to the left foot” and nerve injuries can take a long time 
to heal. (JE4, p. 20)  Ms. Edwards prescribed duloxetine and a topical compounded 
neuropathic pain cream. (JE4, p. 20) 
Mr. Getiso returned to Innovative Pain & Spine Specialists on December 7, 2020. 
(JE4, p. 21)  He reported that the duloxetine and neuropathic compound cream 
provided some relief. (Id.)  Nevertheless, he continued to report sharp shooting pains, 
as well as sensitivity in the left foot that bothered him on a daily basis. (JE4, p. 22)  After 
the examination, Ms. Edwards encouraged claimant to have realistic expectations and 
understand that his pain may never completely go away. (Id.) 
On February 1, 2021, Mr. Getiso reported significant relief with the use of the 
neuropathic compound cream, gabapentin, and Cymbalta. (JE4, p. 24)  Phillip Essay, 
M.D. recommended physical therapy for desensitization of Mr. Getiso’s left lower 
extremity as he started his return to work. (JE4, p. 25) 
According to the March 5, 2021, communication, Mr. Getiso had worked his way 
up to wearing his boot for 30 minutes per hour between February 17, 2021, and March 
5, 2021. (JE4, p. 26)  Nevertheless, Mr. Getiso continued to assert that Tyson was not 
following the restrictions and/or return-to-work plan adopted by Dr. Essay. (Id.)  In 

GETISO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 5 
response, Ms. Edwards told claimant that he would continue to experience increased 
pain with each graduated level, and that such pain was to be expected. (Id.) 
On March 15, 2021, Mr. Getiso presented to Dr. Essay’s office for his six-week 
follow-up appointment since restarting physical therapy. (JE4, p. 27)  He told Dr. Essay 
that he was still presenting to physical therapy, but he had missed some appointments 
due to his work schedule and pain levels. (Id.)  According to Dr. Essay’s notes, Mr. 
Getiso had been calling into his office “3-4 times per week complaining that he cannot 
wear his shoe.” (Id.)  Following the March 15, 2021, appointment, Dr. Essay opined 
there was nothing further to recommend for Mr. Getiso’s condition and placed him at 
maximum medical improvement. (JE4, p. 28)  Dr. Essay did not address impairment or 
permanent restrictions.  
Mr. Getiso sought to establish care with a new primary care physician on 
September 7, 2021. (JE5, p. 30)  He reported the persistence of pain over the left foot 
and ankle, as well as difficulty walking and wearing shoes. (Id.)  He denied the 
existence of any ankle swelling. (Id.)  On examination, Roberto Anel, M.D., of Avera 
Medical Group, was not able to appreciate any erythema or any warmth in the left foot 
and ankle. (JE5, p. 31)  Following the evaluation, Dr. Anel prescribed all of the same 
medications as Dr. Essay’s office and noted that it could take four to six weeks for the 
medications to take full effect. (Id.)  Dr. Anel recommended Mr. Getiso return for a 
follow-up appointment in four weeks. (Id.) 
Mr. Getiso presented to a different Avera Medical Group facility on October 18, 
2021, and requested to meet with a specialist regarding his left foot and ankle condition. 
(JE5, p. 34)  Christopher Baumbach, M.D. conducted the October 18, 2021, evaluation. 
(Id.) During the appointment, Mr. Getiso reported some improvement in symptoms with 
gabapentin and duloxetine. (Id.)  Dr. Baumbach ordered an EMG to rule out nerve 
conduction issues and offered to increase the dosage of Mr. Getiso’s gabapentin 
prescription. (Id.)  Dr. Baumbach opined that the plan of care would be based on the 
results of the recommended EMG study. (Id.) 
Neurologist Justin Persson, M.D., first evaluated Mr. Getiso on December 20, 
2021. (JE5, p. 45)  Dr. Persson assessed third-degree burns of the left foot with 
subsequent peripheral neuropathy.  He also ordered an EMG of claimant’s lower 
extremities and an MRI of the lumbar spine. (Id.)   
The December 20, 2021, EMG returned normal.  There was no convincing 
electrophysiological evidence of a radiculopathy, plexopathy, or mononeuropathy 
affecting the bilateral lower extremities.  There was also no evidence of generalized 
myopathic or large fiber neuropathic disorder. (JE5, p. 49)  Dr. Persson opined that the 
results of the imaging could indicate a small fiber neuropathy. (JE5, p. 51)  Dr. Persson 
was hopeful claimant’s pain could be addressed with medication. (JE5, pp. 51-52)   
A little over one month after the June 9, 2022, hearing, Mr. Getiso presented to 
Dr. Persson for a follow-up appointment. (JE8, p. 194)  He reported that his groin pain 
had improved, but he continued to experience significant neuropathic pain in his left 
foot. (JE8, p. 195)  Dr. Persson assessed third-degree burn of the left foot, numbness of 

GETISO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 6 
the foot, small fiber neuropathy, left leg pain, and back pain with radiculopathy. (JE8, p. 
198)   
 
Mr. Getiso’s left foot pain did quite well over the summer.  He reported that his 
pain was “silent” or much better. (See JE8, p. 206)  Unfortunately, the burning and 
numbness worsened in the fall with the colder weather. (See JE8, p. 206)  On 
September 9, 2022, Savannah DeBelts, N.P., assessed Mr. Getiso with “Pain of burning 
sensation in left ankle region possible etiologies are complex regional pain syndrome 
secondary to trauma of third-degree burns.” (JE8, p. 199) 
 
At a follow-up appointment on February 7, 2023, Becky Emerson, PA-C, 
provided a differential diagnosis of CRPS. (JE8, p. 210)  Ms. Emerson opined that if Mr. 
Getiso’s pain persisted, she would consider referring him to the pain clinic for nerve 
blocks or other appropriate treatments. (Id.) 
 
Mr. Getiso presented to Jamicah Harris, M.D. on August 30, 2023, reporting left 
leg pain, back pain, anxiety, and depression. (JE5, p. 55)  He had pain and swelling of 
the left foot. (JE5, p. 57)  The left ankle had full range of motion and Mr. Getiso 
ambulated well without assistance. (JE5, p. 56) 
An October 10, 2023, EMG and nerve conduction studies of the bilateral lower 
extremities revealed no evidence of a proximal neuropathic disorder causing the left 
lower extremity pain and paresthesia. The electrophysiologic findings were minimal, and 
suspected to be a consequence of local factors; however, the record provided, “if 
suspected clinically, this study is supportive of an incidentally noted mild length 
dependent axonal sensory polyneuropathy.” (JE8, p. 220) 
 
On March 29, 2024, Mr. Getiso presented to James Dreessen, M.D. for an 
evaluation and treatment of chronic left ankle pain. (JE7, p. 167)  The record provides 
that Mr. Getiso was diagnosed with CRPS and small fiber neuropathy by the neurology 
team. (Id.)  He reported that his left ankle was “hot” compared to the right.  Dr. 
Dreessen observed that the left ankle felt warm compared to the right ankle. (JE7, p. 
168)  He reported pain to light touch (allodynia), increased sweating of the left ankle, 
and limited range of motion. (JE7, p. 167)  On examination, Dr. Dreessen observed 
allodynia and limited range of motion; however, he observed no sweating. (JE7, p. 168)  
Dr. Dreessen assessed Mr. Getiso with chronic left ankle pain, CRPS Type 1, and low 
back pain. (Id.)  Dr. Dreessen opined that Mr. Getiso met the Budapest criteria for 
complex regional pain syndrome. (JE7, p. 169)   
Under the Budapest Criteria,a diagnosis of CRPS is appropriate if an individual 
has (1) continuing pain which is disproportionate to any inciting event; (2) at least one 
symptom in three of the four following categories: sensory, vasomotor, pseudomotor, 
and trophic; (3) at least one sign at the time of evaluation in at least two of the 
previously mentioned categories; and (4) no other diagnosis better explains the signs 
and symptoms. (JE7, pp. 168-169)  At the time of the evaluation, Dr. Dreessen 
observed that the left ankle was warm compared to the right, and Mr. Getiso 
demonstrated decreased range of motion and allodynia.  Following the examination, Dr. 
Dreessen performed a left lumbar sympathetic block at L3 on March 29, 2024. (JE7, p. 
169) 

GETISO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 7 
On May 20, 2024, Dr. Persson’s care team assessed Mr. Getiso with refractory 
neuropathic pain of the left foot after burn injury consistent with CRPS. (JE8, p. 227)  
Mr. Getiso relayed that the injection from Dr. Dreessen was helpful, but he had difficulty 
quantifying the benefit. (Id.)  During the appointment, Mr. Getiso relayed that blankets 
placed on his left ankle caused shooting pain. (JE8, pp. 227-228)   
Mr. Getiso returned to Dr. Dreessen on July 8, 2024. (JE7, p. 173)  Again, he 
complained that the left ankle was hot compared to the right, he had pain to light touch, 
he had increased sweating, and he had decreased range of motion. (Id.)  On 
examination, Dr. Dreessen observed pain to light touch, limited range of motion, and 
that the left ankle felt warm compared to the right; however, he observed no sweating. 
(JE7, p. 174)  Dr. Dreessen opined that Mr. Getiso met the criteria for CRPS and 
recommended a series of lumbar sympathetic nerve blocks. (JE7, pp. 174-175)  The 
nerve blocks were administered on July 8, 2024, July 10, 2024, and July 12, 2024. (JE7, 
pp. 175, 178, 181) 
Mr. Getiso returned to Ms. Emerson on September 18, 2024, reporting pain in 
and around the left ankle. (JE8, p. 235)  He described the pain as an ache, and severe 
lancinating/shooting pain throughout the day that is triggered by activity like walking. 
(Id.)  He also reported that the skin around his left ankle was becoming more white. (Id.) 
Sunil Bansal, M.D. conducted an updated independent medical evaluation of Mr. 
Getiso on October 1, 2024. (Ex. 2, p. 15)  Dr. Bansal’s report includes a detailed 
summary of the medical records relating to care Mr. Getiso received for the left foot and 
ankle injury.  During the examination, Mr. Getiso reported concerning color changes of 
his left foot and described it turning black and purple. (Ex. 2, p. 22)  He also reported 
excessive sweating, hypersensitivity, and episodes where the left foot/ankle felt “very 
hot.” (Id.)  On examination, Dr. Bansal noted swelling, tenderness to palpation over the 
entire foot, hypersensitivity, a purplish color in the dorsum of the foot, and that the 
plantar foot was cooler to touch compared to the right. (Ex. 2, p. 23)   
Dr. Bansal opined that Mr. Getiso developed type 1 complex regional pain 
syndrome as a result of his work-related third-degree burn injury to his left ankle. (Ex. 2, 
pp. 24-25)  Dr. Bansal provided a detailed analysis as to how CRPS could have 
developed in Mr. Getiso’s left foot and ankle. (Ex. 2, p. 25)  He opined, “The medical 
records clearly document the development of classic signs of autonomic dysfunction, 
including pseudomotor changes with excessive sweating, vasomotor instability 
manifesting as color changes described as ‘black and purple,’ and temperature 
alterations with Mr. Getiso consistently reporting his ankle feeling ‘very hot’ compared to 
the contralateral side.” (Id.)  He further opined, “The presence of small fiber neuropathy, 
confirmed by clinical evaluation and suggested by electrodiagnostic studies showing 
mild length-dependent axonal sensory polyneuropathy, is consistent with the 
neurogenic inflammation and small fiber dysfunction characteristic of CRPS.” (Ex. 2, p. 
26)  Mr. Getiso did not report the symptoms Dr. Bansal associated with CRPS on or 
before June 9, 2022.  Moreover, Douglas Martin, M.D. noted Mr. Getiso did not exhibit 
any of the above symptoms during his defense IME.    
Utilizing Table 13-15 in the AMA Guides of Evaluation for Permanent Impairment, 
Fifth Edition, Dr. Bansal assigned 10 percent whole person impairment. (Ex. 2, p. 27)  

GETISO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 8 
Dr. Bansal assigned permanent work restrictions of no prolonged standing or walking 
greater than two hours total per eight-hour workday, permission to wear lightweight and 
nonrestrictive footwear to accommodate his left foot hypersensitivity, no prolonged stair 
climbing, avoidance of cold environments, and no forceful pushing or pulling activities 
with the left lower extremity. (Ex. 2, p. 28)  Additional impairment and permanent 
restrictions were provided for Mr. Getiso’s low back condition. (Id.) 
Defendant asserts Mr. Getiso failed to carry his burden of proving a change in 
condition, as he did not offer a medical opinion that complies with the AMA Guides’ 
criteria for diagnosing CRPS.  More specifically, defendant argues there is no medical 
evidence indicating that Mr. Getiso concurrently exhibited 8 of the 11 diagnostic criteria 
for CRPS as required by the Guides. 
In 2017, the legislature amended the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act to 
mandate use of the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition when determining the permanent 
impairment caused by a work injury and the Commissioner has adopted the Fifth Edition 
for determining impairment. See Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(x)  Importantly, there is no 
requirement under the Iowa Code, agency rules, or case law that the AMA Guides, Fifth 
Edition or any other authority must be used when diagnosing an injured employee's 
condition. 
With respect to whether the work injury caused CRPS, all physicians tasked with 
addressing causation agree.  Dr. Persson, the authorized treating physician, provided 
extensive care for Mr. Getiso.  He ultimately diagnosed Mr. Getiso with CRPS and 
referred him to Dr. Dreessen.  Dr. Dreessen, a pain specialist, evaluated Mr. Getiso and 
reached the same diagnosis based on the Budapest Criteria.  Dr. Bansal subsequently 
evaluated Mr. Getiso for an independent medical examination and reached the same 
conclusion.  Defendant did not produce an expert report to rebut the diagnosis of CRPS.   
While Mr. Getiso’s subjective symptoms remain largely consistent with those 
described in the initial arbitration decision, the evidentiary record does reflect some 
objective evidence of a change in condition.  Notably, the December 2021 EMG was 
interpreted as normal, whereas the October 2023 EMG, while also normal, was noted to 
be “notable for mild polyneuropathy if clinically suspected.”  While seemingly 
insignificant, this marks a shift in the objective diagnostic findings and provides some 
corroboration for Mr. Getiso’s assertion of a worsening condition.   
For these reasons, I accept Dr. Persson, Dr. Dreessen, and Dr. Bansal’s 
diagnosis of complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) resulting from Mr. Getiso’s left 
foot and ankle injury. 
Dr. Bansal is the only expert to assess Mr. Getiso’s permanent impairment 
relating to CRPS.  His impairment assessment is reasonable and convincing.  
Therefore, I accept Dr. Bansal’s impairment rating and find Mr. Getiso proved he 
sustained 10 percent whole person impairment as a result of the April 21, 2020, work 
injury.   
Next, Mr. Getiso seeks reimbursement of the medical expenses provided in 
Exhibit 4.  Defendant correctly points out that the majority of the medical expenses 

GETISO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 9 
sought pre-date the June 9, 2022, arbitration hearing.  Additionally, it appears the 
defendant has satisfied several of the charges listed in the summary spreadsheet.  
In his post-hearing brief, Mr. Getiso asserts a claim for medical expenses since 
April 20, 2023, the date of the appeal decision.  Since April 20, 2023, Mr. Getiso has 
received medical treatment from Avera McKennan Hospital and medications from 
Walgreens Pharmacy.  Defendant asserts an authorization defense for the requested 
medical expenses.  
Mr. Getiso requested care from defendant on February 21, 2024. (Ex. D, p. 34)  
On February 22, 2024, defendant identified Dr. Archer as Mr. Getiso’s authorized 
treating physician. (Ex. D, pp. 33-34)  Defendant provided Mr. Getiso with Dr. Archer’s 
contact information and authorized him to schedule his own appointment(s). (Id.)  
Alternatively, defendant told Mr. Getiso it would be willing to arrange an appointment 
with Dr. Archer. (Id.)   
Mr. Getiso asserts it was unreasonable for defendant to authorize treatment with 
Dr. Archer given that Dr. Archer is located in Storm Lake, Iowa, and Mr. Getiso was 
living over two hours away in Sioux Falls, South Dakota.  Nevertheless, Mr. Getiso did 
not file a petition for alternate medical care or allege that the care offered by defendant 
was unreasonable.   
Between March 29, 2024, and September 18, 2024, Mr. Getiso presented to Dr. 
Dreessen, Dr. Persson, and Ms. Emerson for medical treatment.  Mr. Getiso did not 
request that defendant authorize the care provided and defendant did not authorize the 
care provided.  Accordingly, I find the treatment Mr. Getiso received from these 
providers was unauthorized care.  While the care Mr. Getiso received between March 
29, 2024, and September 18, 2024, was more beneficial than no care at all, Mr. Getiso 
failed to give defendant the opportunity to authorize said care. 
Having found Mr. Getiso proved there has been a change of condition, the next 
issue to be resolved is the extent of industrial disability resulting from said change of 
condition.  
Mr. Getiso was born and raised in Ethiopia.  His primary language is Amharic.  
An interpreter was involved in both hearings; however, Mr. Getiso does speak some 
English, and he is able to read and write the English language to some extent. (Ex. 1, p. 
4)  He can reportedly read an English newspaper and communicate with his Lyft 
customers in English. (See id.)  At the review-reopening hearing, Mr. Getiso corrected 
the interpreter on at least one occasion. (Hr. Tr., pp. 52-53)  In terms of his education, 
Mr. Getiso attended Hossana Polytechnic College where he received two years of 
training in machinery and technical management.  Mr. Getiso arrived in the United 
States on November 23, 2014. He currently resides in Sioux Falls, South Dakota.  
Mr. Getiso sought vocational rehabilitation services at South Dakota Vocational 
Rehabilitation Services in October 2021. (Ex. E, p. 37)  According to the records in 
evidence, Mr. Getiso performed at least two “rounds” of Employment Skills Training.  
For his second round of EST, Mr. Getiso performed light janitorial work at Goodwill. (Ex. 
E, p. 44)  His shifts were four hours long. (Id.)  He cleaned bathrooms and windows, 

GETISO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 10 
vacuumed floors, removed garbage, and mopped stairs. (Id.)  Mr. Getiso was able to 
work without constant supervision. (Id.)  He was allowed one 15-minute break; however, 
he typically took two 15-minute breaks due to pain in his foot. (Id.)  Based on his 
performance at Goodwill, the Mission Service Team recommended that Mr. Getiso 
begin looking for competitive employment in the community. (Id.) 
Mr. Getiso expressed an interest in attending higher education or a training 
program at Southeast Technical Institute.  He was especially interested in the trade of 
becoming an electrician. (Ex. 3, p. 35)  In order to obtain this goal, Mr. Getiso needed to 
“brush up” on his computer skills.  Mr. Getiso attended computer classes and learned 
how to use Microsoft Word, PowerPoint, and Excel. (See Ex. 3, p. 52)   
In addition to computer skills, the vocational rehabilitation team told Mr. Getiso 
that he would be required to wear work boots in the electrician program.  The team 
further informed Mr. Getiso that he would have to wear his work boots during training in 
order to evaluate whether he could participate in the electrician program. (See Ex. 3, p. 
35)  Mr. Getiso was able to wear his boots in training; however, he had the boot as 
loose as possible and he reported that he struggled to walk due to pain and swelling. 
(Ex. 3, p. 52)  Due to his continued pain, the vocational rehabilitation team told Mr. 
Getiso that it would not support his placement in the electrician program. (Id.)  This 
decision angered Mr. Getiso. (Ex. 3, p. 54)  Despite vocational rehabilitation’s decision, 
Mr. Getiso continued to request placement in the electrician program. (Id.) 
Mr. Getiso retained the services of Tom Audet, CRC. (Ex. 1)  Mr. Audet 
interviewed claimant via telephone and analyzed pertinent medical records before 
drafting his May 24, 2023, report.  He was not tasked with obtaining employment for Mr. 
Getiso.  At the time of his phone interview, Mr. Getiso’s only employment was driving 15 
to 22 hours per week for Lyft in the Sioux Falls area. (Ex. 1, p. 5)  Mr. Getiso told Mr. 
Audet that he did not believe he was capable of working a full-time job due to the pain in 
his left leg. (Id.)  Based on Dr. Bansal’s 2021 restrictions, Mr. Audet estimated that Mr. 
Getiso had an 80 percent loss of employability and 83 percent loss of access to the 
labor market. (Ex. 1, p. 6)  He further estimated that Mr. Getiso had a loss of wage 
earning capacity between 25 and 35 percent. (Id.) 
In February 2024, Mr. Getiso obtained employment as a part-time janitor with 
INTEK. (Hr. Tr., pp. 18, 36)  He works four six-hour shifts and two four-hour shifts each 
week. (Hr. Tr., p. 19)  He cleans bathrooms and offices. (Hr. Tr., p. 18)  Mr. Getiso has 
demonstrated the ability to return to work, albeit in a part-time position.  Mr. Getiso’s 
employment calls the accuracy and reliability of Mr. Audet’s report into question. 
At the time of the June 9, 2022, hearing, Mr. Getiso was experiencing shooting 
pain, numbness, and burning pain in his left foot, especially with colder weather.  He 
also struggled with hypersensitivity and pain when wearing shoes; however, he was 
able to wear soft or open-toe shoes.  He could travel up and down a flight of stairs.  Mr. 
Getiso was employed as a driver for Lyft, a ridesharing service.  He worked between 12 
and 20 hours per week. He was also working a part-time role at Goodwill through his 
vocational rehabilitation program. 

GETISO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 11 
As of November 26, 2024, Mr. Getiso continues to experience the same or 
similar symptoms that he complained of at the time of the June 9, 2022, hearing.  The 
only significant change in symptoms appears to be Mr. Getiso’s assertions of left foot 
sweating, color changes, and temperature variance between the left and right ankle.  
Notably, no physician has verified these additional complaints on examination.1   
Following the June 9, 2022, hearing, Mr. Getiso was diagnosed with CRPS.  Mr. 
Getiso has received additional medical care, including a series of sympathetic nerve 
blocks, for his left foot and ankle condition.  He has received vocational rehabilitation 
services and has returned to part-time janitorial work.  He also continues to work for 
Lyft. (Hr. Tr., p. 25)  
In consideration of the above and all other appropriate factors, I find that Mr. 
Getiso carried his burden of proving he sustained a change in condition causally related 
to the original work injury and is entitled to a review-reopening of the extent of disability 
previously established by the November 2022 arbitration decision. I find Mr. Getiso has 
sustained 35 percent industrial disability. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
In a proceeding to reopen an award for payments or agreement for settlement as 
provided by section 10A.317, inquiry shall be into whether or not the condition of the 
employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, or increase of compensation so 
awarded or agreed upon. Iowa Code section 10A.317(2). 
Upon review-reopening, claimant has the burden to show a change in condition 
related to the original injury since the original award or settlement was made. The 
change may be either economic or physical. Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 
N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Henderson v. Iles, 250 Iowa 787, 96 N.W.2d 321 (1959). A 
mere difference of opinion of experts as to the percentage of disability arising from an 
original injury is not sufficient to justify a different determination on a petition for review- 
reopening. Rather, claimant's condition must have worsened or deteriorated since the 
arbitration hearing. Bousfield v. Sisters of Mercy, 249 Iowa 64, 86 N.W.2d 109 (1957). A 
failure of a condition to improve to the extent anticipated originally may also constitute a 
change of condition. Meyers v. Holiday Inn of Cedar Falls, Iowa, 272 N.W.2d 24 (Iowa 
App. 1978). Any substantial change in condition related to the initial work injury is 
sufficient to justify an increase in a permanent disability award. The change needs to 
have been unforeseen or unexpected at the time of the arbitration hearing. Kohlhaas v. 
Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387 (Iowa 2009). 
The principles of res judicata apply and the agency should not reevaluate facts 
and circumstances that were known or knowable at the time of the original action. 
Kohlhaas at 392. Review-reopening is not intended to provide either party with an 
opportunity to re-litigate issues already decided or to give a party a “second bite at the 
apple.” The agency, however, is forbidden from speculating as to what was 
contemplated at the time of the original snapshot. Id. 
                                                 
1 Dr. Dreessen documented that the left ankle felt warm when compared to the right ankle; however, there 
is no evidence Dr. Dreessen confirmed the difference in temperature.   

GETISO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 12 
The burden remains upon the injured worker to prove by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the current condition is proximately caused by the original injury. 
Kohlhaas, 777 N.W.2d at 392.  A cause is proximate if it is a substantial factor in 
bringing about the result; it need not be the only cause. A preponderance of the 
evidence exists when the causal connection is probable rather than merely possible. 
George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle 
Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa Ct. App. 1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 
N.W.2d 283 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
The first issue to be addressed is Mr. Getiso’s low back sequela claim.  
Defendant contends that Mr. Getiso cannot raise the issue of a low back injury for the 
first time in this review-reopening proceeding. 
In this case, the evidence demonstrates that Mr. Getiso received medical 
treatment for low back pain he causally related to the work injury between April 21, 
2020, and the June 9, 2022, arbitration hearing.  Mr. Getiso’s low back condition was 
known or knowable at the time of the arbitration proceeding.  However, Mr. Getiso 
chose not to pursue the low back claim at that time.  Thus, the low back claim in this 
review-reopening proceeding cannot be considered.  Therefore, all other issues relating 
to the low back claim are rendered moot.   
Next, Mr. Getiso asserts that his compensation should be increased based on a 
worsening of his left foot and ankle condition.  The claimant has the burden of proving 
by a preponderance of the evidence that the injury is a proximate cause of the disability 
on which the claim is based. A cause is proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing 
about the result; it need not be the only cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists 
when the causal connection is probable rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel 
& Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 
N.W.2d 154 (Iowa Ct. App. 1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 
(Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke's Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
Defendant briefly argues that because the claimant did not include CRPS in his 
petition, it cannot be a basis for recovery in this review-reopening claim.  I disagree.  In 
an administrative agency setting, charged with administering a humanitarian 
compensation system, only a short and plain statement of the claim is necessary. Van 

GETISO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 13 
Meter v. Van Meter, 328 N.W.2d 497 (Iowa 1983); Hoenig v. Mason & Hanger, Inc., 162 
N.W.2d 188, 192 (Iowa 1968). While a claimant is allowed to conform to proof at 
hearing, they “cannot raise matters involving the alleged injury that could not be fairly 
anticipated by competent opposing counsel so as to preclude proper investigation and 
the asserting of possible defenses.” Wichers v. Mix-Rite, Inc., File No. 1241564 (Arb. 
October 29, 2002).  Claimant notified defendant that he was asserting an injury to the 
body as a whole.  The possibility of a CRPS diagnosis was first raised on September 9, 
2022. (JE8, p. 199)  Defendant had more than enough time to conduct a proper 
investigation and failed to do so.   
Mr. Getiso has been diagnosed with CRPS by three different medical providers.  
As such, his impairment classification has changed.  This constitutes a change in his 
condition since the arbitration hearing.  I conclude that Mr. Getiso carried his burden of 
proving a substantial change in his condition that justifies a review reopening of the prior 
arbitration award. 
Since claimant now has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial 
disability has been sustained. Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City 
Ry. Co., 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows: “It is therefore plain that the 
Legislature intended the term “disability' to mean ‘industrial disability’ or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere ‘functional disability’ to be computed in terms of percentages of 
the total physical and mental ability of a normal man.” 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period. Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole. Section 85.34. 
Having considered claimant's permanent impairment, educational background, 
employment history, continued employment, age, as well as all other factors of industrial 
disability identified by the Iowa Supreme Court, I found that Mr. Getiso sustained a 35 
percent loss of future earning capacity as a result of the April 21, 2020, work injury. This 
is equivalent to a 35 percent industrial disability and entitles claimant to an award of 175 
weeks of permanent partial disability benefits. Iowa Code section 85.35(2)(u). 
The final disputed issue is whether costs should be assessed against either 
party. Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency. Iowa Code section 10A.328. 
In this case, claimant was successful and recovers additional permanent disability 
benefits. Exercising the agency's discretion, I conclude that it is reasonable to assess 
claimant's costs in some amount. 

GETISO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC. 
Page 14 
Claimant requests taxation of the cost associated with Dr. Bansal’s IME report.  
Agency rule 876 IAC 4.33(6) permits the agency to assess the reasonable cost of 
obtaining up to two doctors' reports.  However, the Iowa Supreme Court has held that 
only the cost of drafting the expert's report is permissible in lieu of testimony. Des 
Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, (Iowa 2015) 
Dr. Bansal’s invoice does not provide the costs associated with the drafting of the 
IME report. Therefore, exercising the agency's discretion, I conclude this expense 
cannot be taxed as a cost against defendant. 
ORDER 
Defendant shall pay claimant an additional one hundred forty-six point four 
(146.4) weeks of permanent partial disability benefits commencing March 15, 2021. 
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with interest 
at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the 
federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two 
percent. 
Defendant shall receive credit for benefits previously paid. 
Defendant shall provide claimant ongoing medical care for his CRPS condition. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this __30th __ day of June, 2025. 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Mary Hamilton (via WCES) 
Charles Showalter (via WCES) 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal perio d will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
