Case Number: 5053002
Case Title:  TILTON, TERRY V. HJ HEINZ CO
Doc Type:    Decision - Court of Appeals
Source:      Tilton - COA Decision - 12 18 24.PDF
========================================================================

IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF IOWA 
 
No. 24-0236 
Filed December 18, 2024 
 
 
H.J. HEINZ COMPANY and LIBERTY MUTUAL INSURANCE CO., 
 
Petitioners-Appellants, 
 
vs. 
 
TERRY TILTON, 
 
Respondent-Appellee. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Polk County, David Nelmark, Judge. 
 
 
An employer and its insurer appeal from the district court’s ruling denying 
their petition for judicial review of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner’s remand decision.  AFFIRMED.   
 
 
Nathan R. McConkey of Huber, Book, Lanz & McConkey, PLLC, West Des 
Moines, for appellants. 
 
Thomas M. Wertz and Mindi M. Vervaecke of Wertz Law Firm, Cedar 
Rapids, for appellee. 
 
 
Considered by Tabor, C.J., and Chicchelly and Sandy, JJ.
1 of 19
ELECTRONICALLY FILED            DEC 18, 2024            CLERK OF SUPREME COURT
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Dec-18  14:36:40     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

 
2
SANDY, Judge. 
 
H.J. Heinz Company (Heinz) and Liberty Mutual Insurance Company 
(Liberty) appeal from the district court’s ruling denying their petition for judicial 
review 
of 
the 
Iowa 
Deputy 
Workers’ 
Compensation 
Commissioner’s 
(Commissioner) remand decision.  They argue the Commissioner erred by: 
(1) failing to make explicit findings on Terry Tilton’s credibility; (2) determining the 
discovery rule date to be April 15, 2013; (3) determining Tilton’s low back and 
mental conditions were causally related to and permanently aggravated by her 
employment with Heinz and caused her to be permanently and totally disabled; 
and (4) determining Tilton was entitled to penalty benefits.  We affirm, discerning 
no errors of law and finding substantial evidence supports all the Commissioner’s 
factual findings and determinations.   
I. 
Background Facts and Proceedings 
 
Tilton began working for Heinz in 1999 and continued her employment there 
until resigning based on disability on April 15, 2013.  She held several positions 
during her career at Heinz, but her time serving in the “Clean As You Go” position 
at the company is the period of her employment most relevant here.  Around 2009 
or 2010 she bid into the “Clean As You Go” position—which both her testimony 
and official job description described as a very physically demanding position.   
 
While in that position, Tilton was working on her feet for the entire day.  She 
filled and transported barrels of chlorine that weighed up to 100 pounds, cleaned 
up messes on the jobsite by pulling spilled food product with a squeegee, used a 
shovel to lift that squeegeed product about waist high and dump it into garbage 
cans, and pushed those garbage cans up a ramp.  She testified that the trash cans 
2 of 19

 
3
were heavy because the food product inside was very wet.  She also stacked 
pallets weighing up to twenty-five pounds ten levels high, which required her to 
use her back and stomach.  She often crouched and crawled to clean drains, 
moved barrels of food product, and attended to other cleaning duties.  Heinz’s 
official job description confirmed that this position requires frequent or occasional 
bending, twisting, squatting, kneeling, and reaching.  The job description also 
indicated “yes” next to the requirements of “repetitive motion,” “pushing/pulling,” 
“fine manipulation,” and “simple grasping.”  In 2013, Tilton’s wage for this position 
was $15.13 per hour.   
 
Tilton first began treatment with a chiropractor in 2000.  She later started 
treatment for low back and left leg pain with Dr. Matthew Gray in November 2004.  
On December 1, 2004, Tilton had a magnetic resonance imaging scan (MRI) which 
showed a small focal disc herniation on the left side at L4-5.  A second MRI 
conducted on July 30, 2005, showed no significant change at L4-5 from the prior 
MRI, and mild-moderate degenerative changes in the facets were noted at L3-4 
through L5-S1, which were also noted to have no significant progression from the 
prior MRI.   
 
On August 24, 2005, Tilton was evaluated by neurosurgeon Dr. Chad 
Abernathey.  After reviewing her prior MRIs, Dr. Abernathey opined Tilton’s neural 
elements were well decompressed, and he did not recommend surgery “due to a 
paucity of clinical and radiographic findings.”  From February 16, 2006, to about 
March 27, 2006, Tilton’s chiropractor provided a note excusing her from work 
because of low back pain.  Her chiropractor noted she was working on spinal 
strengthening to allow her to return to work. 
3 of 19

 
4
 
On August 12, 2007, Tilton had another MRI.  This scan also showed a disk 
protrusion at L4-5.  A large focal spur on the right facet joint at L5-S1 was identified 
as abutting the right S1 nerve root. 
 
On July 8, 2008, Tilton returned to Dr. Gray.  She told him that she had been 
moving boxes after she and her son had lost their homes due to flooding.  Dr. Gray 
noted that Tilton “[did] not remember any specific accident but about a week ago 
she started getting this left lower back pain,” and that she was on disability from 
work “because she has a fairly heavy job of lifting.”  On July 14, 2008, Tilton had 
an MRI which revealed no changes from her August 2007 MRI.  On July 31, 2008, 
she began treatment with Dr. Farid Manshadi.  He performed an adjustment of her 
SI joint, “and after that she did feel a lot better.”  He recommended 
electromyography (EMG) testing.  That testing came back normal with no evidence 
of lumbosacral radiculopathy.   
 
On February 4, 2010, Tilton’s chiropractor completed a form that asked 
whether Tilton’s condition made her “unable to perform any of [her] job functions,” 
to which he responded, “No.”  He stated that, barring surgery, her disc bulges and 
bone spur were permanent and would be a source of flare-ups in the future that 
could cause her to miss work.  He wrote that Tilton was “not currently” 
incapacitated, “but it is possible/probable over the course of the year,” and that 
Tilton may need to miss work for medical treatment.  In his opinion it would be 
impossible to know how long future flare-ups might last. 
 
On March 22, 2010, Tilton began treating with Dr. Stanley Mathew.  He 
recorded, “The patient has a history of chronic low back pain for the last 3 weeks.  
She denies any accident, injury, or fall, but says she has been doing a lot of 
4 of 19

 
5
bending and lifting at work . . . .”  Dr. Mathew also noted, “The patient has a 
previous history of similar symptoms 2 years ago.  She said physical therapy 
helped resolve her pain.”  On July 7, 2010, Dr. Mathew provided Tilton a note 
indicating she could return to work “[w]ithout any restriction” on July 12, 2010.  
Tilton tried to return to work as planned on July 12 but was unable to do so.  On 
July 13, Tilton reported to Dr. Mathew that the Voltaren gel and cyclobenzaprine 
he prescribed seemed to help the pain.  A new MRI showed a “new tiny right 
posterior disc protrusion at L1-2,” a “new mild broad-based left far-lateral disc 
protrusion at L2-3,” a “mild broad-based left lateral and far-lateral disc protrusion 
at L3-4 and L4-5,” and “[u]nchanged right facet arthropathy.” 
 
On August 10, 2010, Tilton returned to Dr. Mathew.  He reported that, on 
that day, she “describe[d] no pain.”  Dr. Mathew continued, “She had an epidural 
steroid injection 2 weeks ago.  She says she has been pain-free for the last 2 
weeks and would like to do 2 weeks of physical therapy before returning to work.  
Again today she denies any pain in her low back or hips.” 
 
On September 1, 2010, Tilton returned to Dr. Mathew.  He reported: 
She is doing very well.  The patient recently received a 
transforaminal epidural steroid injection, which she says has 
improved her symptoms.  She feels very good.  She denies minimal 
pain, 1 [out of] 10.  Denies any pain radiating into her legs, localized 
to her back, aggravated by activity, better with rest . . . .  [T]he 
combination [of the gel and medication] has been covering her pain 
very well.  She is able to walk independently four to five blocks, 
independent with all activities of daily living.   
 
Dr. Mathew’s examination revealed the range of motion in Tilton’s lumbar spine 
was “full and pain-free.”  Tilton was released to “work full duty” and “[w]ithout any 
restriction” effective September 8, 2010.   
5 of 19

 
6
 
At an October 6, 2010, appointment, Dr. Mathew noted Tilton had returned 
to work and was “overall doing well.”  He wrote that Tilton “[d]oes complain of aches 
and pains, but is tolerating it.”  In December, he noted that she was “[o]verall doing 
much better.”   
 
Tilton left Heinz on disability on April 15, 2013, and did not return.  She had 
been working Clean As You Go for over three years at that time.  Tilton testified 
that on April 15, 2013, she reported to work and shortly after “the pain was just so 
unbearable that I just said I just can’t do this no more.”  Dr. Mathew testified he felt 
it was appropriate for Tilton to have stopped working on April 15, 2013.   
 
At the time of her 2016 hearing with the Iowa Deputy Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation 
Commissioner, 
Tilton 
was 
under permanent 
restrictions 
established by Dr. Mathew in 2015.  She was to “avoid prolonged standing, 
walking, sitting, repetitive bending, squatting, lifting of more than 15 pounds.”  
Dr. Mathew diagnosed her with “chronic low back pain, sacroiliitis, enthesopathy 
of hips, [and] DJD L-S radiculopathy,” which was permanently aggravated by the 
cumulative trauma from her work.  He also opined that she was not capable of full-
time employment based on twenty percent whole-person impairment.   
 
In his testimony, Dr. Mathew stated Tilton's condition is “extremely” painful, 
and she worked until the “pain got so unbearable.”  He also testified that continued 
work would be dangerous to Tilton and would result in “intractable pain,” 
“worsening degeneration of her spine,” “risk of further degeneration of her hips, 
knees, low back,” and “possible impingement of nerves.”   
 
tDr. Marc Hines concurred, confirming Tilton suffered a cumulative trauma 
injury related to her work at Heinz.  Dr. Hines opined that Tilton’s work at Heinz, 
6 of 19

 
7
and in particular in the Clean As You Go position, had been a substantial 
contributing factor in causing her low back condition to progress.  He also found 
her to be at fourteen percent whole-person impairment and that she has “multilevel 
disk disease and facet arthropathy in her lumbar spine . . . motion multilevel facet 
arthropathy, multilevel lumbar disk disease and multilevel lumbar disk osteophyte 
complexes, which have also contributed to sacroiliitis and greater trochanteric 
bursitis.”  Dr. Hines opined these problems “ha[d] an etiology in work at H.J. Heinz.”   
 
Dr. Bradley echoed the opinions of Dr. Mathew and Dr. Hines, stating that 
“prolonged standing, bending, [and] lifting” have “place[d] increased pressure on 
the discs and joints of [Tilton’s] lumbar spine” and prevent her from seeking full-
time, gainful employment.  Vocational rehabilitation specialist Barbara Laughlin 
stated that even sedentary work would be impossible for Tilton, “as she is not able 
to perform prolonged sitting required in sedentary occupations.”   
 
Tilton filed her arbitration petition against Heinz and Liberty in March 2015.  
The hearing was held in March 2016, and the deputy commissioner issued a 
decision on July 1, 2016.  The deputy commissioner concluded Tilton was aware 
“by 2011 that her condition was work related, serious, and potentially 
compensable” and, because “she did not provide notice to her employer until May 
of 2013 . . . and did not file a petition for benefits until 2015,” her claim for benefits 
was barred by Iowa Code sections 85.23 and 85.26(1) (2015).  Tilton appealed the 
decision.  In his appeal decision, the commissioner’s designee found her claim for 
benefits was barred by Iowa Code section 85.23.   
 
In 2018, Tilton petitioned for judicial review of the agency’s decision in the 
district court.  The district court concluded the agency applied an incorrect legal 
7 of 19

 
8
standard; substantial evidence did not support the agency decision; and therefore 
the decision was irrational, illogical, and wholly unjustifiable.  The district court 
remanded the matter to the agency for further proceedings.  Heinz and Liberty 
appealed that decision, and we affirmed the district court’s remand but reversed 
its independent findings.  See Tilton v. H.J. Heinz Co. (Heinz I), No. 18-1629, 2019 
WL 3317393 (Iowa Ct. App. July 24, 2019).   
 
On remand, the deputy commissioner determined Tilton knew or 
reasonably should have known her back injury would have a permanent adverse 
impact on her employment on February 4, 2010, and so her claim was time barred 
by Iowa Code section 85.23.  Tilton petitioned for judicial review, and the district 
court found that the deputy commissioner’s discovery rule date determination was 
irrational, illogical, and wholly unjustifiable, and not supported by substantial 
evidence.  The district court again remanded the matter to the agency for further 
proceedings.  Heinz and Liberty again appealed that decision, and we affirmed the 
district court’s remand to the deputy commissioner.  See Tilton v. H.J. Heinz Co. 
(Heinz II), No. 21-1777, 2022 WL 2824290 (July 20, 2022).   
 
On remand, the deputy commissioner voluntarily recused himself.  The 
Commissioner issued the remand decision on May 22, 2023, concluding that (1) in 
relation to the discovery rule, notice and statute of limitations requirements 
concerning Tilton’s work injury were tolled until April 15, 2013; (2) Tilton’s health 
condition was caused, and permanently aggravated, by her April 15, 2013, work 
injury; (3) Tilton’s work for Heinz caused and permanently aggravated, lit-up, or 
accelerated her lumbar spine condition and chronic pain; (4) Tilton was entitled to 
permanent total disability benefits from the date of injury of April 15, 2013; and 
8 of 19

 
9
(5) Tilton  was entitled to $20,000 in penalty benefits.  Heinz and Liberty petitioned 
for judicial review and the district court denied that petition and affirmed the 
Commissioner’s findings on January 12, 2024.  Heinz and Liberty now appeal to 
our court.   
II. 
Standard of Review 
 
The first issue raised by Heinz and Liberty alleges the Commissioner made 
an error of law.  The remaining issues allege the Commissioner made erroneous 
factual findings.  The Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Iowa Code chapter 17A, 
governs judicial review of workers’ compensation cases.  Iowa Code § 10A.322 
(2024).  If the claim of error lies with the agency’s findings of fact, we ask whether 
substantial evidence supports those findings of fact.  Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 
N.W.2d 213, 219 (Iowa 2006).  We are bound by the Commissioner’s findings of 
fact as long as they are supported by substantial evidence in the record taken as 
a whole.  Id. at 218.   
 
Substantial evidence is “the quantity and quality of evidence that would be 
deemed sufficient by a neutral, detached, and reasonable person, to establish the 
fact at issue when the consequences resulting from the establishment of that fact 
are understood to be serious and of great importance.”  Iowa Code 
§ 17A.19(10)(f)(1).  “The question on appeal is not whether the evidence supports 
a different finding than the finding made by the commissioner, but whether the 
evidence supports the findings actually made.”  Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 218 
(cleaned up).   
 
If “the claim of error lies with the agency’s interpretation of the law, the 
question on review is whether the agency’s interpretation was erroneous, and we 
9 of 19

 
10 
may substitute our interpretation for the agency’s.”  Id. at 219.  And if “the claim of 
error lies with the ultimate conclusion reached [by the agency], then the challenge 
is to the agency’s application of the law to the facts . . . .”  Id.  The question on 
judicial review then becomes “whether the agency abused its discretion by, for 
example, employing wholly irrational reasoning or ignoring important and relevant 
evidence.”  Id.  “An agency’s application of the law to the facts can only be reversed 
if we determine such an application was ‘irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.’”  
Mycogen Seeds v. Sands, 686 N.W. 2d 457, 465 (Iowa 2004) (quoting Iowa Code 
§ 17A.19(10)(m)).  If agency rules and precedent are ignored, or if the agency’s 
decision disregards a relevant and important matter, reversal by the reviewing 
court is appropriate.  Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(g), (h), (j). 
 
With these principles in mind, we consider the issues before us. 
III. 
Discussion 
 
Heinz and Liberty argue the Commissioner erred in (1) failing to make 
explicit findings on Terry Tilton’s credibility; (2) determining the discovery rule date 
to be April 15, 2013; (3) determining Tilton’s low back and mental conditions were 
causally related to and permanently aggravated by her employment with Heinz and 
caused her to be permanently and totally disabled; and (4) determining Tilton was 
entitled to penalty benefits. 
A. Tilton’s Credibility 
 
Heinz and Liberty allege the Commissioner committed an error of law in not 
including express findings on Tilton’s credibility.  In their view, the Commissioner 
had a duty to explicitly state, “I find Tilton to [be/not be] credible.”  Heinz and Liberty 
10 of 19

 
11 
cite McDowell v. Town of Clarksville, 241 N.W.2d 904 (Iowa 1976), and Arndt v. 
City of Le Claire, 728 N.W.2d 389 (Iowa 2007), to support this argument.   
 
Both cases support the proposition that the Commissioner needed to 
determine credibility.  See Arndt, 729 N.W.2d at 394–95 (“It is the commissioner's 
duty as the trier of fact to determine the credibility of the witnesses, weigh the 
evidence, and decide the facts in issue.” (emphasis added)); McDowell, 241 
N.W.2d at 908 (“[T]he fact finder must not ‘arbitrarily or totally reject’ testimony; ‘he 
has the duty to weigh it and determine its credibility.’” (emphasis added) (citation 
omitted)).  But in its thoughtful and well-reasoned ruling, the district court explained 
that these cases do not support Heinz and Liberty’s argument that the 
Commissioner was required to explicitly state her credibility findings: 
The Court finds a distinction between the duty to determine 
credibility and a requirement to write the credibility findings into the 
decision.  While Arndt and McDowell expressly emphasize the duty 
of the commissioner to weigh and determine credibility findings, the 
Court finds no language or implication in either case which mandates 
that credibility determinations be stated in the decision as findings.  
There is also no indication that a lack of written credibility findings 
constitutes an error of law which necessitates reversal.  The Court 
finds [Heinz and Liberty’s] reliance on McDowell and Arndt 
misplaced as neither case supports [Heinz and Liberty’s] contention.  
The Commissioner may properly fulfill the duty of determining 
credibility without including the credibility findings in the written 
decision. 
Heinz and Liberty’s sole response to the district court’s reasoning is to argue that 
“[Tilton] was not credible given inconsistencies and fabrications in her testimony at 
hearing.”  But that is not an argument relating whether the Commissioner did or 
was required to make explicit credibility findings—it is an argument relating to how 
Heinz and Liberty believe the Commissioner should have weighed Tilton’s 
credibility.   
11 of 19

 
12 
 
And there are examples of the Commissioner taking Tilton at her word by 
expressing her statements or opinions as it findings, such as Commissioner’s 
statement that “[t]he record supports Tilton's preexisting chronic low back pain 
became worse over time while she was working for Heinz until she could no longer 
tolerate the pain.”  Relatedly, the Commissioner made no statements expressing 
skepticism or doubt as to any of Tilton’s statements or claims.   
 
It is clear that the Commissioner implicitly found Tilton credible and her 
choice to not write such finding into the remand decision was not in error.   
B. Discovery Rule Date 
 
The date of occurrence for cumulative injuries is the date on which the 
cumulative injury “manifests” itself.  Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 483 
N.W.2d 824, 829 (Iowa 1992).  A cumulative injury is manifested when the worker, 
as a reasonable person, would be plainly aware that (1) she suffers from a 
condition or injury, and (2) such condition or injury was caused by her employment.  
Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284, 288 (Iowa 2001).   
 
Further, the statute of limitations does not begin to run on such injuries until 
“the employee also knows that the physical condition is serious enough to have a 
permanent adverse impact on the claimant's employment or employability.”  Id.  
This is known as the discovery date rule and helps ensure that the clock does not 
begin running until “the claimant knows or should know the ‘nature, seriousness, 
and probable compensable character’ of his injury or condition.”  Id. (citation 
omitted).  “The question of whether a claimant knew, or should have known, of the 
nature, seriousness, and probable compensability of her injury is a question of fact 
to be determined by the commissioner.”  Midwest Ambulance Serv. v. Ruud, 754 
12 of 19

 
13 
N.W.2d 860, 865 (Iowa 2008).  Whether the claimant should have known the 
nature of her injury is an objective standard requiring the claimant to exercise the 
awareness of a reasonable person.  See Herrera, 633 N.W.2d at 288–89.   
 
Heinz and Liberty contend that the Commissioner erred by finding the 
discovery date to be April 15, 2013.  They claim that the discovery date should 
have been set in 2011.  Heinz and Liberty provide a few flawed arguments in 
support of that claim.   
 
First, they point out that Tilton agreed that she changed the way she worked 
at Heinz within a year of the time she started the Clean As You Go position.  They 
argue that “[a]ltering the way she performed her job duties in 2011 demonstrated 
a specific time where her ability to work was seriously affected by her back 
condition.”  While it may be true that altering the way she worked could indicate 
her back condition was seriously affecting her work, it is not necessarily true that 
such alterations reflected her back condition would permanently affect her work.  
And Heinz and Liberty provide no evidence that Tilton’s 2011 actions indicate 
awareness of her injury’s permanence.  We do not agree that accommodating her 
injury is indicative of an injury’s permanence.  Indeed, almost any moderate-to-
severe injury would require work accommodations for the injured employee.  But 
we can find no case law supporting the assertion that accommodations for injury 
can serve as the sole basis for a finding of permanence. 
 
Next, Heinz and Liberty insist that 2010 was the year Tilton should have 
reasonably been aware of the permanent nature of her injuries.  Specifically, they 
point to the exhibit in which her “chiropractor noted that [Tilton] had a permanent 
condition concerning her low back in [February] 2010.” 
13 of 19

 
14 
 
But we have already—twice—held that Tilton did not know and should not 
have reasonably known on September 8, 2010, or earlier that her injuries were 
permanent.  See Heinz I, 2019 WL 3317393, at *5; Heinz II, 2022 WL 2824290, 
at *3.  And we considered—and rejected—this exact argument when Heinz and 
Liberty made it before us the last time we heard an appeal in this case.  See Heinz 
II, 2022 WL 2824290, at *3.  Heinz and Liberty provide us with no reason to depart 
from our previous holding on this same argument.  “It is irrational and illogical to 
find that Tilton's injury had a permanent adverse impact on her employment” in 
February 2010, which is “seven months prior to the date that this court found Tilton 
was not suffering from such an injury.”  Id.   
 
Lastly, Heinz and Liberty argue that the discovery rule date should be set, 
at the latest, to January 23, 2013.  They highlight an FMLA certification provided 
by Dr. Gray which “would require her to attend appointments and work part-time 
or on a reduced schedule two to three times a month.”  They contend that this 
certification evidences the doctor’s opinion that her injuries were permanent.  But 
this argument ignores the fact that this doctor’s opinion was offered in support of 
a period of FMLA leave.  The medical questions asked in the form are only meant 
to inform the U.S. Department of Labor whether the employee will be eligible for 
FMLA protections during the period of requested leave.  In fact, the form itself 
explains that a term “such as ‘lifetime’ . . . may not be sufficient to determine FMLA 
coverage.”  Thus, an FMLA certification form does not necessarily provide 
persuasive value on whether an injury is permanent beyond the FMLA leave period 
being sought.  And in any event, the information provided by Dr. Gray in this 
certification cuts against Heinz and Liberty’s argument.  Dr. Gray provided a 
14 of 19

 
15 
general approximation that the duration of Tilton’s injury would be “one year?”  Dr. 
Gray’s words there expressly opined that her injury would not be permanent.   
 
Thus, there is insufficient evidence in the record to set the discovery rule 
date at any date before April 15, 2013.  And there is no dispute that Tilton’s 
resignation based on injury had a “permanent adverse impact on [Tilton]’s 
employment.”  Herrera, 633 N.W.2d at 288.  Accordingly, we find substantial 
evidence supports a discovery rule date of April 15, 2013.   
C. Cause/Aggravation of Injuries and Disability Status 
 
Heinz and Liberty next argue that substantial evidence did not support the 
Commissioner’s determination that Tilton’s low back and mental conditions are 
causally related to and permanently aggravated by her employment with Heinz.  
To support their insufficient evidence argument, Heinz and Liberty primarily focus 
establishing that Tilton’s complaints relating to her work injuries were not credible.  
They argue “the opinions of Dr. Mathew, Dr. Bradley and Dr. Hines were solely 
contingent upon [Tilton]’s subjective complaints, which should not be believed 
given her lack of credibility.”  But this is not a de novo review, and, as we already 
confirmed, the Commissioner found Tilton to be credible.  Tilton provided extensive 
evidence of the Clean As You Go position’s extreme physical demands.  Her safety 
manager confirmed that “what [Tilton] stated was very representative of what a day 
would be.”   
 
And we are persuaded that the expert testimony of three doctors provided 
the Commissioner with substantial evidence in support of her determination about 
the cause and subsequent aggravation of Tilton’s conditions.  See Cedar Rapids 
Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 845 (Iowa 2011) (“Medical causation 
15 of 19

 
16 
‘is essentially within the domain of expert testimony’” and “the determination of 
whether to accept or reject an expert opinion is within the ‘peculiar province’ of the 
commissioner.” (citations omitted)). 
 
Lastly, Heinz and Liberty claim that Tilton’s failure to seek other employment 
indicates that her resignation was voluntary and that her injuries are not permanent 
and total.  We fail to see how that would be damaging to Tilton on whether she is 
permanently disabled—there would be little reason for her to seek employment if 
her doctor did, in fact, opine that she is totally disabled.  And the Commissioner 
did not err by deferring to the opinion of three doctors who have recently evaluated 
Tilton over that of Dr. Abernathey who has not evaluated Tilton since 2005—many 
years before her injuries became permanent. 
 
We hold that substantial evidence supports the Commissioner’s findings 
relating to the causes, aggravations, and status of Tilton’s injuries. 
D. Penalty Benefits  
 
Under Iowa Code section 86.13 (2001), a delay in commencement of 
benefits without reasonable or probable cause or excuse results in an award of 
penalty benefits, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were 
unreasonably delayed or denied.   
 
Heinz and Liberty assert that the 2001 version of section 86.13 does not 
require them to have conducted a reasonable investigation into Tilton’s 
investigation claim.  But the then-effective language did require them to have 
“reasonable or probable cause or excuse” for delays in commencement or 
termination of benefits.  Id.  “A reasonable cause or excuse exists if either (1) the 
delay was necessary for the insurer to investigate the claim or (2) the employer 
16 of 19

 
17 
had a reasonable basis to contest the employee’s entitlement to benefits.  A 
‘reasonable basis’ for denial of the claim exists if the claim is ‘fairly debatable.’”  
Christensen v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 260 (Iowa 1996).  “Whether 
the issue was fairly debatable turns on whether there was a disputed factual issue 
that, if resolved in favor of the employer, would have supported the employer's 
denial of compensability.”  Gilbert v. USF Holland, Inc., 637 N.W.2d 194, 199 (Iowa 
2001).   
 
Heinz and Liberty argue that the previous 2016, 2018, and 2021 Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Deputy Commissioner decisions provide a reasonable 
basis for their delay of benefits to Tilton.  But Liberty first officially denied Tilton’s 
claim on August 28, 2014.  And Liberty falsely told Tilton’s counsel on October 17, 
2013, that Liberty had “nothing to show an injury at work occurred,” and that any 
such injury had not been reported to Heinz.  Yet Tilton formally provided Heinz 
notice of a work injury in May 2013, and on September 10, 2013, Dr. Mathew 
provided Liberty with a report stating, “I do believe the patient’s current low back, 
hip pain, DID, sacroiliitis and trochanteric bursitis is a condition due to work-related 
injury to a reasonable degree of medical certainty.”  This was a report that the 
Liberty case manager had expressly requested.  Then, after waiting nearly one 
year, Liberty finally sought the opinion of Dr. Abernathey and stacked the deck 
when obtaining such opinion.  Dr. Abernathey did not evaluate Tilton during that 
review, had not seen Tilton since 2005, was not provided with Dr. Mathew’s report, 
and was provided with an inaccurate job description for the Clean As You Go 
position.   
17 of 19

 
18 
 
Liberty’s delay after receiving a medical opinion supporting Tilton’s 
entitlement to benefits, conveyance of false information, and failure to be 
transparent with Tilton, her counsel, and Dr. Abernathy, collectively provided 
substantial evidence for the Commissioner’s determination that Tilton was entitled 
to penalty benefits.   
IV. 
Conclusion 
 
The Commissioner committed no errors of law, and her factual findings and 
determinations were supported by substantial evidence.  In the words of the district 
court, Heinz and Liberty “request [our] court to use its own judgment to replace the 
Commissioner’s credibility findings and the applicable discovery date.  On judicial 
review, [our] court is concerned with substantial evidence and errors of law.”  
Accordingly, we affirm.   
AFFIRMED.   
18 of 19

State of Iowa Courts
Case Number
Case Title
24-0236
HJ Heinz Company v. Tilton
Electronically signed on 2024-12-18 08:10:50
19 of 19
