Case Number: 21004397.01
Case Title:  MILIAN, DAVID V. YOUNGLOVE CONSTRUCTION LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Milian David-21004397.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DAVID MILIAN, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
  File No. 21004397.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
YOUNGLOVE CONSTRUCTION, LLC,   : 
         ARBITRATION DECISION  
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
TRAVELERS INDEMNITY CO. OF CT,   : 
 
 
  : 
        Head Note Nos.:  1804, 3003 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Claimant, David Milian, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Younglove Construction, LLC, (Younglove), employer, and 
Travelers Indemnity Company of Connecticut, insurer, both as defendants.  This matter 
was heard on August 29, 2023, with a final submission date of October 23, 2023.   
 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 11 and the testimony 
of claimant. 
STIPULATIONS 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
1. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits. 
 
2. Rate. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Mar-04  15:08:11     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MILIAN V. YOUNGLOVE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 2 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
Claimant was 61 years old at the time of hearing.  Claimant was born in Mexico.  
Claimant went to school from the time he was six until he was 12.  Claimant testified he 
has limited reading, writing and math skills.  (Hearing Transcript, pages 8-12) 
 
Claimant began employment helping his father make pottery.  When he was 21, 
claimant came to the United States.  Between the ages of 21 through 24, claimant 
worked 6-7 months in the United States, and then returned to Mexico.  During this time, 
claimant worked mostly on farms.  Claimant also did some factory work.  (Tr., pp. 12-17) 
 
In February 1985 claimant began working for Younglove.  Claimant initially 
worked in Texas and Mississippi.  The work claimant did with Younglove required 
claimant to travel throughout the United States.  Claimant had worked in Arkansas, 
Illinois, Georgia, Alabama, North Dakota, South Dakota, Washington, Montana, North 
Carolina, South Carolina, and Iowa.  (Tr., pp. 17-23) 
 
Claimant’s job duties with Younglove included, but were not limited to, building 
concrete forms, laying rebar, pouring concrete, carpentry and welding.  Claimant 
testified the work at Younglove was very physical.  (Tr., pp. 21-24) 
 
Claimant applied for U.S. citizenship and eventually became a U.S. citizen.  (Tr., 
p. 21) 
 
Claimant began at $5.00 per hour with Younglove.  At the time of injury, claimant 
was earning $25.50 per hour.  (Tr., pp. 24-25) 
 
Claimant testified he got per diem with Younglove, as his employer required him 
to travel.  Claimant initially testified, “I was given like maybe 30 or 40 something on per 
diem.  Something like that.  I don’t remember.”  (Tr., p. 25)  He later testified, “Okay, 
then $64.  Like I said, it wasn’t –- I wasn’t sure on that.”  Id. 
 
After his attorney told claimant records suggested claimant got between $320.00 
to $384.00 per week in per diem, claimant agreed.  Claimant also agreed he might have 
an extra $150.00 per week after paying rent.  (Tr., pp. 26-27)  Claimant testified he 
thought his rent, for the last 5-10 years he worked for Younglove, was around $900.00 
per month.  (Tr., p. 26)  He also testified his rent was $400.00 per month the year prior 
to his accident.  (Tr., p. 28) 
 
Claimant appeared to testify he always got per diem as he was always traveling.  
He testified he got per diem if he was going to stay in a motel or renting.  (Tr., pp. 49-
51)  Claimant had no receipts of how much he paid for rent.  He testified the per diem 
did not cover meal expenses.  (Tr., pp. 51-52) 
 
During testimony, claimant’s counsel indicated Exhibit 5 showed claimant was 
getting $64.00 per day in per diem.  (Tr., p. 25) 

MILIAN V. YOUNGLOVE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 3 
 
 
The bulk of Exhibit 5 is copies of documents titled “Check Activity Report With 
Detail.”  One of the columns in the Check Activity Report is titled “Taxable Subsist.”  
These records appear to show that for the pay periods between October 18, 2020, 
through March 21, 2021, claimant was paid “taxable subsist” of amounts between 
$192.00 to $384.00.  (Joint Exhibit 5, pages 50-54) 
 
On March 26, 2021, claimant was in Storm Lake working on a flat roof.  Claimant 
stepped on a foam insert covering a hole.  Claimant testified he fell approximately 30 
feet to concrete.  (Tr., pp. 31-34; JE 1, p. 8) 
 
Claimant initially was taken to Buena Vista Regional Medical Center.  (JE 1, p. 8)  
He was later transferred to Iowa Methodist Hospital in Des Moines.  Claimant had 
multiple diagnoses at that time including, but not limited to, multiple closed fractures of 
the pelvis, traumatic retroperitoneal hematoma, acute blood loss anemia, multiple 
fractures of the ribs, pneumothorax on the right, spleen laceration, fracture of the shaft 
of the right humerus, closed fracture of the acromial end of the left clavicle, fracture of 
the fourth lumbar vertebra, hemorrhagic shock, acute respiratory failure with hypoxia 
and hypercapnia.  Claimant was also initially put on assisted ventilation.  (JE 1, p. 7)   
 
Claimant’s injuries resulted in multiple surgeries.  On March 26, 2021, claimant 
underwent an angioembolization of pelvic bleeding.  On March 28, 2021, claimant 
underwent open reduction and internal fixation of the right humeral shaft fracture and 
open reduction and internal fixation of the right olecranon fracture.  On March 31, 2021, 
claimant underwent open reduction and internal fixation of the right acetabular fracture, 
closed reduction and percutaneous screw fixation of the left sacral fracture, and fixation 
of an anterior pelvic fracture.  On April 6, 2021, claimant underwent surgery for open 
reduction and internal fixation of a left clavicle fracture.  (JE 1, p. 8) 
 
Claimant was discharged from Iowa Methodist on April 12, 2021.  (JE 1, p. 11)  
Because of his multiple injuries, claimant was transferred to the Shepherd Center 
Multispecialty Clinic (Shepherd) for physical therapy and rehabilitation.  (JE 2; Tr., p. 36)  
Claimant was ultimately discharged from Shepherd on July 14, 2021.  After his release, 
he stayed with his son for a few months due to his condition.  (Tr., p. 35) 
 
After being discharged from Shepherd, claimant underwent a right shoulder 
surgery on November 4, 2021.  (JE 7, p. 72)  On April 4, 2022, he had a right reverse 
total shoulder arthroplasty.  (JE 7, p. 83) 
 
On July 27, 2022, claimant was evaluated by Lee Kelley, M.D., at Peachtree 
Orthopedics in Peachtree, Georgia.  Claimant was allowed to return to work at light 
duty.  He was limited to lifting, pushing and pulling up to 15 pounds, no repetitive 
bending, alternate sitting and standing as needed.  (JE 3, p. 31) 
 
Claimant saw Walter McClelland, M.D., on October 16, 2022.  Claimant was 
found to be at maximum medical improvement (MMI) for his right reverse total shoulder 
arthroplasty.  He was returned to work at light duty.  He was restricted on the right upper 
extremity to underhand lifting up to 25 pounds with shoulder level lifting up to 10 

MILIAN V. YOUNGLOVE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 4 
 
pounds.  Dr. McClelland felt claimant had a 32 percent permanent impairment to the 
right upper extremity and a 2 percent permanent impairment to the left.  (JE 3, p. 33) 
 
In a November 14, 2022 visit, claimant saw Allen McDonald, M.D.  Dr. McDonald 
restricted claimant to no climbing, crawling or prolonged walking or standing.  (JE 3, p. 
34) 
 
On November 21, 2022, Dr. Kelley limited claimant to pulling, pushing and lifting 
up to 15 pounds, no bending, with alternate sitting and standing.  (JE 3, pp. 36-37) 
 
In a July 3, 2023 report, Sunil Bansal, M.D., gave his opinions of claimant’s 
condition following an independent medical evaluation (IME).  Claimant had pain in the 
right shoulder and arm.  He had limited strength and range of motion of his right upper 
extremity.  Claimant had occasional numbness and tingling in the right hand.  Claimant 
had trouble with balance.  Claimant had some difficulty with cognitive ability and had 
gone to speech and cognitive therapy.  Claimant had back pain.  (JE 7, p. 79) 
 
Dr. Bansal found that claimant had a 23 percent permanent impairment to the 
body as a whole for his low back.  He found that claimant had a 16 percent permanent 
impairment to the right shoulder, converting to a 10 percent permanent impairment to 
the body as a whole.  He found claimant had a 5 percent permanent impairment to the 
right elbow, converting to a 3 percent permanent impairment to the body as a whole.  
He also found that claimant had a 5 percent permanent impairment to the left pelvic and 
the right pelvic area each.  He found claimant’s combined permanent impairment ratings 
resulted in a 39 percent permanent impairment to the body as a whole.  (JE 7, p. 81) 
 
Dr. Bansal limited claimant to lifting no more than 30 pounds, no overhead lifting 
on the right, no kneeling or squatting, no frequent bending or twisting, and no prolonged 
sitting or walking more than 1 hour.  (JE 7, p. 81) 
 
In an addendum report dated July 18, 2023, Dr. Bansal indicated he had 
reviewed records concerning claimant’s right shoulder surgeries.  He found that 
claimant had a 36 percent permanent impairment to the right upper extremity due to the 
shoulder replacement, converting to a 22 percent permanent impairment to the body as 
a whole.  Based on the combined values chart in the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, the additional impairment of the shoulder results in 
a 48 percent permanent impairment to the body as a whole (23 percent + 22 percent + 
3 percent + 5 percent + 5 percent). 
 
In a July 21, 2023 report, Barbara Laughlin, M.A., gave her opinion of claimant’s 
vocational opportunities following an interview with claimant and a review of his records.  
Utilizing Dr. Bansal’s restrictions, Ms. Laughlin found that claimant had 100 percent 
occupational loss of all skilled and semi-skilled occupations.  Claimant had a 96.6 
percent occupational loss with unskilled occupations.  (JE 8, p. 103) 
 
Using the restrictions of Dr. Kelley, Ms. Laughlin found claimant had 100 percent 
loss of all semi-skilled and skilled occupations.  He had a 95.1 percent loss of all 

MILIAN V. YOUNGLOVE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 5 
 
unskilled jobs.  (JE 8, p. 104)  Using the restrictions given by Dr. McDonald and Dr. 
McClelland, claimant had similar occupational losses of semi-skilled, skilled, and 
unskilled occupations.  (JE 8, p. 105)  
 
Ms. Laughlin performed a geographic labor survey for claimant within a 50-mile 
radius of his residency in Calhoun, Georgia.  Using the restrictions given by all the 
doctors, Ms. Laughlin was unable to find any jobs available to claimant.  (JE 8, pp. 105-
106) 
 
Ms. Laughlin opined that claimant would require accommodation from any future 
employer; without those accommodations she opined that claimant would not be able to 
find any jobs of quality, quantity or dependability.  (JE 8, p. 107) 
 
Claimant testified he has continued pain in his hips and pelvis and lower back.  
He said he deals with pain in his pelvis by periodically laying down.  (Tr., pp. 38-39)  
Claimant said he lays down approximately every 2 hours every day for pain.  (Tr., pp. 
48-49)  Claimant said he has pain in his elbow and right shoulder.  (Tr., p. 42)  He said 
he can stand for approximately 10-15 minutes before he has to sit.  (Tr., p. 43)  He said 
he can sit for approximately 1 hour before he has to stand or move.  (Tr., p. 44)  
Claimant testified he did not believe he could do any of his jobs at Younglove given his 
restrictions and condition.  (Tr., p. 44) 
 
Claimant testified he applied for, and was granted, Social Security disability 
benefits.  (Tr., pp. 42-43) 
 
Claimant testified he has not looked for work since being injured at Younglove.  
(Tr., p. 64) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The first issue to be determined is the extent of claimant’s entitlement to 
permanent partial disability benefits.   
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3). 
 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained. Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows: "It is therefore plain that the 
Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of 
the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 

MILIAN V. YOUNGLOVE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 6 
 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period. Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole. Section 85.34. 
An employer’s failure to offer work is one element in assessing whether industrial 
disability should be awarded.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 
1980) 
Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness.  Permanent total 
disability occurs where the injury wholly disables the employee from performing work 
that the employee's experience, training, education, intelligence, and physical capacities 
would otherwise permit the employee to perform.  See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 
288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 
N.W. 899 (1935). 
A finding that claimant could perform some work despite claimant's physical and 
educational limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total disability, 
however.  See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File No. 661698 (App. October 1987); 
Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 134 (App. 
May 1982). 
In Guyton v. Irving Jensen Co., 373 N.W.2d 101 (Iowa 1985), the Iowa court 
formally adopted the “odd-lot doctrine.”  Under that doctrine a worker becomes an 
odd-lot employee when an injury makes the worker incapable of obtaining employment 
in any well-known branch of the labor market.  An odd-lot worker is thus totally disabled 
if the only services the worker can perform are “so limited in quality, dependability, or 
quantity that a reasonably stable market for them does not exist.”  Id., at 105. 
Under the odd-lot doctrine, the burden of persuasion on the issue of industrial 
disability always remains with the worker.  Nevertheless, when a worker makes a prima 
facie case of total disability by producing substantial evidence that the worker is not 
employable in the competitive labor market, the burden to produce evidence showing 
availability of suitable employment shifts to the employer.  If the employer fails to 
produce such evidence and the trier of facts finds the worker does fall in the odd-lot 
category, the worker is entitled to a finding of total disability.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 
106.  Factors to be considered in determining whether a worker is an odd-lot employee 
include the worker’s reasonable but unsuccessful effort to find steady employment, 
vocational or other expert evidence demonstrating suitable work is not available for the 
worker, the extent of the worker’s physical impairment, intelligence, education, age, 
training, and potential for retraining.  No factor is necessarily dispositive on the issue.  
Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258 (Iowa 1995).  Even under the 
odd-lot doctrine, the trier of fact is free to determine the weight and credibility of 

MILIAN V. YOUNGLOVE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 7 
 
evidence in determining whether the worker’s burden of persuasion has been carried, 
and only in an exceptional case would evidence be sufficiently strong as to compel a 
finding of total disability as a matter of law.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 106. 
Claimant was 61 years old at the time of hearing.  He has a sixth grade 
education.  Most of his work life has been in construction work.  As noted, claimant had 
injuries on the job that included, but were not limited to, multiple fractures of the pelvis, 
fractures of his ribs, a collapsed right lung, acute blood loss anemia, fracture of the right 
humerus, fractures of the acromial end of the left clavicle, fractures of the fourth lumbar 
vertebra.  Claimant was on mechanically assisted ventilation following his injuries.  (JE 
1, p. 8)  As noted above, claimant also had numerous surgeries, which included, but 
were not limited to, fixation of a right humeral shaft fracture, fixation of a right olecranon 
fracture, fixation of a left sacral fracture, fixation of a left clavicle fracture, and a right 
reverse total shoulder arthroplasty. 
Dr. Bansal found claimant had a 48 percent combined permanent impairment.  
Dr. Bansal’s rating is the most recent rating of his numerous permanent impairments.  
Dr. Bansal’s rating takes into consideration all of claimant’s impairments.  Given this 
record, it is found that Dr. Bansal’s rating for permanent impairment is the most 
convincing.   
Dr. Bansal found claimant had a 30-pound lifting restriction, with no lifting 
overhead on the right.  He also limited claimant to no kneeling or squatting.  (JE 7)  Dr. 
McClelland limited claimant to a 25-pound underhand lift.  Dr. Kelley limited claimant to 
pushing, pulling and lifting no more than 15 pounds, no repetitive bending, and alternate 
standing and sitting as needed.  Dr. McDonald limited claimant to no climbing, no 
crawling, no prolonged walking or standing.   
Claimant underwent a vocational assessment with Ms. Laughlin.  She found that 
using the restrictions by Dr. Bansal, claimant had a 96.6 percent to 100 percent loss of 
access to the labor market.  She made similar findings using permanent restrictions 
given by Dr. Kelley, Dr. McDonald, and Dr. McClelland. 
Given all of the facts as detailed above, claimant has made a prima facie case of 
total disability.  The burden now shifts to the employer to produce evidence of showing 
availability of suitable employment. 
Defendants offered no evidence of any job claimant could perform.  No expert for 
defendants has opined claimant was capable of returning to work.  It is true that 
claimant testified he has not looked for work since his numerous injuries following his 
accident at Younglove.  However, that evidence alone is not sufficient enough, in this 
case, of evidence of availability of suitable employment for claimant. 
Claimant has made a prima facie showing of total disability.  Defendants have 
failed to carry their burden of proof showing availability of suitable employment.  Given 
this record, claimant has carried his burden of proof he is an odd-lot employee.  
Assuming for argument’s sake that claimant is not considered an odd-lot employee, 

MILIAN V. YOUNGLOVE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 8 
 
claimant is still considered permanently and totally disabled applying factors for 
industrial disability.   
The next issue to be determined is rate.   
Section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the 
employee at the time of the injury. The section defines weekly earnings as the gross 
salary, wages, or earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the 
employee worked the customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee 
was injured as the employer regularly required for the work or employment. The various 
subsections of section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings 
depending upon the type of earnings and employment. 
If the employee is paid on a daily or hourly basis or by output, weekly earnings 
are computed by dividing by 13 the earnings over the 13-week period immediately 
preceding the injury. Any week that does not fairly reflect the employee’s customary 
earnings is excluded, however. Section 85.36(6). 
Claimant contends he was paid a weekly per diem by Younglove.  He argues that 
he only used a portion of that per diem for housing or rent.  Claimant contends that the 
remainder of the per diem should be used in calculating rate. 
In Premium Transportation Staffing, Inc. v. Bowers, No. 15-0378 (Iowa Court of 
Appeals, November 14, 2015), unpublished 872 N.W.2d 199 (table), the Iowa Court of 
Appeals allowed a portion of claimant’s per diem amount to be added to claimant’s 
average weekly wages to determine rate.  In Bowers, claimant received $52.00 per day 
in per diem.  Claimant testified he spent only $12.00 per day for food and expenses and 
kept the rest.  The deputy workers’ compensation commissioner in Bowers found that 
the $40.00 per week that claimant kept should be used in calculating the weekly rate.  
The Iowa Court of Appeals affirmed the deputy commissioner’s decision, finding the 
$40.00 per diem should be used in calculating rate.   
There are numerous problems in considering a portion of claimant’s per diem in 
calculating his rate in this case. 
At hearing, claimant initially testified he received between $30.00 to $40.00 a day 
in per diem.  (Tr., p. 25)  After prompting by his attorney, claimant testified he made 
$64.00 a day in per diem.  (Tr., p. 25)  Claimant testified he paid $900.00 in rent the last 
few years he worked for Younglove.  (Tr., p. 26)  He also testified that the year before 
his accident he paid $400.00 a month in rent. (Tr., p. 28) 
Claimant testified he received between $320.00 and $384.00 per week in per 
diem.  (Tr., p. 26)  Claimant’s counsel relies on records filed in Exhibit 5 to support that 
contention.  Joint Exhibit 5, pages 50-54, are records titled “Check Activity Report With 
Detail.”  In the Check Activity Report there is a column captioned “Taxable Subsist.”  
There is no testimony or evidence in the record indicating that the column captioned 
“Taxable Subsist” represents per diem that claimant received. 

MILIAN V. YOUNGLOVE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 9 
 
Claimant’s testimony regarding his per diem amount is ambiguous.  His 
testimony regarding the rent he paid is unclear.  There is no evidence in the record that 
the column in the Check Activity Report titled “Taxable Subsist” were amounts paid to 
claimant for per diem.  Claimant testified his per diem was for rent only, and did not 
include meals.  Claimant has no documentation or receipts of any kind regarding rent he 
paid.  Given this record, claimant has failed to carry his burden of proof a portion of his 
alleged per diem with Younglove should be used in calculating claimant’s rate. 
The parties agreed in the hearing report that absent the alleged per diem, 
claimant’s gross earnings were $1,191.14 per week.  Claimant was single with one 
exemption.  Claimant’s rate is $719.31 per week. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
That defendants shall pay claimant permanent and total disability benefits 
commencing on November 22, 2022, at the rate of seven hundred nineteen and 31/100 
dollars ($719.31) per week. 
That defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.  
That defendants shall be given credit for benefits previously paid. 
That defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
under Rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
That defendants shall pay costs. 
Signed and filed this _4TH _ day of March, 2024. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Nicholas Pothitakis (via WCES) 
 
Timothy Clausen (via WCES) 
 
     JAMES F. CHRISTENSON 
          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

MILIAN V. YOUNGLOVE CONSTRUCTION, LLC 
Page 10 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
  
