Case Number: 24700629.01
Case Title:  HILL, JR., MELVIN V. MN89, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Hill Melvin-24700629.01m.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
MELVIN HILL, JR., 
No. 24700629.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
MN89, INC., 
ALTERNATE CARE DECISION 
 
Employer, 
ZURICH AMERICAN INSURANCE 
COMPANY, 
Headnote:  2701 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
I.  
STATEMEN T OF TH E C ASE . 
On August 7, 2024, Melvin Hill, Jr. applied for alternate care under Iowa Code 
section 85.27 and Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.48. The defendants, employer 
MN89, Inc. (MN89) and insurance carrier Zurich American Insurance Company (Zurich), 
did not file an answer and no attorney appeared on their behalf. The agency assigned 
the case a number and issued an order scheduling a telephone alternate care hearing 
on August 20, 2024. 
The undersigned presided over a telephone alternate care hearing on August 20, 
2024, which was recorded. The audio recording constitutes the official record of the 
proceeding under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.48(12). Hill participated 
personally and through attorney Bryant A. Engbers. The defendants did not participate.  
II.  
ISSU E . 
The issue under consideration is whether Hill is entitled to alternate care in the 
form of authorization of the ultrasound for which he was referred and medication during 
his appointment at PeachTree Immediate Care. 
III .  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T . 
The evidentiary record consists of: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Aug-20  12:31:50     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HILL V. MN89, INC. 
Page 2 
 
 Claimant’s Exhibit 11; and 
 Hearing testimony by Hill. 
After careful consideration of the evidence the undersigned enters the following findings 
of fact. 
Hill sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of his employment with 
MN89 on July 31, 2024, as a commercial truck driver. Hill was driving a load on a 
highway, when a deer darted out in front of his vehicle and he struck the deer. Hill drove 
to a Love’s gas station, where he called local law enforcement to make an accident 
report and notified MN89 maintenance of the collision. 
MN89 advised Hill to complete his delivery, which he did. He then drove back to 
Georgia. While refueling, he contacted MN89 and asked about receiving care for an 
injury caused by the crash. MN89 directed him to make a workers’ compensation claim 
with Zurich. Hill did so and Zurich sent him a list of authorized care providers. (Ex. 1, pp. 
6–7)  
Hill chose PeachTree Immediate Care, a provider listed on the document Zurich 
sent him, on August 18, 2024. PeachTree referred him for an ultrasound of his groin 
and medications. The medical documentation noted that Hill would work with Zurich “to 
obtain coverage for meds and ortho referral.” (Testimony; Ex. 1, pp. 6–9) 
The defendants did not authorize the ultrasound or medication. Hill obtained 
representation of counsel. Claimant’s counsel communicated with Zurich regarding the 
care. Zurich took the position that Hill is not covered by a workers’ compensation policy. 
According to correspondence Zurich sent to claimant’s counsel, the defendants believe 
Hill is covered by trucker’s occupational accident benefits because he was a self-
employed contractor at the time of the injury. Zurich requested that Hill voluntarily 
dismiss his petition, but claimant’s counsel refused and explained his reasoning as to 
why in a reply email. (Ex. 1, pp. 1–5)  
The defendants did not have an attorney make an appearance on their behalf in 
this case. Nor did the defendants file an answer. The defendants have not asserted 
their position with respect to liability in a filing with the agency despite knowledge of the 
pending case. 
IV.  
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW. 
Iowa Code section 85.27 requires an employer to furnish care related to an 
employee’s a work injury. Such care “must be offered promptly and be reasonably 
                                                 
1 Hill attached intended exhibits to his petition, a common practice in alternate care cases before 
the agency. Claimant’s counsel and Zurich engaged in communication about the care between the 
petition’s date of filing and the date of hearing, so Hill moved to amend his exhibits to include such 
correspondence. The undersigned approved the motion and admitted the amended Claimant’s Exhibit 1 
at hearing. 

HILL V. MN89, INC. 
Page 3 
 
suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.” Iowa Code 
§ 85.27(4). The legislature saw fit to pair this responsibility with the right to choose care. 
Id.; see also Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 436 (Iowa 1997). 
“If the employer chooses the care, the employer shall hold the employee harmless for 
the cost of care until the employer notifies the employee that the employer is no longer 
authorizing all or any part of the care and the reason for the change in authorization.” 
Id.; Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, 771 (Iowa 2016). 
However, an employer’s right to choose care is not absolute under the statute. 
See id.; Ramirez-Trujillo, 878 N.W.2d at 769. An employee dissatisfied with employer-
furnished care (or lack thereof) has the right to seek an alternative. See id.; see also 
Iowa Admin. Code r. 876—4.48. A dissatisfied employee must first share the 
employee’s discontent with the employer. Id.; Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. 
Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 204 (Iowa 2010). If the parties cannot reach an agreement on 
care, the employee may apply to the commissioner for alternate care. Id.; see also Iowa 
Admin. Code r. 876—4.48. And after an informal hearing, “the commissioner may, upon 
. . . reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care.” Id. 
The dispositive question in an alternate care case is whether the employer-
furnished care is reasonable. Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 124 (Iowa 
1995). “Reasonableness, of course, is a question of fact.” Reynolds, 562 at 436 (citing 
Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123). As the party seeking relief in the form of alternate care, the 
employee bears the burden of proving that the authorized care in question is 
unreasonable. Id. Because “the employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the 
question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” an injured employee’s dissatisfaction 
with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough to satisfy the employee’s 
burden of proof. Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124. 
Hill contacted Zurich and a representative provided him a list of authorized 
providers of care for his injury. After Hill received care from one such provider, the 
defendants refused to act on the referral for an ultrasound and prescription of 
medication, which caused Hill to hire an attorney. A representative of Zurich informed 
claimant’s counsel by email after the petition that initiated this case was filed that it is 
the position of the defendants that Hill was a contractor and not an employee at the time 
of the injury and asked that Hill dismiss his petition. In reply, claimant’s counsel 
informed Zurich Hill would not dismiss his petition and explained why.  
Under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.48(8), “After being served with an 
application for alternate care, the employer shall file an appearance of answer as soon 
as practicable before the time of the hearing.” And rule 876—4.48(6) provides, 
“Application cannot be filed under this rule if the liability of the employer is an issue. If 
an application is filed where the liability of the employer is an issue, the application will 
be dismissed without prejudice. (Petitions for alternate care where liability of the 
employer is an issue should be filed pursuant to rule 876—4.1.[)]” Despite knowing of 
the pending alternate care case before this agency, the defendants did not have an 
attorney make an appearance or file an answer pursuant to agency rules. The 
defendants’ failure to file an answer that places liability in dispute because of their belief 

HILL V. MN89, INC. 
Page 4 
 
that he was an independent contractor and not an employee under Iowa law at the time 
of the injury precludes dismissal without prejudice of this case. 
Hill sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of his employment with 
MN89. Zurich provided Hill a list of authorized care providers for the injury. Hill chose 
PeachTree, a clinic on the list. At the PeachTree examination, he was referred for an 
ultrasound and prescribed medication. The refusal to authorize the care recommended 
by an authorized provider is unreasonable under these circumstances. 
V. 
OR D ER . 
Under the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) The application for alternate care is GRANTED. 
 
2) The defendants shall promptly authorize the: 
 
a) Medication prescribed during the August 18, 2024 examination at 
PeachTree; and 
b) Ultrasound for which Hill was referred during the August 18, 2024 
examination at PeachTree. 
The Iowa workers’ compensation commissioner issued an order delegating 
authority to deputy workers’ compensation commissioners, such as the undersigned, to 
issue final agency decisions on applications for alternate care. That order is attached to 
the notice of hearing issued in this case. Due to the order of delegation, there is no 
intra-agency appeal of this decision to the commissioner, only judicial review in an 
appropriate district court under the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Iowa Code 
chapter 17A.  
Signed and filed this 20th day of August, 2024. 
 
 
 
BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
Served via the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES): 
Bryant A. Engbers, Attorney for Claimant 
Nicholas Shaull, Attorney for Claimant 

HILL V. MN89, INC. 
Page 5 
 
Served via certified U.S. Mail, return receipt requested: 
Attn: Work Comp Claims 
MN89, Inc. 
10825 S. Central Avenue 
Oak Lawn, IL 60453-5006 
 
Attn: Work Comp Claims 
Zurich American Insurance Company 
PO Box 968041 
Schaumburg, IL 60196-8041 
