Case Number: 5053398
Case Title:  PRUISMANN, RICKY V. BRAD'S TANK LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Court of Appeals
Source:      Pruissman, Rick-5053398.Court of Appeals Decision.pdf
========================================================================

IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF IOWA 
 
No. 19-1012 
Filed August 5, 2020 
 
 
RICK PRUISMANN, 
 
Plaintiff-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
IOWA TANKLINES INC. and ZURICH AMERICAN INSURANCE COMPANY, 
 
Defendants-Appellants. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Hamilton County, Kurt L. Wilke, 
Judge. 
 
 
An employer and its insurance company appeal the ruling of the district 
court on judicial review of the workers’ compensation commissioner’s decision.  
REVERSED. 
 
 
 
Valerie A. Foote of Smith Mills Schrock Blades Monthei, P.C., West Des 
Moines, for appellants. 
 
Jerry L. Schnurr III of Schnurr Law Firm, P.C., Fort Dodge, for appellee. 
 
 
 
Considered by Bower, C.J., and Doyle and Schumacher, JJ.

 
2
BOWER, Chief Judge. 
 
Iowa Tanklines, Inc., and its insurance company, Zurich American 
Insurance Company,1 appeal the ruling of the district court on judicial review, which 
reversed the workers’ compensation commissioner’s decision on Tanklines’s 
employee Rick Pruismann’s workers’ compensation claim.  The commissioner 
concluded Pruismann suffered a work-related injury and sustained a forty-five 
percent industrial disability as a result.  The commissioner found Pruismann had 
“failed to carry his burden of proof that he is permanently and totally disabled as a 
result of the work injury under either an industrial disability analysis or under an 
odd-lot analysis.”  Because there is substantial evidence in the record to support 
the commissioner’s factual findings and his industrial disability conclusion is not 
irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable, we reverse the district court’s ruling to 
the contrary and remand for dismissal of the petition for judicial review.   
I. Background Facts and Proceedings.  
 
Pruismann was employed by Tanklines in various capacities from 1990 to 
2015, when he was laid off due to “lack of work.”  For the last twenty years 
Pruismann worked as a mechanic.  The employer’s job description for the position 
of mechanic states an employee must be able to walk, stoop, kneel, crouch, crawl, 
climb, and balance at heights, frequently lift and/or move ten pounds, and 
occasionally lift and/or move more than 100 pounds.  The employee must have full 
range of body motion and be able to access all areas of trucks and trailers.  
                                            
1 For ease of reference, we will refer to the appellants collective as Tanklines or 
employer. 

 
3
 
On May 3, 2007, a boom from a forklift crushed Pruismann’s right ankle at 
work.  Pruismann underwent several surgeries.  In a letter dated April 16, 2013, 
Pruismann’s orthopedic surgeon, Dr. David Inda, determined Pruismann suffered 
a sixteen percent permanent impairment to the right lower extremity as a result of 
the ankle injury.   
 
On November 19, 2014, Pruismann injured his back while putting a power 
takeoff motor on the back of a truck.  Pruismann immediately reported the incident 
and went home without finishing his shift.   
 
On April 10, Pruismann’s physical therapist noted that Pruismann was “no 
longer . . . limited by pain” and had “full lumbar extension.”  The therapist noted 
Pruismann had shown an improved gait and a lack of pain-related limitation in 
motion testing.  The therapist recommended two to three additional weeks of 
physical therapy, with two sessions per week.   
 
On April 15, Pruismann’s surgeon, Dr. Beck, noted his improvement.  Dr. 
Beck released Pruismann to return to regular work duties for half-day shifts on April 
27.  He recommended continued physical therapy and another evaluation in four 
weeks.  
 
Pruismann attended his final authorized session of physical therapy on April 
28.  At that time, he reported seventy-five percent improvement.  The therapist noted 
Pruismann had resumed work on light duty and had not been performing “all the 
tasks at work.”  Pruismann explained he was “sometimes” bothered by symptoms 
at work, especially when working under a vehicle.  During the session, Pruismann 
lifted thirty-five pounds from floor to waist.  He also carried thirty-five pounds up and 
down stairs five times.  At the conclusion of the session, the therapist opined 

 
4
Pruismann had made “large improvements” and was “returning to function at work.”  
The therapist recommended two additional sessions of physical therapy in order to 
meet a “very work-relevant” performance goal of lifting tasks with fifty pounds of 
weight.  
 
Pruismann returned to Dr. Beck on May 11.  Dr. Beck opined Pruismann had 
achieved maximum medical improvement (MMI).  He released Pruismann to return 
to work at full duty on May 12.  Dr. Beck opined Pruismann sustained an eight 
percent whole-person impairment as a result of the back injury.    
 
Tanklines began paying Pruismann permanent partial disability benefits 
coinciding with the eight percent whole-person rating issued by Dr. Beck.  Forty-four 
weeks of such benefits were paid, at a weekly rate of $325.71.  
 
On June 8, Pruismann was laid off for “lack of work.”  Pruismann filed for 
and received unemployment benefits, which required that he perform a job search.  
His unemployment job log listed six in-person contacts and notations that each 
place was not hiring.  He filed no applications with the listed contacts. 
 
On June 15, Pruismann filed an application for Social Security Disability 
(SSD) benefits, listing conditions of a right ankle fracture, herniated disc of the back, 
and early stage dementia.  He alleged an onset of disability on November 19, 2014. 
Pruismann provided details of the physical demands of his former mechanic position 
and noted the heaviest weight he lifted was fifty pounds and that he frequently lifted 
twenty-five pounds.   
 
In relation to the application for SSD benefits, Dr. Dennis Weis performed a 
residual functional capacity assessment and found Pruismann capable of lifting and 
carrying twenty pounds occasionally and ten pounds frequently; standing and 

 
5
walking six hours of an eight-hour workday; sitting six hours of an eight-hour 
workday; occasionally climbing ramps or stairs, balancing, stooping, kneeling, 
crouching or crawling; and never climbing ladders, ropes, or scaffolds.  A vocational 
assessment was made, including consideration of Pruismann’s ability to perform 
past relevant work.  It was noted Pruismann worked as a mechanic from 1995 to 
2015, a work categorized as skilled, medium physical demand level work.  The 
assessment concluded Pruismann was limited to light work by the medical examiner 
and, accordingly, could not return to mechanic work due to lifting and/or standing 
requirements.  Following review, Pruismann was found disabled for purposes of 
SSD.  
 
In July, Pruismann filed a petition for workers compensation.   
 
On September 11, Pruismann presented to board-certified occupational 
medicine physician Dr. Sunil Bansal for an independent medical examination (IME). 
Dr. Bansal authored a report containing his findings and opinions dated November 
24, 2015.  As elements of his evaluation, Dr. Bansal reviewed Pruismann’s medical 
records and performed a physical examination.  He also interviewed Pruismann.  
Pruismann complained of constant left low-back pain.  Pruismann reported he 
believed he could safely lift twenty pounds occasionally and ten pounds on a more 
frequent basis, could stand in one place for fifteen minutes before he needed to 
move about, could walk for approximately one hour before he needed to sit, could 
sit approximately one hour before becoming stiff and sore, and experienced difficulty 
with stairs and traversing uneven surfaces.  Pruismann and Dr. Bansal also 
discussed Pruismann’s prior job duties as a mechanic for Tanklines.  Dr. Bansal 
noted Pruismann’s duties required bending, twisting, lifting, and climbing onto and 

 
6
under trucks.  Dr. Bansal also noted Pruismann was required to replace heavy truck 
tires and, although an assistive machine was available, Pruismann was able to lift 
fifty to seventy-five pounds to perform this task before his work injury.  
 
In his IME report, Dr. Bansal agreed Pruismann reached MMI with respect to 
his right ankle on March 26, 2013, and with respect to his back injury on May 11, 
2015.  Dr. Bansal opined Pruismann’s right ankle injury resulted in a twenty percent 
lower-extremity impairment and eight percent whole-person impairment.  With 
respect to Pruismann’s back, Dr. Bansal agreed with Dr. Beck’s MMI date of May 
11, 2015, and opined Pruismann experienced a ten percent whole-person 
permanent impairment.  Dr. Bansal also recommended permanent restrictions 
attributable to the “right ankle/back” conditions of no lifting over twenty pounds 
occasionally and ten pounds frequently; no frequent bending, climbing, or twisting; 
and sitting, standing and walking as tolerated, specifically recommending avoidance 
of sitting or walking over sixty minutes and standing over thirty minutes.  Dr. Bansal 
opined Pruismann would ultimately require right ankle arthrodesis.  He 
recommended Pruismann receive maintenance care of his back, including 
evaluation by a pain specialist to consider various treatment modalities.  
 
Tanklines supplied Dr. Beck with a copy of Dr. Bansal’s report for review.  On 
February 24, 2016, Dr. Beck responded to the employer’s counsel’s inquiries and 
confirmed his prior opinions that Pruismann sustained permanent impairment of 
eight percent whole person and did not require permanent work restrictions.   
 
The employer retained vocational evaluator, Tom Karrow, who authored a 
vocational rehabilitation report dated March 10, 2016.  Karrow based his report upon 
Pruismann’s medical records, interrogatory answers, and deposition transcript, as 

 
7
well as information provided by the United States Department of Labor, Iowa 
Workforce Center, and local labor market information.  Karrow noted Pruismann’s 
work history included work as a mechanic, which he described as heavy, semi-
skilled work; tractor-trailer truck driver, described as medium, semi-skilled work; 
dispatcher, described as light, semi-skilled work; and heavy equipment operator.  
Karrow wrote:  
According to the medical records, Mr. Pruismann can return to work 
full duty without restrictions as determined by Dr. Beck on May 12, 
2015.  If Mr. Pruismann chooses to do so, there are currently drop-
and-hook, no-touch-load tractor-trailer truck driving positions available 
in the Webster City area.  These positions do not require the driver to 
load or unload the freight, and loads are ready for the driver to 
transport. . . .  He can also return to all of his previous occupations, 
specifically his most recent job as a mechanic which is considered 
heavy duty.  Tractor-trailer truck driving, according to the U.S. 
Department of Labor, is considered medium duty. 
 
Given Dr. Bansal’s limitations as set forth in his [IME] of 
September 11, 2015, Mr. Pruismann would be able to return to drop-
and-hook, no-touch-load tractor-trailer truck driving, except for the 
sitting restriction.  Dr. Bansal indicates Mr. Pruismann should sit, stand 
and walk as tolerated.   
 
There is a possibility that drop-and-hook, no-touch-load truck 
driving positions may be available for Mr. Pruismann that are also 
within Dr. Bansal’s limitations if those job opportunities were in his 
local area and would not require over-the-road, distance driving, 
[t]This would limit the amount of sitting that is required.  Drop-and-
hook, no-touch-load tractor-trailer truck driving is considered 
sedentary to light duty work. 
 
Karrow listed six employers in the labor market listing available opportunities and 
the average yearly pay.  Karrow also noted Pruismann could perform other jobs that 
met his skill level and physical restrictions.  Karrow opined that depending on what 
alternative work Pruismann chose, his earning capacity ranged from no loss of 
earnings to thirty-five percent loss of earnings. 

 
8
 
On March 21, Dr. Beck wrote to Pruismann’s counsel: “Because Mr. 
Pruismann has a history of back surgery it would be prudent to limit his work 
activities to infrequent stooping, kneeling, crawling, bending, or twisting.  I would 
probably limit his repetitive lifting to [fifty] pounds and only infrequently go above 
that.” 
 
On April 27, Pruismann had another IME by Dr. Charles Mooney.  Dr. 
Mooney concurred with Dr. Beck’s recommended work restrictions of lifting rarely 
exceeding fifty pounds and limiting stooping, kneeling, crawling, bending or twisting 
to an occasional basis.  He opined Pruismann demonstrated ten percent impairment 
of the whole person as a result of his November 2014 back injury. 
 
At the June 28, 2016 arbitration hearing, Pruismann testified that when he 
returned to work in May 2015, he did not perform his duties in the same manner as 
pre-injury.  Pruismann testified he worked more slowly and was more careful in his 
actions.  He also testified he received assistance from coworkers on occasion, 
particularly with moving and lifting heavy Items.  Pruismann testified he lacked full 
motion of his body and the ability to move items weighing 100 pounds.  At his 
deposition Pruismann described difficultly and increased pain with stooping, 
crawling, bending, walking, and riding in vehicles.  Pruismann acknowledged 
coworkers readily assisted each other with tasks prior to his back injury.  
 
Pruismann testified he was not warned of an impending layoff, was not 
advised of any job performance issues, and was unaware of any other employees 
being laid off at the time of his June lay off.  He acknowledged he would not 
necessarily be aware if employees were laid off from other terminals.  He also 
testified he had intended to continue working for Tanklines had he not been laid off.   

 
9
On February 7, 2017, the deputy filed an arbitration decision, finding 
Pruismann suffered a forty-five percent industrial disability, commencing on May 
12, 2015, and awarded permanent partial disability benefits and select costs.  The 
deputy concluded Pruismann failed to make a prima facie case of total disability 
and that a penalty award was not appropriate. 
Pruismann filed an intra-agency appeal to the workers’ compensation 
commissioner.  On June 8, 2018, the commissioner issued his final decision, 
noting,  
[Pruismann] asserts on appeal that the deputy commissioner erred 
in finding [he] sustained [forty-five] percent industrial disability as a 
result of the work injury.  [Pruismann] asserts the award for industrial 
disability should be increased substantially or, in the alternative, 
claimant asserts he should be awarded permanent total disability 
benefits under either an industrial disability analysis or under an odd-
lot analysis. 
 
The commissioner adopted and affirmed the deputy’s findings and “well-reasoned 
analysis,” concluding Pruismann experienced a forty-five percent industrial 
disability.  
 
Pruismann sought review of the commissioner’s industrial-disability 
determination and the agency’s rejection of his claim of total permanent disability.  
The district court concluded the commissioner’s decision “was without substantial 
evidence, and the charge that [Pruismann] is an odd-lot employee is supported by 
substantial evidence.”   
 
Tanklines appeals, contending the district court employed an incorrect 
standard of review.   

 
10 
II. Scope of Review.   
 
“Judicial review of workers’ compensation cases is governed by Iowa Code 
chapter 17A.  On our review, we determine whether we arrive at the same 
conclusion as the district court.”  Warren Props. v. Stewart, 864 N.W.2d 307, 311 
(Iowa 2015). 
III. Discussion. 
 
Whether Pruismann suffered a forty-five percent industrial disability is a 
mixed question of law and fact.  See Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 
512, 525 (Iowa 2012).  A challenge to the agency’s ultimate conclusion is a 
challenge to the agency’s application of law to facts.  See Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 
N.W.2d 213, 219 (Iowa 2006).  We review the commissioner’s findings of fact for 
substantial evidence and we “must engage in a ‘fairly intensive review of the record 
to ensure that the fact finding is itself reasonable.’”  Neal, 814 N.W.2d at 525 
(citation omitted).  But “in considering findings of industrial disability, we recognize 
that the commissioner is routinely called upon to make such assessments and has 
a special expertise in the area that is entitled to respect by a reviewing court.”  Id. 
at 527.  “Because the challenge to the agency’s industrial disability determination 
challenges the agency’s application of law to facts, we will not disrupt the agency’s 
decision unless it is ‘irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.’”  Id. at 526 (citation 
omitted). 
 
Dr. Beck released Pruismann to return to work with restrictions, supporting 
a finding that Pruismann was not precluded from returning to work.  Two IMEs 
concluded Pruismann suffered only partial permanent whole-body impairment.  
And a vocational evaluator found there were jobs Pruismann could perform and 

 
11 
opined that Pruismann’s earning capacity ranged from no loss of earnings to thirty-
five percent loss of earnings.2  
 
The district court erred in reversing the commissioner’s determination.  The 
commissioner’s findings of fact with respect to the extent of Pruismann’s industrial 
disability are supported by substantial evidence and the commissioner’s 
application of those facts in holding Pruismann suffered a forty-five percent 
industrial disability is not irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.  We reverse the 
judgment of the district court.   
 
REVERSED.   
                                            
2 The district court erred in making its own findings of fact: 
After examining the transcript, the exhibits, the briefs from counsel, 
and considering [Pruismann’s] age, lack of education, lack of 
transferable job skills, and his physical detriments, enhanced by his 
work back injury which preclude his employment as a mechanic, . . . . 
(Emphasis added.)  “[T]he question on appeal is not whether the evidence 
supports a different finding than the finding made by the commissioner, but 
whether the evidence ‘supports the findings actually made.’”  Meyer, 710 N.W.2d 
at 218 (citation omitted).  
