Case Number: 23700270.02
Case Title:  JORDAN, ROBERT V. DES MOINES AREA REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Jordan Robert-23700270.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ROBERT JORDAN, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
   File No. 23700270.02 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
DES MOINES AREA REGIONAL 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
TRANSIT AUTHORITY, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
WEST BEND MUTUAL INS. CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Headnote Nos.: 1403.30; 2400; 2402 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
The claimant, Robert Jordan, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from employer Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority 
(“DART”) and their insurer, West Bend Mutual Insurance Company.  Richard Schmidt 
appeared on behalf of the claimant.  Charles Blades appeared on behalf of the 
defendants.   
 
The matter came on for hearing on November 24, 2025, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips.  Pursuant to an order of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, the hearing occurred electronically via Zoom.  
The hearing proceeded without difficulty.  
 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-2, and 
Defendants’ Exhibit A-P.  The exhibits were admitted into the record without objection.   
 
The claimant testified on his own behalf.  Kristi Miller was appointed the official 
reporter and custodian of the notes of the proceeding.  The matter was considered fully 
submitted following briefing by the parties on January 5, 2026.     
STIPULATIONS 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2026-Jan-27  11:41:51     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

JORDAN V. DES MOINES AREA REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY 
Page 2 
 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged injury. 
  
2. That, if the injury is found to be a cause of permanent disability, the disability is 
to be evaluated as a scheduled member disability to the shoulder. 
 
3. That the claimant’s gross earnings were one thousand one hundred fifty-two 
and 52/100 dollars ($1,152.52) per week, that the claimant was single and 
entitled to one exemption, providing a weekly rate of compensation of seven 
hundred six and 86/100 dollars ($706.86).   
 
4. That certain costs were paid. 
 
Entitlement to temporary disability benefits and credits against any award were no 
longer in dispute.  The defendants waived some of their affirmative defenses. 
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the 
course of employment on January 3, 2023. 
  
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery. 
  
3. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
 
4. The extent of permanent disability benefits, should any be awarded. 
 
5. The proper commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any are awarded. 
 
6. Whether the claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
examination (“IME”) pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.   
  
7. Whether the claimant should be awarded a specific taxation of costs.   
 
8. Whether the defendants have proven an affirmative defense of an untimely 
claim pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.26. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 

JORDAN V. DES MOINES AREA REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY 
Page 3 
 
Robert Jordan, the claimant, was 55 years old at the time of the hearing.  
(Testimony).  He operated a bus for DART for 27 years.  (Testimony).  This bus ran on 
a route upon which he picked up and dropped off passengers.  (Testimony).  He worked 
Monday to Friday for about eight hours and forty minutes per day.  (Testimony).  He 
earned around twenty-nine and 29/100 dollars ($29.29) per hour in this role.  
(Testimony).  Mr. Jordan is right-handed.  (Testimony). 
There were some medical records included in the evidentiary record which 
predate the alleged date of injury.  I will review these records in their chronological 
order.   
On August 31, 2015, Mr. Jordan visited an urgent care clinic in Des Moines, 
Iowa, for complaints of pain in his right elbow.  (Joint Exhibit 1:1-2).  He began 
experiencing the pain about one month prior.  (JE 1:1).  The provider found Mr. Jordan 
to have tenderness on palpation to the ulnar tunnel.  (JE 1:1-2).  Mr. Jordan had normal 
range of motion.  (JE 1:2).  Mr. Jordan was diagnosed with right elbow pain and told to 
take anti-inflammatories.  (JE 1:2).   
Mr. Jordan returned to an urgent care clinic on January 23, 2017.  (JE 1:3-4).  He 
experienced numbness and tingling in his right upper extremity while driving.  (JE 1:3).  
After standing, his numbness resolved.  (JE 1:3).   
On June 26, 2017, Mr. Jordan visited Des Moines Orthopaedic Surgeons 
(“DMOS”) for complaints of numbness and tingling in his bilateral hands and forearms 
while he slept.  (JE 2:5-11).  The provider reviewed an EMG, which showed bilateral 
carpal tunnel syndrome.  (JE 2:6).  Mr. Jordan was provided with nighttime splints, and 
additional carpal tunnel syndrome treatment was discussed.  (JE 2:7).   
DART entered into evidence a functional job analysis of a “fixed route operator.”  
(Defendants’ Exhibit C:26-30).  This report outlined the duties of a DART driver such as 
Mr. Jordan.  (DE C:26-30).  According to John Kruzich, M.S., the author of the functional 
job analysis: 
The Fixed Route Operator’s critical physical demands include the following: 
maximum occasional horizontal push/pull of up to 50 lbs. of force over a 
distance of 15 feet; maximum frequent horizontal push/pull of 2 lbs. of force 
over a distance of 6 inches; maximum occasional vertical push/pull of 15 
lbs. of force over a distance of 2 inches; maximum constant lower extremity 
push of 30 lbs. of force; occasional standing, walking, bending, 
crouching/kneeling, overhead reaching, climbing (6/9/12 inch steps) and 
neck extension; frequent lateral reaching, neck flexion and neck rotation; 
constant forward reaching, hand coordination, foot coordination and sitting. 
(DE C:30).   
The claimant returned to DMOS on February 14, 2020, with complaints of right 
shoulder pain for the last five months.  (JE 2:12-17).  Mr. Jordan denied a specific injury, 

JORDAN V. DES MOINES AREA REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY 
Page 4 
 
but instead told Ian Lin, M.D., that he noticed “a lot of pain” in the shoulder while 
showering.  (JE 2:12).  He also had pain while driving at work.  (JE 2:12).  Dr. Lin found 
Mr. Jordan to have good range of motion in both of his shoulders, along with mild pain 
with “extreme forward flexion.”  (JE 2:13).  Dr. Lin ordered x-rays, which showed 
calcification in his right shoulder.  (JE 2:13).  Based upon the examination, Dr. Lin 
diagnosed Mr. Jordan with right calcific tendonitis.  (JE 2:13).  He recommended that 
Mr. Jordan continue home exercises from a previous round of physical therapy, and 
prescribed diclofenac.  (JE 2:13).  Dr. Lin completed a form indicating that Mr. Jordan 
had work-related right shoulder tendonitis.  (JE 2:15).  He allowed Mr. Jordan to return 
to work with no restrictions.  (JE 2:15).   
On April 10, 2020, Mr. Jordan returned to see Dr. Lin regarding his right 
shoulder.  (JE 2:18-20).  Mr. Jordan told Dr. Lin that his right shoulder was improving, 
and that he could drive with limited issues.  (JE 2:18).  On examination, Dr. Lin found 
Mr. Jordan to have only mild pain with impingement and Hawkins testing.  (JE 2:18).  
Dr. Lin diagnosed Mr. Jordan with mild impingement syndrome with calcific tendonitis in 
the right shoulder.  (JE 2:18).  Since Mr. Jordan showed improvement, Dr. Lin 
recommended observation.  (JE 2:18).  He again allowed Mr. Jordan to return to work 
with no restrictions on April 10, 2020.  (JE 2:20).   
Mr. Jordan followed-up with Dr. Lin on June 5, 2020, for mild impingement 
syndrome and calcific tendonitis in his right shoulder.  (JE 2:21-23).  Mr. Jordan told Dr. 
Lin that he was “pretty much back to normal.”  (JE 2:21).  Dr. Lin found Mr. Jordan to 
have an unremarkable examination with full range of motion in the right shoulder.  (JE 
2:21).  X-rays taken during the visit showed “mild calcific tendonitis and a type 2-3 
acromion.”  (JE 2:21).  Dr. Lin told Mr. Jordan that he reached maximum medical 
improvement (“MMI”) with no impairment for his right shoulder.  (JE 2:21).  Dr. Lin 
allowed Mr. Jordan to return to work with no restrictions on the same date of the 
appointment.  (JE 2:23).   
Mr. Jordan acknowledged that he first brought it to the attention of DART that he 
was having right shoulder issues in 2020.  (Testimony).  He attributed his right shoulder 
problems to repetitively turning the steering wheel on his bus.  (Testimony).  He agreed 
with this in his deposition.  (DE L:60).   
In 2022, Mr. Jordan sought treatment for pain in his left shoulder, which occurred 
after he moved furniture.  (Testimony).   
The claimant reported to CIA Des Moines for examination by William Maher, 
D.O., on January 25, 2022.  (JE 3:42-44).  Mr. Jordan had some neck pain and stiffness 
along with right shoulder pain.  (JE 3:43).   
Mr. Jordan visited UnityPoint Clinic Sports Medicine in Urbandale, Iowa, on April 
20, 2022, for examination by Marc Molis, M.D.  (JE 4:45-47).  Mr. Jordan complained of 
left shoulder pain over the previous several weeks.  (JE 4:45).  Dr. Molis noted that Mr. 
Jordan previously presented to the walk-in clinic on April 13, 2022, at which time, he 
received a steroid injection into his left shoulder.  (JE 4:45).  X-rays also showed only 

JORDAN V. DES MOINES AREA REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY 
Page 5 
 
mild degenerative changes to the left shoulder.  (JE 4:45).  Dr. Molis opined that Mr. 
Jordan had rotator cuff tendinitis and irritation.  (JE 4:45).  He recommended that Mr. 
Jordan proceed with physical therapy.  (JE 4:45).  Dr. Molis restricted Mr. Jordan to 
driving only four (4) hours per day for the next three (3) weeks due to left rotator cuff 
issues.  (JE 4:46).   
On April 25, 2022, Mr. Jordan attended physical therapy at Athletico for his left 
shoulder complaints.  (JE 5:62-65).  He noted that driving and reaching overhead 
aggravated his pain.  (JE 5:62).   
Benjamin Paulson, M.D. provided opinions as they related to the claimant’s right 
wrist in a letter dated May 2, 2022.  (DE K:55-56).  Dr. Paulson opined that the 
claimant’s right carpal tunnel and right cubital tunnel issues were not related to his work 
with DART.  (DE K:55-56).   
Dr. Molis examined Mr. Jordan again on May 11, 2022, for his left shoulder 
complaints.  (JE 4:48-50).  Mr. Jordan continued to have issues with overhead activities.  
(JE 4:48).  He also complained of clicking, catching, or popping, in his left shoulder.  (JE 
4:48).  X-rays of the left shoulder showed no acute issues.  (JE 4:49).  As a result, Dr. 
Molis recommended an MRI.  (JE 4:49).  He also recommended activity modifications 
and physical therapy.  (JE 4:49).  Dr. Molis again recommended that Mr. Jordan restrict 
driving to four (4) hours over the next three (3) weeks.  (JE 4:50).   
On May 24, 2022, Dr. Molis re-examined Mr. Jordan, in an effort to review the 
MRI results.  (JE 4:51-52).  Mr. Jordan felt that working four (4) hours was “just about 
tolerable.”  (JE 4:51).  Dr. Molis opined that the MRI showed “partial tearing of the 
subscapularis tendon of the rotator cuff as well as a partial tearing of the biceps tendon 
as well as some degenerative changes, degenerative tearing about the anterior portion 
of the labrum from about 2 to 4 o’clock…”  (JE 2:51).  Dr. Molis noted, “[w]e talked quite 
a bit about his job in relation to his shoulders.  I do feel that he can continue the 4 hours, 
but it sounds like more than that is potentially aggravating it and it would make sense 
with having to turn the wheel with especially using that biceps that partial tear would be 
irritating, so we will keep him at 4 hours for now.”  (JE 4:51).  Dr. Molis also 
recommended that Mr. Jordan continue physical therapy for his left shoulder.  (JE 4:51).   
Mr. Jordan had a virtual appointment with Dr. Molis on June 23, 2022, in order to 
fill out FMLA paperwork.  (JE 4:53).  Mr. Jordan told Dr. Molis that his right shoulder 
was worsening due to his ongoing left shoulder issues, and that he experienced right 
shoulder pain on-and-off over the years.  (JE 4:53).   
Dr. Molis met with Mr. Jordan again on July 12, 2022, regarding his left arm and 
ongoing problems with his right shoulder.  (JE 4:59-61).  Mr. Jordan felt that his right 
shoulder problems increased due to his left shoulder issues.  (JE 4:59).  Mr. Jordan 
could not recall a specific injury to his right shoulder.  (JE 4:59).  Mr. Jordan told the 
doctor that driving the bus and using a door handle on the bus irritated his shoulder.  
(JE 4:59).  Dr. Molis recommended an MR arthrogram of the right shoulder “given how 
much discomfort or irritation he is having.”  (JE 4:59).  Dr. Molis opined that he was 

JORDAN V. DES MOINES AREA REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY 
Page 6 
 
concerned about “right labral pathology given his exam and given his symptoms.”  (JE 
4:59).   
On July 12, 2022, Mr. Jordan had an MRI arthrogram of his right shoulder.  (JE 
4:55-56).  The MRI showed an inferior labral tear from 5 to 8 o’clock, and mild 
infraspinatus and supraspinatus tendinopathy without a full-thickness tear.  (JE 4:56).   
On August 2, 2022, Mr. Jordan called DMOS, indicating that he experienced right 
shoulder issues for over one year.  (JE 2:24).  He was told to come in and visit Nicholas 
Honkamp, M.D.  (JE 2:24).   
Mr. Jordan reported to DMOS on August 9, 2022, for an examination with Dr. 
Honkamp.  (JE 2:25-31).  Mr. Jordan reiterated that his right shoulder had bothered him 
for over one year.  (JE 2:25).  He told the doctor that his right shoulder periodically 
locked up.  (JE 2:25).  He could not recount a direct injury to his right shoulder.  (JE 
2:25).  X-rays showed no calcific deposit.  (JE 2:26).  Dr. Honkamp documented range 
of motion in the claimant’s right shoulder, including: forward flexion and abduction to 
160 degrees, abduction external rotation to about 105 degrees, and abduction internal 
rotation to 40 degrees.  (JE 2:26).  The doctor also reviewed an MRI of the right 
shoulder.  (JE 2:26).  The MRI showed a tear to the inferior labrum from “approximately 
5-8 o’clock” along with mild tendinopathy of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus.  (JE 
2:26).  Dr. Honkamp told Mr. Jordan that his labral tearing could be from either trauma 
or “over time from use.”  (JE 2:26).  The doctor recommended physical therapy and a 
restriction to work only four hours per day. (JE 2:26, 30).   
On August 23, 2022, Mr. Jordan visited Athletico for physical therapy for his right 
shoulder.  (JE 5:75-76).  Mr. Jordan noted that his shoulder bothered him when he used 
it repetitively.  (JE 5:75).  He showed palpable tenderness upon examination.  (JE 5:75).   
Mr. Jordan visited Athletico for his ninth physical therapy session on September 
8, 2022.  (JE 5:69-71).  Mr. Jordan told the therapist that his shoulder was doing “really 
good” with no catching or locking.  (JE 5:69).  His shoulder also no longer bothered him 
when he drove the bus.  (JE 5:69).  The therapist documented that Mr. Jordan showed 
improved strength and coordination in his left shoulder.  (JE 5:69).  
On September 9, 2022, Mr. Jordan returned to DMOS to visit with Dr. Honkamp.  
(JE 2:32-34).  Mr. Jordan told the doctor that he had not experienced any feelings of 
catching in his shoulder since his last visit.  (JE 2:32).  He felt that therapy helped.  (JE 
2:32).  According to Dr. Honkamp, Mr. Jordan showed improvement in his range of 
motion following physical therapy.  (JE 2:32).  The doctor recommended that Mr. Jordan 
return to normal activities, but that he should return if he again experienced the catching 
sensation or pain, in order to discuss possible surgical intervention.  (JE 2:33).  Dr. 
Honkamp allowed Mr. Jordan to return to work with no restrictions as of September 12, 
2022.  (JE 2:34).   
On January 3, 2023, Mr. Jordan reported an injury to his right shoulder to Jake 
Comstock of DART.  (Testimony).  He felt that this was due to “repetitive use of the 

JORDAN V. DES MOINES AREA REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY 
Page 7 
 
steering wheel…”  (Testimony).  He noted that he felt his right shoulder tightening up 
during the day, and that it eventually locked up while he was in the shower.  
(Testimony).  Mr. Jordan’s discovery responses from a previous matter indicated that 
his arm locked while he was showering.  (DE H:50).  His discovery responses in this 
matter indicate that he injured his right shoulder due to his “work activities of driving a 
bus…” which “…aggravated his arm and back and hips.”  (DE I:52).   
Mr. Jordan filed a “workers [sic] compensation employee injury statement” with 
DART on January 4, 2023.  (DE D:31-32).  Mr. Jordan wrote that his injury occurred 
“through time…” and that he had pain after getting off of the bus.  (DE D:31).  He 
indicated delayed reporting as “I [thought] it was common aches.”  (DE D:31).   
On January 9, 2023, Mr. Jordan provided a statement to Dawn Naujokaitis of 
West Bend Mutual Insurance Company.  (DE E:33-43).  When asked to confirm the 
date of his injury, or accident, Mr. Jordan responded that he could not confirm said date.  
(DE E:36).  This was due to his condition being “…kinda [sic] ongoing due to the fact 
there, there was a, probably a misdiagnosed [sic] and I can’t really confirm an actual 
date on it.”  (DE E:37).  Mr. Jordan then changed his statement and indicated that he 
previously had a calcium build-up in his shoulder and then he struck a pothole.  (DE 
E:38).  He then went to the doctor and was told that he had “…a tear in the shoulder…” 
and that he told the doctor about having “…the same pain…”  (DE E:38).  The adjuster 
asked Mr. Jordan how he knew his symptoms were connected to his work with DART.  
(DE E:38).  Mr. Jordan responded, “[b]ecause that’s all I do is drive buses eight hours, 
nine hours a day, I don’t do nothing [sic] else… I don’t…workout, exercise, lift weights, 
or none of them [sic] other things…”  (DE E:38).  Mr. Jordan then described his ongoing 
symptoms, including a deep, throbbing pain.  (DE E:39).   
The insurer sent claimant’s counsel a letter on March 22, 2023.  (DE F:44).  The 
adjuster recounted Mr. Jordan’s recorded statement, including his indecisiveness as to 
when the injury occurred.  (DE F:44).  The adjuster noted that Mr. Jordan’s claim was 
denied, as it was determined that Mr. Jordan’s injury was unexplained and thus 
idiopathic in nature.  (DE F:44).   
On May 18, 2023, Charles Mooney, M.D., M.P.H., issued a report outlining his 
opinions from an IME conducted on Mr. Jordan.  (DE B:3-19).  Dr. Mooney is board 
certified in occupational medicine.  (DE B:19).  Dr. Mooney began his report by outlining 
certain medical records.  (DE B:3-12).  Dr. Mooney then outlined the results of his 
examination of Mr. Jordan.  (DE B:12).  Mr. Jordan told Dr. Mooney that there was “no 
specific incident associated” with the January 3, 2023, date of injury.  (DE B:12).  Mr. 
Jordan indicated that he never had any prior injuries to either the right or left shoulder.  
(DE B:12).  Mr. Jordan complained of constant pain in his right shoulder, which he 
described as throbbing, aching, sharp, and stabbing.  (DE B:13).  Leaning forward and 
attempting to lift exacerbated this pain.  (DE B:13).  His left shoulder had no pain at the 
time of the examination, though he noted a popping sensation with activity.  (DE B:13).   
Dr. Mooney documented Mr. Jordan to have left shoulder abduction and flexion 
to 170 degrees, external rotation to 80 degrees, and internal rotation to 70 degrees.  

JORDAN V. DES MOINES AREA REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY 
Page 8 
 
(DE B:14).  He found Mr. Jordan to have reduced range of motion in the right shoulder 
due to pain.  (DE B:14).  Mr. Jordan had 90 degrees of abduction and flexion, 60 
degrees of external rotation, and 40 degrees of internal rotation.  (DE B:14).  Dr. 
Mooney observed Mr. Jordan to have breakaway incidents while testing certain ranges 
of motion in the right shoulder.  (DE B:14).   
Dr. Mooney diagnosed Mr. Jordan as follows: 
1. Medical record evidence of chronic impingement of the right greater than 
left shoulder with progressive symptoms of an increasing pain in the right 
shoulder despite conservative treatment. 
2. History of right wrist pain with evidence of volar ganglion cyst status post 
removal with ongoing complaints of pain but no specific abnormality.   
3. Bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome right greater than left evidenced both 
on examination and by EMG studies.   
 
(DE B:14-15).  Dr. Mooney next offered his opinions in response to questions posed to 
him by defendants’ counsel.  (DE B:15-19).  Based upon his examination and review of 
the functional job descriptions provided by DART, Dr. Mooney opined that Mr. Jordan’s 
right shoulder issues were not related to his work activities with DART.  (DE B:15).  Dr. 
Mooney noted that “…there is no evidence that occupational risk factors [were] present 
as it [related] to … his bilateral shoulders…”  (DE B:15).  Dr. Mooney cited page 320 of 
the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Disease and Injury Causation noting various 
“occupational risk factors for shoulder tendinopathy, impingement, and rotator cuff 
tears.”  (DE B:16).  According to Dr. Mooney, Mr. Jordan’s job with DART did not 
require significant force and repetition, force and posture, or sustained shoulder 
postures with more than 60 degrees of flexion or abduction.  (DE B:17).  Because of 
this, Dr. Mooney concluded that there was “no occupational risk or hazard associated 
with Mr. Jordan’s shoulder condition.”  (DE B:17).  Instead, Dr. Mooney opined that Mr. 
Jordan’s shoulder condition was based on “personal intrinsic factors…”  (DE B:17).  Dr. 
Mooney continued by concluding that there is no potential for material aggravation of 
Mr. Jordan’s underlying condition based on his work activities despite his work activities 
possibly causing Mr. Jordan “some degree of discomfort.”  (DE B:18).  Any discomfort 
would only be temporary in nature, according to the doctor.  (DE B:18).  Since there was 
no evidence of any work-related injury, Mr. Jordan reached MMI as of June 5, 2020, 
with no permanent impairment.  (DE B:18).  Finally, Dr. Mooney noted that Mr. Jordan 
needed no additional medical care or permanent restrictions related to his work 
activities with DART.  (DE B:18-19).   
 
On November 21, 2023, Mr. Jordan returned to DMOS to visit with Dr. Honkamp 
following a right shoulder arthroscopic anterior and inferior labral repair performed on 
September 11, 2023.  (JE 2:35-36).  Mr. Jordan continued to have lateral achiness and 
stiffness.  (JE 2:35).  Mr. Jordan expressed concern about returning to work on 
December 4, 2023.  (JE 2:35).  Upon examination, Dr. Honkamp noted Mr. Jordan to 
have some diminished range of motion with accompanying tightness.  (JE 2:35).  Dr. 
Honkamp opined that the stiffness was normal, and recommended that Mr. Jordan 

JORDAN V. DES MOINES AREA REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY 
Page 9 
 
continue physical therapy to improve his range of motion.  (JE 2:35).  Dr. Honkamp 
allowed Mr. Jordan to return to working five (5) hours per day for three (3) weeks before 
returning to full-time work.  (JE 2:36).   
In response to a “check-box” letter from defendants’ counsel, dated December 5, 
2023, Jeffrey Rodgers, M.D., provided his opinions in response to certain questions.  
(DE J:53-54).  Dr. Rodgers agreed that Mr. Jordan’s work activities did not cause or 
aggravate any condition in his wrists.  (DE J:53-54).  Dr. Rodgers also opined that Mr. 
Jordan had no permanent impairment to his wrists.  (DE J:53-54).   
Mr. Jordan returned to Athletico for his twenty-first physical therapy visit on 
December 7, 2023.  (JE 5:77-78).  Mr. Jordan told the therapist that his right shoulder 
felt good, and that he felt as though his range of motion returned to 85 percent to 90 
percent of his full range of motion.  (JE 5:77).  Mr. Jordan showed improved range of 
motion on examination, though the therapist found him to have some apprehension with 
pushing.  (JE 5:78).  The therapist recommended that Mr. Jordan continue with therapy.  
(JE 5:78).   
In response to a “check-box” letter drafted by defendants’ counsel, dated 
December 13, 2023, Dr. Honkamp indicated his agreement or disagreement with four 
statements.  (DE A:1-2).  Dr. Honkamp agreed that Mr. Jordan’s injuries were not 
consistent with a “wear-and-tear type of injury…” or a cumulative injury.  (DE A:1).  He 
also agreed that Mr. Jordan’s work activities with DART did not cause his labral tear.  
(DE A:1).  Additionally, Dr. Honkamp agreed that “Mr. Jordan’s ongoing work activities 
as a bus driver for DART cumulatively did not make the condition of his right shoulder 
structurally worse nor did they light up a preexisting condition.”  (DE A:1).   
Mr. Jordan returned to DMOS to see Dr. Honkamp on January 2, 2024.  (JE 
2:37-39).  Mr. Jordan continued to have some soreness in his shoulder; however, he 
has not had any new issues since returning to work.  (JE 2:37).  He noted bowling for 
recreation on New Year’s Eve, which resulted in some soreness.  (JE 2:37; Testimony).  
Dr. Honkamp re-measured Mr. Jordan’s range of motion again.  (JE 2:37).  Dr. 
Honkamp opined that Mr. Jordan’s right shoulder looked “great” overall.  (JE 2:37).  He 
told Mr. Jordan to continue to work on strengthening his shoulder, either on his own or 
through physical therapy.  (JE 2:37).   
On February 13, 2024, Mr. Jordan followed up with Dr. Honkamp again.  (JE  
2:40-41).  Mr. Jordan told the doctor that he was performing stretching exercises on his 
own.  (JE 2:40).  During these exercises, he had some stiffness and soreness. (JE 
2:40).  Mr. Jordan denied pain, but experienced periodic aches.  (JE 2:40).  Dr. 
Honkamp found Mr. Jordan to have forward flexion and abduction to 155 degrees, 
external rotation to 90 degrees, and internal rotation to 40 degrees.  (JE 2:40).  He 
showed no issues with strength in the right shoulder.  (JE 2:40).  Dr. Honkamp told Mr. 
Jordan that some tightness was common, but that this would eventually dissipate with 
strengthening and stretching.  (JE 2:40).  Mr. Jordan was released to return to work on 
February 13, 2024, with no restrictions.  (JE 2:40; Testimony).  Mr. Jordan did not return 
to Dr. Honkamp or any other doctor since his discharge.  (DE M:72).   

JORDAN V. DES MOINES AREA REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY 
Page 10 
 
At the arrangement of claimant’s counsel, Mr. Jordan had an IME with Sunil 
Bansal, M.D., M.P.H., on August 11, 2025.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 1:1-11).  Dr. Bansal is 
board certified in occupational medicine.  (CE 1:1).  Following his examination, Dr. 
Bansal issued a report outlining his findings, dated September 26, 2025.  (CE 1:1-11).  
Dr. Bansal’s report begins with a review of medical records dating back to 2015 for what 
he termed “unrelated medical issues.”  (CE 1:1-5).  Dr. Bansal’s report continued by 
noting that Mr. Jordan was driving a bus on January 3, 2023, when he came upon ice 
on the road.  (CE 1:5).  He then “hit something that caused the steering wheel to jerk, 
and his right shoulder was jerked as he attempted to maintain control of the bus.”  (CE 
1:5).  Mr. Jordan noted he then experienced immediate pain in his right shoulder.  (CE 
1:5).  Mr. Jordan told Dr. Bansal that he continued to work until his pain increased, at 
which time he reported the incident to his employer.  (CE 1:5).   
At the time of the examination with Dr. Bansal, Mr. Jordan noted temporary 
improvement in his right shoulder following his surgery.  (CE 1:6).  However, he noted 
increased pain in his right shoulder around his visit with Dr. Bansal.  (CE 1:6).  
Exceeding “his current abilities” aggravated his right shoulder pain and soreness.  (CE 
1:6).  Upon examination, Dr. Bansal found Mr. Jordan to have tenderness to palpation.  
(CE 1:6).  This was especially worse at the acromioclavicular joint.  (CE 1:6).  Dr. 
Bansal measured the range of motion in Mr. Jordan’s right shoulder, and found him to 
have 170 degrees of flexion, 143 degrees of abduction, 40 degrees of adduction, 51 
degrees of external rotation, 43 degrees of extension, and 32 degrees of internal 
rotation.  (CE 1:7).  Mr. Jordan also had a positive impingement test.  (CE 1:7).   
Dr. Bansal diagnosed Mr. Jordan with an aggravation of a labral tear, an 
aggravation of degenerative tearing to the supraspinatus and infraspinatus, and referred 
neck pain from the right shoulder.  (CE 1:8).  He opined that the January 3, 2023, work 
injury represented “a significant aggravating factor that aggravated his pre-existing right 
shoulder pathology, and ultimately necessitated surgical intervention.”  (CE 1:8).  He 
noted that the “mechanism of injury was a sudden forceful jerking of the steering wheel 
while maintaining control of a city bus on ice, which created substantial biomechanical 
forces that would have exceeded the physiological tolerance of his already 
compromised shoulder structures.”  (CE 1:8).  Dr. Bansal proposed that the pre-existing 
labral tear in Mr. Jordan’s right shoulder “created structural weakness of the 
glenohumeral stabilizing mechanism…” and that “[t]he sudden torsional forces from the 
steering wheel incident likely propagated this tear or caused additional damage to the 
surrounding capsular structures.”  (CE 1:9).  Further, the progression of his symptoms 
“directly correlates with the work injury.”  (CE 1:10).   
Dr. Bansal then assigned permanent impairment to the right shoulder based on 
the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  (CE 1:10).  
He cited to Figures 16-40 to 16-46, and compared range of motion to the left shoulder.  
(CE 1:10).  Based upon this, he found impairment to the right upper extremity as 
follows: 
 

JORDAN V. DES MOINES AREA REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY 
Page 11 
 
Flexion: 
 
170 degrees  
1 percent impairment 
Abduction: 
 
143 degrees  
1 percent impairment 
Adduction: 
 
40 degrees  
0 percent impairment 
External Rotation: 51 degrees  
1 percent impairment 
Extension: 
 
43 degrees  
1 percent impairment 
Internal Rotation: 
32 degrees  
4 percent impairment 
(CE 1:10).  Dr. Bansal combined the foregoing impairments and arrived at an 8 percent 
upper extremity impairment, which he equated to a 5 percent impairment of the body as 
a whole.  (CE 1:10).   
Dr. Bansal opined that Mr. Jordan reached MMI as of August 11, 2025.  (CE 1:8).  
He recommended permanent restrictions of no lifting more than 20 pounds with the right 
arm and no overhead lifting with the right arm.  (CE 1:10).   
Mr. Jordan acknowledged that he told DART prior to January 3, 2023, that he 
experienced right shoulder pain.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Jordan testified at the hearing that his shoulder was bothering him again after 
an initial period of improvement following his surgery.  (Testimony).  Specifically, things 
like driving caused him issues.  (Testimony).   
During his deposition, Mr. Jordan testified that he continued to work full-time for 
DART with no restrictions.  (DE M:71).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.904(3).   
Affirmative Defense Under Iowa Code section 85.26 
 
The defendants assert an affirmative defense of failure to timely bring a claim 
pursuant to Iowa Code 85.26.  Before engaging in any analysis as to any of the other 
disputed issues in this case, it is important to determine whether or not the claim can 
even stand based upon an analysis of the facts and applicable law.  Therefore, I begin 
my review of this case with an analysis of the defendants’ asserted affirmative 
defense.  The alleged date of injury in this matter is January 3, 2023.  However, the 
claimant also made complaints of right shoulder issues dating back to 2020.   
 

JORDAN V. DES MOINES AREA REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY 
Page 12 
 
Iowa Code 85.26 states: 
An original proceeding for benefits under chapter 10A, subchapter III, this 
chapter or chapter 85A or85B, shall not be maintained in any contested 
case unless the proceeding is commenced within two years from the date 
of the occurrence of the injury for which benefits are claimed, or if weekly 
compensation benefits are paid under section 10A.315, within three years 
from the date of the last payment of weekly compensation benefits.  For the 
purposes of this section “date of the occurrence of the injury” means the 
date that the employee knew or should have known that the injury was work-
related.   
See Iowa Code section 85.26(1).  Prior to the 2017 statutory changes, the common law 
“discovery rule” was often applied when analyzing an affirmative defense under Iowa 
Code section 85.26.  The Iowa Supreme Court clarified the application of Iowa Code 
section 85.26 noting that, “[t]he general assembly has chosen to limit the discovery rule 
to knowledge that an injury is work-related, not to knowledge of the compensable nature 
of the injury…”  Tweeten v. Tweeten, 999 N.W.2d 270, 281 (Iowa 2023).  Therefore, 
“[f]or purposes of section 85.26, the two-year statutory period begins to run when the 
employee knows or should know that an injury is work-related, without regard to 
whether the injury is also serious enough to be compensable.”  Id. at 282.   
 
In this case, the defendants assert that the claimant knew, or should have known 
that his right shoulder injury was work related by August of 2022.  Thus, the defendants 
argue, the claimant should have filed his petition by August of 2024.  The claimant 
makes no argument as to this issue in their posthearing brief.   
 
Mr. Jordan testified that he first brought his right shoulder complaints to the 
attention of DART in 2020.  He attributed his issues to his work with DART; specifically, 
repeatedly turning the steering wheel on a bus.  Mr. Jordan sought medical care for 
right shoulder issues beginning on February 14, 2020.  During a visit with Dr. Lin, Mr. 
Jordan complained of “a lot of pain” in his right shoulder while showering and while 
driving at work.  According to the medical record, Mr. Jordan’s right shoulder pain began 
about five months earlier.  After reviewing an x-ray and examining Mr. Jordan, Dr. Lin 
diagnosed Mr. Jordan with right calcific tendonitis.  He recommended home exercises 
and prescribed diclofenac.  Dr. Lin completed a form indicating that Mr. Jordan’s right 
shoulder tendonitis was work-related.   
 
Following treatment, Mr. Jordan’s right shoulder continued to improve during 
2020.  By June of 2020, Mr. Jordan felt his right shoulder was “pretty much back to 
normal.”  Dr. Lin concurred, and placed Mr. Jordan at MMI for his right shoulder with no 
permanent impairment.   
 
Mr. Jordan then injured his left shoulder while moving furniture in early 2022.  He 
continued some follow-up treatment through 2022, telling his doctor in April of 2022 that 
he felt that driving aggravated his left shoulder.  In May of 2022, Dr. Molis observed that 
Mr. Jordan complained of “a lot of pain in both of his shoulders with the turning motion.  

JORDAN V. DES MOINES AREA REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY 
Page 13 
 
It is really bothersome having to turn that big wheel for the bus that does bother it and 
does make it hurt more.”  In June of 2022, Mr. Jordan had a virtual appointment with Dr. 
Molis.  During this visit, Mr. Jordan complained of worsening right shoulder pain.  He 
noted that he experienced right shoulder pain on-and-off over several years.  Dr. Molis 
visited with Mr. Jordan again in July of 2022.  He again complained of right shoulder 
pain.  He felt that his right shoulder pain increased because of his ongoing left shoulder 
issues.  Mr. Jordan indicated to Dr. Molis that driving the bus aggravated his right 
shoulder.  Dr. Molis recommended an MRI due to concerns about “right labral pathology 
given his exam and given his symptoms.”  The MRI showed an inferior labral tear from 5 
to 8 o’clock with mild infraspinatus and supraspinatus tendinopathy.   
 
In August of 2022, Mr. Jordan reached out to DMOS requesting an appointment, 
due to a one-year history of right shoulder issues.  Dr. Honkamp examined Mr. Jordan 
at DMOS regarding his right shoulder issues.  Mr. Jordan reiterated to Dr. Honkamp that 
he could not recall a specific injury to his right shoulder.  Dr. Honkamp examined Mr. 
Jordan and reviewed the results of the previous MRI of his right shoulder.  He opined 
that Mr. Jordan’s right shoulder labral issues could be caused either by trauma or “over 
time from use.”  Dr. Honkamp recommended that Mr. Jordan work only four hours a day 
and complete a physical therapy program.   
 
As recommended by Dr. Honkamp, Mr. Jordan completed a course of physical 
therapy for his right shoulder before returning to visit Dr. Honkamp on September 9, 
2022.  Mr. Jordan told Dr. Honkamp that he no longer experienced a catching sensation 
in his right shoulder, and that physical therapy helped alleviate his symptoms.  Dr. 
Honkamp opined that the range of motion in the right shoulder improved over previous 
measurements.  At this visit, Dr. Honkamp allowed Mr. Jordan to return to normal 
activities with no restrictions.  He counseled Mr. Jordan to return to his office if his pain 
or the catching sensation returned, in order to discuss a surgical intervention.   
 
Mr. Jordan then reported an injury to his right shoulder to DART on January 3, 
2023.  He opined that his right shoulder tightened up during the day and noted that it 
locked up while showering after the conclusion of his shift at DART.  On January 4, 
2023, Mr. Jordan completed a “workers [sic] compensation employee injury statement” 
from DART.  He wrote that his injury occurred “through time.”  He then told an adjuster 
from West Bend Mutual Insurance Company on January 9, 2023, that the date of his 
right shoulder injury could not be pinpointed, as his symptoms were “ongoing.”  
Nevertheless, he connected his symptoms to his work with DART, as “all [he] [did] [was] 
drive buses eight hours, nine hours a day…”  Based on this interview, and their 
investigation, the insurer issued a denial letter on March 22, 2023.   
 
On March 27, 2023, the claimant filed an original notice and petition alleging that 
he injured his right shoulder on January 3, 2023, “while performing work duties.”  This 
matter was assigned file number 23700270.01.   
 
The defendants sent Mr. Jordan to an IME with Dr. Mooney in May of 2023.  Dr. 
Mooney is board certified in occupational medicine.  Dr. Mooney examined Mr. Jordan 
and reviewed a number of medical records.  Mr. Jordan told Dr. Mooney that there was 

JORDAN V. DES MOINES AREA REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY 
Page 14 
 
not a specific event associated with the January 3, 2023, date of injury.  He also 
indicated to Dr. Mooney that he did not have any other injuries to his right shoulder.  In 
preparing his report, Dr. Mooney referenced the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Disease and Injury Causation.  Based on factors noted in the Guides to the Evaluation 
of Disease and Injury Causation, Dr. Mooney opined that Mr. Jordan’s job with DART 
did not require significant force and repetition, force and posture, or sustained shoulder 
postures with more than 60 degrees of flexion or abduction.  Thus, Dr. Mooney 
concluded that there was “no occupational risk or hazard associated with Mr. Jordan’s 
shoulder condition.”  Instead, Dr. Mooney opined that Mr. Jordan’s shoulder condition 
was based on “personal intrinsic factors…,” and that there was no potential for 
aggravation of an underlying condition to the right shoulder.  Since there was no 
evidence of any work-related injury, Dr. Mooney opined that Mr. Jordan reached MMI as 
of June 5, 2020, with no permanent impairment.   
 
In September of 2023, Mr. Jordan underwent a right shoulder arthroscopic 
anterior and inferior labral repair.  This surgery appears to have been performed by Dr. 
Honkamp.  Following this surgery, Dr. Honkamp restricted Mr. Jordan to working only 
five (5) hours per day for three (3) weeks.  Mr. Jordan also had another course of 
physical therapy following his surgery.  Mr. Jordan continued his care with Dr. Honkamp 
through February of 2024, at which time he was discharged from care.  During that visit, 
Dr. Honkamp also allowed Mr. Jordan to return to work with no restrictions.   
 
On April 26, 2024, the claimant dismissed his original notice and petition in file 
number 23700270.01 without prejudice. 
 
On November 14, 2024, Mr. Jordan then filed the original notice and petition that 
is the basis for this case.  In that petition, Mr. Jordan alleged that he injured his right 
shoulder “[w]hile performing work duties” on January 3, 2023.   
 
By his own admission, Mr. Jordan first reported right shoulder pain to DART in 
2020.  He attributed this pain to repetitively turning the steering wheel on his bus.  He 
testified consistently with this on two occasions.  He underwent a short course of 
treatment and then appears to have returned to his baseline.   
 
In 2022, Mr. Jordan then injured his left shoulder while moving furniture.  
Through the course of his treatment for his left shoulder, Mr. Jordan began to 
experience pain in his right shoulder.  He attributed the increase in his right shoulder 
pain to his ongoing left shoulder injury.  He also told Dr. Molis that driving the bus and 
using a door handle on the bus irritated his shoulder.  Because of his pain, Dr. Molis 
recommended an MR arthrogram of Mr. Jordan’s right shoulder.  The MR arthrogram 
revealed an inferior labral tear from 5 to 8 o’clock, along with mild infraspinatus and 
supraspinatus tendinopathy.   
 
As a result of his visits with Dr. Molis and the results of the MR arthrogram, Mr. 
Jordan commenced treatment with Dr. Honkamp.  Mr. Jordan told Dr. Honkamp that he 
could not recount a direct injury to his right shoulder, but that he experienced a locking 
sensation in the right shoulder.  Dr. Honkamp reviewed the previous MR arthrogram 

JORDAN V. DES MOINES AREA REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY 
Page 15 
 
and examined Mr. Jordan.  During this visit, Dr. Honkamp told Mr. Jordan that his labral 
tearing could be from either trauma or “over time from use.”  The doctor recommended 
physical therapy and restricted Mr. Jordan to working only four hours per day.   
 
Mr. Jordan completed a short course of physical therapy, and then returned to 
see Dr. Honkamp.  He indicated that therapy helped him.  On September 9, 2022, Dr. 
Honkamp allowed Mr. Jordan to return to work with no restrictions as of September 12, 
2022.   
 
Mr. Jordan admits that he experienced previous pain his right shoulder, which he 
attributed to his work with DART, for which he received treatment, in 2020.   
Subsequently, Mr. Jordan recognized that he experienced increased pain in his 
right shoulder during the course of his treatment with Dr. Molis in 2022.  He indicated to 
Dr. Molis that steering the bus and using a door handle on the bus irritated his shoulder. 
This is the earliest time that Mr. Jordan could have known or should have known that 
his right shoulder issues were work related.  However, this alone would not be enough 
to satisfy the defendants’ burden regarding the affirmative defense.  Nevertheless, there 
is other evidence that supports the defendants’ position.  For example, Dr. Molis 
ordered an MR arthrogram of the right shoulder, which revealed the partial inferior labral 
tear and tendinopathy.  Additionally, Mr. Jordan testified as to this issue during the 
arbitration hearing: 
Q. 
And then it was in – you were getting treatment for the left shoulder, 
and then your right shoulder started bothering you, and you got an 
MRI of your right shoulder, and that was in about August of 2022; 
correct? 
A. 
That’s correct. 
Q. 
Okay.  And at that time, you were told that you had a labral tear in 
your right shoulder? 
A. 
That’s correct. 
Q. 
Yeah.  And at that time you understood, at least in your mind you 
thought that that condition was caused by work activities at DART; 
correct? 
A. 
That’s correct. 
See Transcript, pp. 21-22.  This is an admission from Mr. Jordan that he knew his right 
shoulder issues were work related in August of 2022, following his right shoulder MR 
arthrogram.   
Following the results of the MRI, Mr. Jordan visited Dr. Honkamp for treatment 
for his right shoulder pain.  Dr. Honkamp then restricted him to working only four hours 
per day.  Taken in conjunction with the development of right shoulder symptoms and 

JORDAN V. DES MOINES AREA REGIONAL TRANSIT AUTHORITY 
Page 16 
 
Mr. Jordan’s admission, this is proof at a minimum, that Mr. Jordan should have known 
that his right shoulder injuries were related to his work at DART by August 9, 2022.   
It does not appear from the record that DART ever made any payments to extend 
the statute of limitations to three years pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.26.  Thus, the 
time contemplated by the two-year statute of limitations commenced on August 9, 2022.  
The two-year statute of limitations ran out on August 9, 2024.  The original notice and 
petition in this matter was filed on November 14, 2024.  This is outside of the two-year 
period contemplated by Iowa Code section 85.26.  Accordingly, the claimant’s claim is 
barred by the statute of limitations. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
That the claimant shall take nothing further. 
That the defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by 
this agency pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 3.1(2) and 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 11.7.   
Signed and filed this _27th _ day of January, 2026. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Richard Schmidt (via WCES) 
Charles Blades (via WCES) 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
            ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
