Case Number: 5067240.01
Case Title:  LONG, SIDNEY ROBERT V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Long SidneyRobert-5067240.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
SIDNEY ROBERT LONG, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  :                     File No. 5067240.01 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION 
  : 
COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE COMPANY 
  : 
OF NORTH AMERICA, 
  :  
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos.: 1100, 4100, 1702, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
      1803, 1801, 1806 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Sidney Long, has filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits against Jacobson Transportation Company, employer, and 
Indemnity Insurance Company of North America, insurance carrier, both as defendants.  
In accordance with agency scheduling procedures and pursuant to the Order of 
the Commissioner in the matter of the Coronavirus/COVID-19 Impact on Hearings, the 
hearing was held on October 30, 2020, via Court Call. The case was considered fully 
submitted on November 20, 2020, upon the simultaneous filing of briefs.  
The record consists of Joint Exhibits 1-7, claimant’s exhibits 1-8, Defendants 
exhibits A-O, and the testimony of claimant, Jessica Cabanaw, and Noah Peterson. 
ISSUES 
1. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary or healing period benefits; 
2. Whether claimant sustained a permanent disability; 
3. Whether claimant’s injury resulted in a scheduled member or industrial 
disability;  
4. Whether claimant is entitled to a finding of permanent total and/or benefits 
under the odd-lot doctrine; 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to payment and/or reimbursement of medical 
expenses itemized in Claimant’s Exhibit 7; 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to a reimbursement of a medical examination 
under Iowa Code section 85.39; 
7. Whether defendants are entitled to credits under Iowa Code section 85.34 for 
prior injury with the same employer;  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Apr-14  09:32:54     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 2 
8. And the assessment of costs. 
STIPULATIONS 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
The parties stipulate claimant sustained a work related injury arising out of and in 
the course of employment on December 17, 2018. While the parties disagree as to 
whether claimant is entitled to additional healing period benefits, they agree claimant 
was off work from the date of the injury through July 16, 2020.  
At the time of the accepted work injury, claimant’s gross earnings were $909.23 
per week. He was single and entitled to one exemption. Based on the foregoing, 
claimant’s weekly benefit rate is $565.64.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant was a 55-year-old person at the time of hearing. He was an above 
average student. He liked shop and history and auto mechanics. He is a person who 
likes to work with his hands and mechanical things.  He obtained his Class A, CDL in 
1999 and has held it for twenty years. His adult work history consisted of truck driving 
jobs that required him to have a healthy body.  
A Con-Way Truckload Services Driver/Sales Rep (DSR) position required the 
ability to change tires, lift chains, unload and load or stack freight. (Defendants’ Exhibit 
L:110) These tasks required the frequent lifting of up to 50 pounds and the occasional 
lifting of more than 76 pounds. Id. Claimant also testified that inspections of the vehicles 
and trailers required bending, crawling and lifting. He was terminated on or about 
August 31, 2019, as part of a reduction in the work force. (Claimant’s Exhibit 5:76)  
Some of claimant’s testimony about the physical demands of his job were not 
consistent from his 2017 testimony in a previous workers’ compensation proceeding 
and his testimony at hearing. For instance, he testified during his 2017 deposition that 
as a concrete truck driver, he was only required to hose out the chutes that weighed five 
to seven pounds. (Depo p. 15)  At the 2020 hearing, he maintained those chutes were 
50 pounds. At hearing, he testified that even with no touch driving, there were physical 
tasks. In the deposition testimony, he testified that dock to dock driving required no 
physical tasks other than opening the doors. (Depo p. 19) At CRST, claimant did drop 
and hook trucking which required no loading or unloading. (Depo p. 26-27)  
During his period of employment with defendants, claimant did have at least two 
accounts where he was not required to touch the load.  
 
 

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 3 
On October 17, 2007, claimant suffered an injury to his left shoulder while pulling 
himself into his truck. He first sought care at Boone County Family Medicine with 
Richard E Vermillion, D.O. (JE 1:1) Claimant displayed severe restriction in shoulder 
movement and trigger point tenderness. Id. In the medical record, claimant’s medical 
history included fibromyalgia, fibromyositis, lumbosacral strain and torsion, and 
psoasitis. Id. An MRI study revealed a small incomplete full thickness rotator cuff tear 
and some mild to moderate signs of degenerative disease. (JE 1:3)  He was initially 
provided treatment in the form of injection, medications, and physical therapy. (JE 1:1, 
1:5) Eventually, he underwent surgical repair.  
On January 11, 2017, claimant was seen at Newton Clinic by Stephanie Bantell, 
M.D., for an injury to multiple body parts following a fall while disembarking the cab of 
his semi truck. (JE 3:22) He fell and did a sort of splits and felt something pop or give in 
the left knee. He fell on his right knee and then back onto his right shoulder. Id. The 
examination revealed swelling in the left knee with tenderness and limited ROM. (JE 
3:22) Claimant exhibited tenderness in the right shoulder blade with active range of 
motion limited to 80 degrees but full passive ROM. (JE 3:23)  
An MRI of the right shoulder was conducted on January 27, 2017, which 
revealed a full thickness rotator cuff superimposed with rotator cuff tendinopathy. (JE 
3:32) Following the MRI, claimant was referred to Dr. Vincent at Iowa Ortho. (JE 3:33) 
On the same day, claimant returned to Dr. Bantell with reports of ongoing pain 
and weakness in the left knee. (JE 3:35) Because of this, claimant was sent for an MR 
Arthrogram which showed a rupture of the ACL (JE 3:37)  
Claimant presented Christopher Vincent, M.D., on February 1, 2017, regarding 
right shoulder pain. (JE 4:85) Dr. Vincent noted the claimant had not been previously 
treating for the right shoulder nor had he suffered any previous right shoulder pain. Id. 
Claimant’s reports of pain, tenderness and range of motion restrictions along with the 
testing were suggestive of a full-thickness rotator cuff tear, subacromial impingement, 
acromioclavicular joint arthralgia and biceps tendinopathy of the right shoulder. Id. 
Because of this diagnosis, Dr. Vincent offered surgical repair which claimant selected.  
On March 1, 2017, claimant underwent surgical repair on the rotator cuff tear. (JE 
3:44) On March 8, 2017, claimant returned to Dr. Vincent in follow up to the surgery on 
the right shoulder and complained of new left knee pain which claimant attributed to the 
fall on January 11, 2017. (JE 4:88) He shared with Dr. Vincent that while he had had 
past knee surgery, he had been completely asymptomatic in the recent past. (JE 4:89) 
Dr. Vincent suggested a corticosteroid injection, which was administered during the 
visit. (JE 4:90-91) Claimant was then referred to PT. (JE 3:46)  
On April 12, 2017, claimant returned to Dr. Vincent for recheck of the right 
shoulder and follow up of the left knee complaints. (JE 4:93) Dr. Vincent discussed a 
number of treatment options and claimant elected to proceed with a left knee 
arthroscopic ACL reconstruction which took place on May 24, 2017. (JE 4:95, 97)  
 
 

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 4 
During a follow up with Dr. Vincent on October 11, 2017, claimant reported 
continuing instability in the left knee which Dr. Vincent attributed to severe atrophy. (JE 
4:102) Dr. Vincent advised claimant that the visible significant atrophy of the quadriceps 
and hamstrings were signs of incomplete compliance with exercise and strengthening 
and that there was no way for claimant to regain his strength but through resistance 
training. (JE 4:102) Dr. Vincent recommended claimant continue progressive 
strengthening with physical therapy. (JE 4:102)  
Jacqueline M. Stoken, D.O., provided an expert witness report on November 20, 
2017 pertaining to the January 2017 injury to claimant’s right shoulder and left lower 
extremity. (DE G)  The report noted the claimant had undergone a functional capacity 
evaluation which placed him in the light medium duty work category with restrictions as 
follows: 
Waist to floor lifting 10 lbs. frequently, 20 lbs. occasionally, and 30 lbs. rarely.  
Waist to crown lifting (Handles) of 10 lbs. frequently, 20 lbs. occasionally, 
      And 25 lbs. rarely. 
Wait to crown lifting (Preferred) of 15 lbs. frequently, 25 lbs. occasionally,  
     And 35 lbs. rarely.  
Front carry of 0 lbs. frequently, 25 lbs. occasionally, and 35 lbs. rarely. 
Right carry of 0 lbs. frequently, 25 lbs. occasionally, and 35 lbs. rarely.  
Left carry of 0 lbs. frequently, 20 lbs. occasionally, and 30 lbs. rarely. 
He was limited to occasional elevated work, forward bending standing,  
     Crouching, walking and climbing a ladder with 2 hands. 
(DE G:83)  
The functional capacity evaluation of November 6, 2017, included a mention of 
low back pain in addition to the left knee and right shoulder pain. (DE I:97)  
Claimant’s current condition at the time of the independent medical examination 
of November 13, 2017 included pain in his left knee that he described as aching, 
shooting, stabbing, exhausting, tiring and miserable with pain ranging from 4 to 9 on a 
10 scale. The pain averaged 7/10 that was 5/10 at the time of the examination.  (DE 
G:80) Climbing stairs, lifting, and squatting worsened his pain. Id. He also complained of 
pain in his right shoulder that range from 3 to 6 on a 10 scale in pain. Lifting overhead 
and lifting 15 to 20 pounds worsened his pain. (DE G:80) Therapy and ibuprofen gave a 
moderate amount of relief but his pain interfered mildly with sitting for one-half hour, 
traveling up to one hour by car, showering and bathing, writing, typing and dressing and 
moderately with walking one block, standing for one-half hour, sleep, social activities, 
daily activities, relationships, chores around the house, sexual activities, concentration 
and mood. Id.  
 
 

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 5 
Dr. Stoken assessed 18 percent impairment of the whole person for the left knee 
and right shoulder pain and placed claimant in the light category of work and the low 
range of the medium category of work in line with the FCE of November 6, 2017. (DE 
G:83, DE I)  
Claimant testified that despite these restrictions he was able to perform the 
essential functions of his job prior to the injury on December 17, 2018. In his deposition, 
he maintained he had no pain in his left knee or right shoulder.  (DE L: 34-35) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Vincent on November 29, 2017, for continued left knee 
pain. (JE 4:104) With movement, claimant felt pain and heard a clicking sound. Id. On 
examination, Dr. Vincent noted claimant’s knee felt normal and he had full passive 
range of motion. (JE 4:106) He again encouraged claimant to pursue vigorous PT. Id. A 
corticosteroid injection was administered. Id.  
On December 14, 2017, Dr. Vincent engaged in a discussion with claimant 
regarding the ongoing issues of his shoulder and in a January 16, 2018, letter, Dr. 
Vincent stated the following:  
The patient sustained a work injury on January 11, 2017, when he fell 
and slipped on the ice, injuring his right shoulder and his left knee.  
History, exam, radiographs, and his MRI scan demonstrated a full-
thickness tear of his rotator cuff with features of subacromial impingement, 
acromioclavicular arthralgia and biceps tendinopathy.  He underwent a 
shoulder arthroscopy with subacromial decompression, distal clavicle 
excision and rotator cuff repair on March 1, 2017.  He was subsequently 
compliant with postoperative restrictions, physical therapy and 
rehabilitation.  I saw him back on August 30, 2017, and released to work 
without restrictions for his shoulder injury.  I believe he had reached 
maximum medical improvement at that time. 
At the same time of his shoulder injury, he also injured his left knee.  A 
subsequent MRI demonstrated findings of an ACL rupture, and on May 
24, 2017, he underwent a left arthroscopic ACL reconstruction with partial 
lateral meniscectomy.  Postoperatively he was compliant with his physical 
therapy.  Objectively his knee exam findings were within normal 
postoperative expectations.  At his most recent follow-up, his knee exam 
was completely stable.  He had an intact ACL graft with acceptable range 
of motion in his ongoing rehabilitation of the knee.  Throughout his 
postoperative course in the knee, he continued to report very high pain 
levels and an inability to perform his work duties.  He was very resistant to 
attempt to return to work duties.  There was incongruency sign seen on 
physical exam with inconsistencies throughout encounters which raised 
my concern for symptom magnification during my evaluation of him 
regarding his knee.   
(DE H:86)  

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 6 
During my evaluation on December 14, 2017, due to his previous 
reports of normal shoulder function and his new reports of a new shoulder 
injury, I interviewed him very pointedly regarding his new injury.  I wanted 
to have a clear understanding of whether this was an acute reinjury, or 
ongoing dysfunction.  Mr. Long clearly indicated and confirmed to me that 
he was having no pain, no weakness and no dysfunction prior to the 
reinjury of December 13, 2017.  He told me that prior to his 12/13/17 
reinjury, he was feeling great, having no pain and had full strength and 
range of motion in his shoulder.  He stated he reinjured his shoulder when 
he was pulling his duffel bag out of the truck at work on December 13, 
2017.  Based on my evaluations of him throughout the end of the year, 
and in my interview with him on December 14, 2017, as well as my 
evaluation on August 30, 2017, it is my opinion that the patient had 
reached maximum medical improvement in the shoulder on August 30, 
2017.  I believe his current complaints of pain and weakness are new and 
related to a new injury of 12/13/17. 
(DE H:87)  
Dr. Vincent took issue with Dr. Stoken’s 2017 assessments as well. 
Dr. Stoken then reports strength loss in every plan of motion for the 
shoulder.  There is no physiologic explanation for Mr. Long to have any 
loss of strength in the planes of internal rotation and abduction, as these 
completely eliminate any use of the supraspinatus tendon, which was the 
repaired tendon.  And yet, Dr. Stoken documented profound strength loss 
in essentially every measureable motion plane.  This contradicts my 
observation of 5/5 strength in all planes through multiple visits.  The 
function capacity evaluation dated November 6, 2017, by Work Well 
Systems found similar findings to what I observed regarding strength 
testing.  When reviewing their strength testing, the patient had 5/5 strength 
in the planes of extension, abduction, internal rotation, and external 
rotation of the right shoulder on page 8.  The only abnormality noted 
during strength testing from the functional capacity evaluation was 4/5 
strength in forward flexion.  Therefore, I do not believe Dr. Stoken’s 
impairments for strength loss to be accurate.  In addition, Mr. Long self-
reported to me that he did not have weakness prior to his December 13, 
2017, reinjury.  Regarding Dr. Stoken’s impairment of the left knee, I do 
agree with the 2% impairment rating which would be eventually awarded 
once the patient has reached maximum medical improvement based on 
the partial lateral meniscectomy that the patient underwent.  However, as 
noted I would not place him at MMI for the knee yet.  
(DE H:89) Dr. Vincent was also critical of the FCE as it did not have any blind strength 
tests.  
 
 

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 7 
On December 22, 2017, claimant was seen at Newton Clinic PT for a re-
evaluation. (JE 3:47) In the history, claimant returned to work on December 11, 2017, 
but that he re-injured his shoulder on December 12, 2017. (JE 3:48) He also 
complained of a re-emerging left knee pain which he rated 4-5 on a 10 scale. (JE 3:48)  
On January 9, 2018, claimant underwent an MRI of the right shoulder which 
showed an intact rotator cuff repair. (JE 3:52) The tendon was intact with some small 
vacation at the suture sites through the subacromial space. Id. Dr. Vincent did not see 
any evidence of an acute injury or retear. (JE 4:109) 
On January 18, 2018, claimant returned to Dr. Vincent with reports of mild pain in 
the right arm along with difficulty elevating the arm. (JE 4:108) Dr. Vincent 
recommended a month of PT and anticipated releasing claimant to unrestricted work in 
a month. (JE 4:109)  
Regardless, the parties agreed to a settlement wherein claimant was deemed to 
have suffered a 35.8 percent body as a whole impairment for the right shoulder and left 
knee injuries. (DE N:114) His benefit rate was $566.43.  
On March 10, 2018, claimant was seen by David E Hatfield, M.D., for claimant’s 
low back complaints radiating into the leg. (JE 2:10) MRI of the back showed slight 
decreased disc space throughout the lumbar region with a minimal disc protrusion at the 
L5-S1 level. (JE 2:14) Dr. Hatfield did not feel claimant was a candidate for surgery and 
instead claimant was sent to physical therapy for conditioning and rehabilitation. (JE 
2:14) Claimant was unable to complete the course of therapy due to transportation and 
fuel costs and did not believe it was particularly helpful, telling Dr. Hatfield that he 
“thought it was too easy.” (JE 2:15) After discussion with Dr. Hatfield, claimant 
underwent an FCE to properly assess claimant’s permanent work restrictions. (JE 2:16)  
On August 20, 2018, claimant returned with complaints of lumbar pain, worse on 
the left than the right. (JE 3:57) He attributed it to picking up a ladder in his garage and 
was concerned he had pulled a muscle. Id. His pain rating was 9 on a 10 scale. Id. 
Andrew Cope, D.O., diagnosed claimant with an acute muscle strain and claimant was 
provided medications and a work excuse by Dr. Cope. (JE 3:58-60) Eventually, claimant 
was referred to PT. (JE 3:62; 3:64)  
Claimant returned to Dr. Cope on September 18, 2018, with reports of pain and 
decreased function. (JE 3:69) Although Dr. Cope had previously released claimant to 
work, claimant felt the pain was too great and he did not return to work. (JE 3:69) Dr. 
Cope noted claimant was able to mow his lawn without issue. (JE 3:70) At this 
appointment, claimant requested a return to work release due to the demands of his 
employer. (JE 3:70) Dr. Cope fulfilled this request.   
On or about December 17, 2018, claimant was dispatched to Toledo to pick up a 
load. He exited the truck and fell backwards on the concrete. He was able to re-enter 
his truck wherein he called dispatch. Dispatch directed him to continue his route from 
Toledo to Kellogg. Once at Kellogg, he sat in a truck for several hours. He was then 
allowed to drive his personal vehicle to Concentra where he was seen by Carlos Moe, 
D.O., for left shoulder pain, back pain with tingling into the left leg and left knee pain 

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 8 
with decreased range of motion. (JE 5:111) Dr. Moe ordered an MRI and an injection 
was administered for lumbar pain and radiculopathy. (JE 5:116)  
On December 20, 2018, claimant was seen in follow up with Dr. Moe. (JE 5:115) 
During this visit, claimant’s back pain persisted but his left shoulder and left knee pain 
were getting better. Id.  
On January 13, 2019, claimant underwent an MRI. (JE 2:18) The findings were 
compared with the lumbar spine MRI of March 17, 2008. Id.  At L5-S1, there was a 
herniated disc that touched the left S1 nerve root which was not present on the 2008 
MRI. At L4-5, there was an interim progression of degenerative disc bulge and facet 
changes contributing to mild spinal canal and mild bilateral neural foraminal narrowing, 
presumably chronic. (JE 2:18-19)  
On March 5, 2019, claimant returned to see Dr. Cope for a review of medications 
and follow up for the low back pain. (JE 3:73) Claimant reported a MVA on December 
17, 2018. Id. His low back pain radiated down into the left leg with a pins and needles 
sensation. (JE 3:73) At the request of claimant, Dr. Cope made an orthopaedic referral. 
(JE 3:74)  
Claimant began care with Trevor Schmitz, M.D., on April 15, 2019, for the low 
back pain which claimant said began four months prior. (JE 6:121) Dr. Schmitz 
concluded that claimant should attempt conservative care in the form of injection 
medications and physical therapy. (JE 6:121) Dr. Schmitz started claimant on 
gabapentin and Flexeril. Id. On April 26, 2019, claimant was administered a 
transforaminal epidural steroid injection. (JE 6:123) Per the notes, claimant presented 
with pain at 9 on a 10 scale and after the injection, his pain level was zero on a ten 
scale. (JE 6:23)  
On May 17, 2019, claimant returned to Dr. Cope for follow up of back pain which 
Dr. Cope noted started after the MVA of December 17, 2018. (JE 3:79)There was no 
mention of left knee pain other than the radicular arm pain or left shoulder pain. Id. 
During the physical exam action, he had normal range of motion bilaterally in the knees 
with negative straight leg test and ability to stand on toes and walk on heels. (JE 3: 79)  
Claimant reported that the epidural steroid injection worsened his pain but gabapentin 
alleviated it. (JE 3:79) Unfortunately, Dr. Schmitz refused to refill the medications likely 
due to claimant’s missed appointment. (JE 3:80) Dr. Cope called in a refill for the 
gabapentin and Flexeril to serve as a bridge until claimant’s next ortho appointment. Id.  
In a physical therapy progress note dated May 28, 2019, claimant’s pain was 8 
on a 10 scale for lumbar pain. (JE 3:82)  
On June 5, 2019, claimant returned to Dr. Schmitz’s office for follow up 
complaining of low back pain, left leg tingling, and numbness and weakness. (JE 6:125) 
Because of the lack of response to the conservative treatments, claimant proceeded 
with posterior lumbar decompression and discectomy at the L5-S1 level which took 
place on September 16, 2019. (JE 6:126; 7:147)  

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 9 
Defendants requested a records review performed by William Boulden, M.D., on 
July 18, 2019 (DE E:58) Dr. Boulden opined the claimant’s low back pain was 
attributable to the underlying pre-existing significant degenerative disc disease at all five 
lumbar disc levels. (DE E:57) Dr. Boulden did find that the work injury could have been 
the cause of the herniated disc but not the degenerative changes. (DE E:57) Dr. 
Boulden was concerned claimant suffered some nonorganic pain problems and that as 
a result, claimant would find the surgery a failure. (DE E:57)  Based on the 
radiculopathy, Dr. Boulden would assign a 10 percent impairment rating but had 
concerns that the primary areas of complaint were in the claimant’s low back, which was 
not related to the work injury. (DE E:58)  
In the meantime, claimant underwent right inguinal hernia repair on September 5, 
2019. (JE 3:82) On September 16, 2019, he underwent lumbar discectomy with Dr. 
Schmitz which Dr. Schmitz earlier explained to claimant would provide relief only for the 
leg pain. (JE 6:127. 7:147-48)  
He presented on October 30, 2019, for follow up, with reports of mild pain 
symptoms that were aggravated by sitting. (JE 6:128) He did feel his left leg was better 
but was experiencing new right sided low back and hip pain. (JE 6:128)  
On December 3, 2019, claimant was seen by Dr. Schmitz in follow up for the 
back surgery. (JE 6:132) Claimant had reports of pain in the left lower back and back of 
the knee. (JE 6:132) Dr. Schmitz encouraged claimant to return to PT. (JE 6:137) In a 
follow up visit on January 7, 2020, claimant reported left sided low back pain. (JE 6:137) 
The therapist wanted to continue treatment but claimant felt it was not helpful. (JE 
6:138) Given that claimant was not making significant strides in therapy, Dr. Schmitz 
believed claimant was at MMI and sent claimant for an FCE. (JE 6:138)  
The FCE was rated as invalid.  
Claimant returned to Dr. Schmitz on February 11, 2020. (JE 6:140) Dr. Schmitz 
documented that claimant had several findings of examination that were consistent with 
a nonanatomic source for pain and that Dr. Schmitz did not have a good explanation for 
the current clinical presentation. (JE 6:141) Dr. Schmitz opined that claimant had a 
stable spine and could do whatever he wishes to do in life. Id. Dr. Schmitz placed 
claimant at MMI without restrictions upon his return to work. Id.  
Claimant had one more visit with Dr. Schmitz prior to hearing on July 14, 2020. 
(JE 6:144) During that visit, claimant reported ongoing low back and left sided pain.  
I had a lengthy discussion with Robert today in clinic.  On examination 
he has exam findings fully inconsistent with any known anatomic source 
for pain.  History of axial compression of his head.  He has pain with 
simulator trunk rotation.  He has nondermatomal numbness and tingling 
on the LEFT leg.  He has a distractible straight leg raise on the LEFT.  
When he thinks we are testing his knee range of motion he has a negative 
straight leg raise.  When he thinks that I am testing for nerve root 
impingement he has a positive nerve root response.  X-rays appear to be 
unchanged.  

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 10 
I certainly do not think he has anything further surgically or 
interventionally that is going to drastically alter his underlying treatment 
course.  From my perspective he is at maximum medical improvement 
(MMI).  He is requesting a referral to pain management.  I will see him 
back on an as-needed basis and we will go from there. 
(JE 6:144-45)  
On December 9, 2019, claimant underwent an FCE at Kinetic Edge Physical 
Therapy with Todd Schemper, PT. (CE 2) The FCE was deemed valid as claimant 
demonstrated cooperative behavior, consistent performance with reproducible activities, 
and maximum effort. (CE 2:1)  
As a result of the test, claimant was placed in the sedentary work category due to 
limitations in his ability to front carry only 10 pounds on an occasional basis and 15 
pounds on a rare basis. (CE2:21) His ability to lift waist to crown fell within the light duty 
category which meant he could handle up to 15 pounds occasionally and 25 pounds 
rarely. Therapist Schemper also recommended claimant use a cane for longer distance 
walking and on uneven surfaces. (CE 2:22)  
After reviewing the FCE from Atletico discussed below, Mr. Schemper made no 
changes to his FCE report. (CE 2:29)  
Claimant was sent to Dr. Stoken for an IME pertaining to the low back and left 
shoulder on January 9, 2020. (CE 1) His current complaints included left shoulder pain 
that was aching, shooting, exhausting and miserable, ranging from 6-7 on a 10 scale. 
Rest, medicine and hot baths alleviated pain while lifting and overhead reaching 
worsened it. (CE 1:11) For his back, he described the pain as aching, shooting, 
stabbing, exhausting, continuous and miserable, ranging from 7-8 on a 10 scale. He 
also reported left leg pain that he described as aching, shooting, intermittent, 
exhausting, penetrating and miserable, ranging from 6-8 on a 10 scale. Hot baths, a soft 
chair and ice reduce pain and walking, twisting, standing worsen pain. Id.  
Gabapentin, cyclobenzaprine and physical therapy gave him a moderate amount 
of relief. The pain interfered moderately with sitting for one-half hour, showering and 
bathing, writing and typing, dressing, concentration and his mood. The pain interfered 
moderately to severely with walking one block, lifting ten pounds, sleep, traveling up to 
one hour by car, his daily activities, his relationships, chores around the house, and 
sexual activities. The pain completely interfered with standing for one-half hour and 
social activities. Id.  
For objective findings, claimant’s reflexes were normal and symmetrical. Muscle 
tone and bulk was within normal limits. (CE 1:12) Muscle strength was 5+/5. Sensation 
as normal. Right shoulder had reduced range of motion while the left shoulder was 
positive for Hawkin's, Neer, and supraspinatus tests. Lumbar range of motion was also 
reduced. He had a positive straight leg raise test on the left, ambulated with an antalgic 
gain, and used a cane. Id.  

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 11 
Dr. Stoken’s diagnoses included several impressions including herniated disk, 
chronic low back pain, left knee strain with ACL rupture and lateral meniscus tear. (CE 
1:12)  She opined slipping on the truck stairs and falling caused or aggravated 
claimant’s injury to his back, left shoulder, lower extremity and body as a whole. Prior to 
this incident, claimant was able to work full duty without restrictions.  
This conclusion appears to be in contradiction to the claimant’s assertions in the 
2017 workers’ compensation case and Dr. Stoken’s own expert witness report rendered 
on November 2017. (Ex. G) Dr. Stoken assigned permanent impairment ratings of 18 
percent to the whole body based on the right shoulder and left knee injuries. The 2017 
FCE placed claimant in the low range of medium to light duty category of work. The 
settlement between the parties resulted in a 38.5 percent impairment to the body as a 
whole.  
Claimant was off work during periods of 2017 and 2018 for right shoulder, left 
knee, low back on the left and the right. Dr. Cope noted claimant had been reluctant to 
return to work even after Dr. Cope released claimant.  
Thus, the statement that claimant was able to work full duty without restrictions is 
not wholly accurate and diminishes the weight to be afforded Dr. Stoken’s opinions.   
As it related to the back, left shoulder, left lower extremity and whole body, Dr. 
Stoken assigned the following impairment ratings: 
Low back injury due to the history of herniated disc and associated 
radiculopathy = 13% 
Left upper extremity range of motion deficits – 10% UE or 6% whole 
person 
(CE 1. at 13, 14)   
For work restrictions, claimant was placed in the light category of work and 
ordered to avoid lifting more than 10 pounds on a frequent basis, 15 pounds on an 
occasional basis, and 20 pounds on a rare basis. (CE 1:13)  
Claimant was then sent for a vocational evaluation with Jeff Johnson. Based on 
an interview, the IME of Dr. Stoken and the FCE from Mr. Schemper, Mr. Johnson 
opined that claimant was precluded from returning to any previous occupations and that 
he had sustained a 75-97 percent loss of access to the labor market (CE 3:40)  On the 
low end, using Dr. Stoken’s assessments placing claimant in the light duty work 
category, claimant lost 58 percent access to the labor market. On the high end, based 
on the more restrictive evaluation of Mr. Schemper, claimant lost 97 percent of access 
to the labor market. Id.  
In a follow-up letter dated October 2, 2020, Mr. Johnson revised his opinion on 
claimant’s employability, finding him able to perform less than a full range of light duty 
work activities and that his actual loss of employment opportunities was greater than 72 
percent. (CE 3:57) He also took issue with the opinion of Ms. Sellner described below 

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 12 
who suggested claimant could work jobs outside of his past skilled work experience. 
(CE 3:56-57)  
On February 7, 2020, claimant underwent an FCE at Athletico Physical Therapy. 
(DE D:28) The FCE was deemed invalid due to testing inconsistencies, subjective 
complaints of pain that were not consistent or did not correlate with observed functional 
movement patterns, and absence of signs that claimant was displaying maximum effort. 
(Id. at 29)  Though not requested, claimant completed 20 minutes of activity without the 
use of a single point cane. (Id at 33)  At one point, claimant’s lower left extremity gave 
way and the therapist requested claimant use the cane for the remainder of the testing. 
Id. Despite the invalid results, John Kruzich placed claimant in the light physical demand 
level. Id.  
The second baseline functional capacity evaluation was performed on August 20, 
2020. (DE D:38)  This test was deemed valid as claimant’s performance was consistent 
and repeatable with no significant exaggerated pain behaviors and a display of good 
effort. (DE D:38) Based upon the August 20, 2020, functional capacity evaluation placed 
claimant in the light physical demand level with the following restrictions; 
 Waist to floor lifting – 20 lbs., occasionally 
 Waist to shoulder lifting – 15 lbs., occasionally 
 Waist to overhead lifting – 15 lbs., occasionally 
 Bilateral carrying – 15 lbs., occasionally 
 Horizontal pushing/pulling – 35 lbs. of force, occasionally 
 Standing/walking – Frequently, with positional changes as required 
 Stair climbing – Frequently, with use of hand rails 
 Bending – Occasionally, within available range of motion 
 Kneeling – Occasionally, with use of upper extremity support for 
transitional movements 
 Squatting – Occasionally, with use of upper, extremity support for 
transitional movements 
 Left unilateral overhead reaching – Occasionally, within available 
range of motion 
(DE D:38)  
Trevor R. Schmitz, M.D., an orthopaedic spine surgeon authored a report in 
response to a request from defendants.  (DE A) Dr. Schmitz diagnosed claimant with a 
disc herniation which he attributed to claimant’s fall at work on December 17, 20181, 
and performed a hemilaminotomy and microdiscectomy to remove the disc. (DE A:1) 
Dr. Schmitz believed that the surgery resolved the radiating pain into the left leg but that 
during subsequent visits claimant presented with symptoms that were not consistent 
with any known anatomic structure. Id. Based on the successful resection of the 
herniated disc, the modest surgical procedure and the nonanatomic pain behaviors, Dr. 
Schmitz opined claimant’s future prognosis was good, achieving MMI on January 7, 
                                                 
1 Dr. Schmitz’ report says December 17, 2019, but the fall was on December 17, 2018. I believe that the date in Dr. 
Schmitz’s report is a scrivener’s error.  

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 13 
2020.  Id.  He assigned a 10 percent whole person impairment rating and based on the 
FCE of February 7, 2020, no work restrictions. (DE A:2)  
On September 9, 2020, Dr. Cope filled out a checklist letter authored by 
defendants wherein Dr. Cope acknowledged treating claimant for a back injury on 
August 2018 prior to his fall at work on December 17, 2018. (Ex B:7) Dr. Cope agreed 
that during his last medical visit with claimant, claimant’s back condition had markedly 
improved from the December 17, 2018, injury. (DE B:8)  
On September 14, 2020, claimant underwent an IME with Jeff Henson, M.D., at 
the request of the defendants.  (DE C)  Dr. Henson opined claimant had chronic back 
pain from degenerative changes not caused by his work injury. (DE C:16) Based on 
claimant’s condition during the September 14, 2020, examination, Dr. Henson would 
impose permanent restrictions based on claimant’s chronic back pain of no lifting 
greater than 25 pounds frequently and no greater than 40 pounds occasionally. (DE 
C:17) He also felt that Dr. Stoken’s IME was thorough and well performed and that he 
agreed with the majority of the opinions held by Dr. Stoken but for the area of 
permanent work restrictions. (DE C:18)  
On February 19, 2020, Lana Sellner issued an employability report at the request 
of the defendant. (DE F:60) Ms. Sellner determined that based upon the opinions of Dr. 
Stoken and Dr. Schmitz, claimant could work in the light work category. (DE F:64) 
Based on that physical demand categorization, Ms. Sellner identified the claimant would 
be able to perform several jobs within the transportation industry that would not require 
him to drive in addition to no touch driving positions. (DE F:64) Ms. Sellner 
acknowledged that the SVP score of several of the non-driving positions were higher 
than that which claimant held in the past but that he was qualified to perform these 
different positions. Id. Thus it was Ms. Sellner’s position that claimant suffered little, if 
any, vocational impact. (Ex F:66)  
A follow-up report was provided on August 4, 2020 by Ms. Sellner, but her 
opinions remained unchanged that claimant had sustained very little if any vocational 
impact based upon the expert witness opinions about his physical capabilities when 
paired with her market research. (Ex F:67; 72)  
Ms. Sellner did identify several jobs available to the claimant within his work 
restrictions, but several were higher in SVP than he had previously worked. While it is 
possible that claimant’s extensive experience as an over-the-road trucker would be 
welcomed by hiring authorities within the trucking industry for higher-level office 
positions, that still would not obviate claimant’s loss of access to a portion of the labor 
market that was open to him prior to the December 17, 2018 work injury. For Ms. 
Sellner to claim that claimant sustained little, if any, loss of access to the labor market 
would ignore the physical change all experts have agreed claimant has undergone 
since the work injury of December 17, 2018. For that reason, Ms. Sellner’s opinions are 
given lower weight. 
Claimant maintains he has a difficult time sleeping, lifting, standing, walking, and 
doing most activities. He takes gabapentin 10 mg three times a day, suffers from 
anxiety, has high cholesterol, and can walk only approximately 50 feet.  

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 14 
He has not shown a motivation to return to work. He did look for work in March 
2020 but felt that he was being treated unfairly due to his work injury. Prospective 
employers were not interested in him after he shared the level of pain and discomfort he 
was in. Claimant admitted he did not want to work a no-touch trucking job because it 
paid less.  
There is an issue of credibility raised by the defendants. Claimant was sharp in 
tone during some parts of cross-examination and he had some inconsistencies in his 
testimony, admitting, for instance, that the medical visit he had with Dr. Henson two 
months prior to hearing did not fully and accurately present claimant’s post injury 
symptoms.  
There were inconsistencies in his presentation to his doctors. Dr. Vincent was 
particularly bothered by the changeable nature of claimant’s subjective symptoms. More 
recently, claimant told his family doctor, Dr. Cope, during a July 2020 visit, claimant 
reported that his back condition was “markedly improved.” (DE B:8) At hearing, claimant 
maintained the surgery was not helpful. He also reported to various IME examiners that 
the back surgery was not helpful.  
Dr. Schmitz and Dr. Vincent, surgeons who cared for claimant for significant 
periods of time, both opined that claimant’s complaints of pain were not consistent with 
his physical objective findings. These opinions were given in two separate workers’ 
compensation cases, three years apart.  
Finally, claimant maintained in early 2018, he was significantly impaired, yet, he 
later asserted he was fully healed and had no restrictions by his injury of December 
2018, notwithstanding the two prior events of 2018 that led to days off of work and 
medical visits.  
Claimant reported to Dr. Stoken, among others, that he could not sit for longer 
than 30 minutes but that was not evident during the video conference hearing. Based on 
the foregoing, it is found claimant’s subjective complaints of pain and discomfort are 
given low weight.   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 15 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
The parties agree claimant sustained an injury arising out of a slip and fall on 
December 17, 2018. Defendants maintain claimant’s injury was temporary in nature 
while claimant argues that he has suffered a total loss or a near total loss of access to 
the labor market as a result of the 2018 work injury.  
Claimant relies on the expert opinions of Dr. Stoken to provide a causal 
connection between his current symptomatology and the work injury; however, as 
discussed above, her opinion is given low weight.  
The remainder of the expert opinions weigh in favor of finding claimant did 
sustain an aggravation of his underlying degenerative disc condition. Dr. Schmitz, the 
surgeon who performed the discectomy, opined that the disc herniation was caused by 
the fall at work. Dr. Boulden who performed an IME also opined that the work injury 
caused claimant’s disc herniation.   
However, the shoulder and knee problems predate claimant’s December 2018 
injury and claimant has not met his burden as it relates to the ongoing pain and 
discomfort in his left shoulder, left knee, and, to the extent that there is a claim, for the 
right shoulder. The contemporaneous medical treatment records do not include 
reference to left shoulder pain or knee pain beyond the first couple appointments with 
Dr. Moe nor is there any treatment to those areas of the body. When claimant consulted 
with his own physician, Dr. Cope, there was no mention of left shoulder or left knee 

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 16 
problems. Claimant’s primary complaints were of low back radiating into the left lower 
extremity pain. There was no injury found to claimant’s left knee but instead he suffered 
pain radiating from the disc herniation. Dr. Schmitz noted claimant’s left leg pain was 
ameliorated by the surgery. The greater weight of the evidence supports a finding that 
claimant’s permanent disability arising from the December 17, 2018, work injury is 
limited to his lumbar region.  
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) now provides:  
In all cases of permanent partial disability other than those 
hereinabove described or referred to in paragraphs ‘a’ through ‘t’ hereof, 
the compensation shall be paid during the number of weeks in relation to 
five hundred weeks as the reduction in the employee's earning capacity 
caused by the disability bears in relation to the earning capacity that the 
employee possessed when the injury occurred. A determination of the 
reduction in the employee's earning capacity caused by the disability shall 
take into account the permanent partial disability of the employee and the 
number of years in the future it was reasonably anticipated that the 
employee would work at the time of the injury. If an employee who is 
eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work or is 
offered work for which the employee receives or would receive the same 
or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the employee received at the 
time of the injury, the employee shall be compensated based only upon 
the employee's functional impairment resulting from the injury, and not in 
relation to the employee's earning capacity. (emphasis added)  
Claimant has not returned to work nor does it appear he was offered work at the same 
or greater salary. He was terminated as part of a reduction in the work force, thus, 
85.34(2)(v) mandates that the claimant’s industrial disability be measured in relation to 
his earning capacity. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(7) states:   
7.  Successive disabilities.   
a.  An employer is fully liable for compensating all of an employee's 
disability that arises out of and in the course of the employee's 
employment with the employer.  An employer is not liable for 
compensating an employee's preexisting disability that arose out of and in 
the course of employment with a different employer or from causes 
unrelated to employment.   
b. (1)  If an injured employee has a preexisting disability that was 
caused by a prior injury arising out of and in the course of employment 
with the same employer, and the preexisting disability was compensable 
under the same paragraph of subsection 2 as the employee's present 
injury, the employer is liable for the combined disability that is caused by 
the injuries, measured in relation to the employee's condition immediately 
prior to the first injury.  In this instance, the employer's liability for the 

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 17 
combined disability shall be considered to be already partially satisfied to 
the extent of the percentage of disability for which the employee was 
previously compensated by the employer.   
(2)  If, however, an employer is liable to an employee for a combined 
disability that is payable under subsection 2, paragraph "u", and the 
employee has a preexisting disability that causes the employee's earnings 
to be less at the time of the present injury than if the prior injury had not 
occurred, the employer's liability for the combined disability shall be 
considered to be already partially satisfied to the extent of the percentage 
of disability for which the employee was previously compensated by the 
employer minus the percentage that the employee's earnings are less at 
the time of the present injury than if the prior injury had not occurred.   
In Warren Properties v. Stewart, the Iowa Supreme Court directed the fact finding 
to determine the earning capacity when the successive injury occurred and the 
reduction in earning capacity caused by the disabilities. Warren Properties v. Stewart, 
864 N.W.2d 307, 320 (Iowa 2015), as corrected (July 1, 2015). In Second Injury Fund of 
Iowa v. Nelson, the Supreme Court wrote that: 
[w]hen there are two successive work-related injuries, the employer liable 
for the second injury “is generally held liable for the entire disability 
resulting from the combination of the prior disability and the present 
injury.” Celotex Corp. v. Auten, 541 N.W.2d 252, 254 (Iowa 1995). In 
another opinion filed today, we applied this “full responsibility” rule, holding 
the employer liable for its employee's 100% permanent industrial 
disability resulting from a recent work-related injury and two prior work-
related injuries. Id. Thus, the employer liable for the current injury is also 
liable for any preexisting industrial disability caused by a work-related 
injury when that disability combines with industrial disability caused by a 
later injury.” 
Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258, 265 (Iowa 1995), as amended 
on denial of reh'g. (Feb. 14, 1996). 
In Summerlin v. Tyson Foods, Inc., File No. 5025718, 5025719  (App. May 19, 
2011), the commissioner engaged in the following application of facts to the law: 
As it relates to claimant's subsequent left shoulder disability, 
consideration must also be given to his existing right shoulder disability for 
which Tyson is liable. Both the prior injury and the present injury are 
compensable injuries under the same paragraph of section 85.34(2). It is 
therefore required that the employer's liability for the “combined disability” 
- herein the combined disability resulting from the right shoulder injury and 
the left shoulder injury - shall be considered to be already partially 
satisfied to the extent of the percentage of disability for which the 
employee was previously compensated by the employer for the right sided 
injury. Claimant is no longer capable of most of the heavy work he has 
previously performed for Tyson. While claimant was significantly disabled 

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 18 
due to his right shoulder, his subsequent loss of use of the left shoulder is 
devastating vocationally. Claimant remains capable of employment, but 
only in a mostly non-physical position called pick trim. Claimant's 
permanent restrictions preclude a return to anything but modest labor 
meatpacking positions. Upon consideration of all of the industrial disability 
factors it is concluded that the presiding deputy correctly found claimant's 
combined disability at the present time to be 75 percent due to his ongoing 
work activity. Such a finding entitles claimant to 375 weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits as a matter of law under Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(u), which is 75 percent of 500 weeks, the maximum allowable 
number of weeks for an injury to the body as a whole in that subsection. 
Summerlin v. Tyson Foods, Inc., File Nos: 5025718, 5025719, 2011 WL 2010321, at 
*10 (May 19, 2011).  
The first step is to determine the combined disability of the whole body injuries. 
See Bridgestone/Firestone v. Accordino, 561 N.W.2d 60, 62 (Iowa 1997) (requiring the 
decision include the process used to reach conclusions in order for adequate judicial 
review). 
Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 
587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the legislature intended 
the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning capacity and not a 
mere 'functional disability' to be computed in the terms of percentages of the total 
physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Dr. Schmitz concluded that the surgery resolved the radiating pain into the left 
leg but that the lingering low back problems were nonanatomic. Claimant’s spine was 
stable and thus there was little claimant could not physically undertake. Dr. Schmitz 
assigned a 10 percent whole person impairment but no work restrictions. Dr. Cope, 
claimant’s family doctor, shared that claimant reported a marked improvement during a 
July 2020 visit. The vocational report of Dr. Sellner suggests that there was little to no 
loss of access to the labor market.  
Claimant has shown little interest in returning to work. This was true in 2017 after 
his work injury and again in the summer of 2018 when Dr. Cope released claimant to 
return to work but claimant did not.  
 
 

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 19 
Two valid FCEs in 2020 placed claimant in the light to sedentary work category. 
FCEs can have flaws as pointed out by Dr. Vincent for the 2017 FCE however, the FCE 
was performed by two different therapists at different times at the request of both the 
claimant and defendant. While part of the FCE and claimant’s SSD determination is, in 
part, due to his multiple problems that existed both before and developed after 
December 17, 2018, claimant’s condition arising out of the work injury is worse than 
before the work injury. Dr. Schmitz opined claimant’s leg pain was resolved after the 
surgery but not the back pain. Even Dr. Cope’s notes portrayed claimant as continuing 
to have pain, albeit better than previously.  
Defendants argue that claimant’s baseline condition was unchanged by the 
December 17, 2018, injury. This seems to ignore the disc herniation, subsequent 
surgery, valid FCEs, and impairment ratings assigned by Dr. Schmitz. Dr. Schmitz 
assigned a 10 percent impairment and Dr. Henson put claimant in the DRE lumbar 
category III as well.  
It is more likely than not claimant’s current physical condition places him in the 
light duty category balancing the results of the 2020 FCEs and the opinions of Dr. 
Schmitz, Dr. Henson, and Dr. Cope. Claimant was previously in the low end of the 
medium category of work and light duty category of work prior to his December 2018 
work injury. Based on this finding, Ms. Sellner’s opinions do not provide much guidance.  
In the light duty category, there is no touch or drop and hook driving, as well as 
dispatching and other office related trucking industry work. He could also return to his 
job as a meat cutter as he testified that the work required lifting of five to ten pounds. 
(DE, Depo. P. 9-11) In the light duty category of work, Mr. Johnson opined claimant 
would incur a 58 percent loss of access to the employment market based on Dr. 
Stoken’s assessment of claimant’s whole body impairment. This is adopted herein.  
It is found claimant’s full impairment is 58 percent.  
Once the combined disability is determined, the statute requires that the previous 
award be deducted from whole impairment. Deputy Elliott in Dunham v. United Parcel 
Service, File No. 5045229 and 5062713, (affirmed on appeal on January 5, 2019) 
applied a formula that required the combined disability to be partially satisfied by the 
extent of the percentage of disability the employee was previously compensated 
(38.5%) minus the percentage that the employee’s earnings are less at the time of the 
present injury than if the prior injury had not occurred. 
In 2017, the claimant’s weekly benefit rate was $566.43. The stipulated benefit 
rate in 2018 is $565.64. The percentage reduction in weekly wages is 13 percent  
Claimant’s reduction in earning capacity due to the successive injury was 19.5 
percent (58% - 38.5%= 19.5%).  The reduction of the earning capacity, 19.5 percent, is 
then divided by the earning capacity at the time of the successive injury which was 80.5 
percent (100%-19.5%). The resulting percentage credit is 24 percent (19.5/80.5). Thus 
the total award for the claimant is 120 (500 x 24%) weeks of compensation.   
Claimant is not permanently totally disabled nor is he an odd-lot employee. 

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 20 
Claimant has worked no touch and drop and hook jobs previously and based on his 
deposition testimony, that work required little to no manual labor. Those positions would 
be within his light duty work restrictions. While he does not have the experience in 
dispatching or other non driving jobs, he does have years of experience in the trucking 
industry that could open up other non-driving positions. Thus, the claimant has not 
proven that he is permanently totally disabled or that he is entitled to recovery under the 
odd-lot doctrine.  
The next question is the commencement date of benefits.  
Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an injured 
worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has returned to 
work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 
312N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or 
intermittent.  Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
Dr. Schmitz returned claimant to work with no restrictions on January 7, 2020. 
However, claimant continued to receive treatment and reported to Dr. Cope in July 16, 
2020, who found claimant’s back to be markedly improved. Given that improvement is 
the key to determining MMI, it is determined permanent partial disability benefits should 
commence on July 16, 2020.  
The parties have stipulated claimant was off work from the date of his injury, 
December 17, 2018, through July 16, 2020. Given that he had a compensable workers’ 
compensation injury that necessitated back surgery followed by a period of recovery 
and that the commencement date of PPD benefits is July 16, 2020, claimant would be 
entitled to temporary benefits from December 17, 2018 through July 15, 2020. Claimant 
did not return to his pre-injury employment or substantially similar employment.  
Claimant seeks reimbursement of medical expenses. To the extent the medical 
was for the treatment of claimant’s work injury including but not limited to his low back, 
left knee, and shoulder—the latter two which resolved without permanent disability, 
claimant is entitled to reimbursement, mileage, out of pocket co-pays and all other 
reasonable medical expenses.  
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 21 
not ultimately prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify 
for reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008). 
Dr. Boulden issued an impairment rating of 10 percent on July 18, 2019. 
Claimant retained the services of Dr. Jacqueline Stoken on January 9, 2020. The 
examination of claimant by Dr. Stoken is subject to reimbursement under Iowa Code 
section 85.39 with the report awarded under Rule 876 IAC 4.33.  
Claimant is the prevailing party and has requested an assessment of costs. 
Costs are awarded at the discretion of the commissioner. Iowa Code section 86.40 
states: 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand 
reporter or presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential 
depositions, (2) transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service 
of the original notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as 
provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of 
doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs 
do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 
622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of notice and 
subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or agency by the 
party utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining 
doctors’ or practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, 
doctors or practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called 
or by whom the report is requested. Witness fees shall be paid in 
accordance with Iowa Code section 622.74. Proof of payment of any cost 
shall be filed with the workers’ compensation commissioner before it is 
taxed. The party initially paying the expense shall be reimbursed by the 
party taxed with the cost. If the expense is unpaid, it shall be paid by the 
party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the 
deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation commissioner hearing the 
case unless otherwise required by the rules of civil procedure governing 
discovery.  This rule is intended to implement Iowa Code section 86.40. 
Thus the costs itemized by claimant are awarded herein. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
That defendants are to pay unto claimant one hundred twenty (120) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits at the rate of five hundred sixty-five and 64/100 
dollars ($565.64) per week from July 16, 2020. 

LONG V. JACOBSON TRANSPORTATION COMPANY 
Page 22 
That defendants are to pay unto claimant healing period benefits from December 
17, 2018, through July 15, 2020 at the rate of five hundred sixty-five and 64/100 
($565.64). 
That defendants are to reimburse claimant for all medical expenses, mileage, 
and other medical related costs arising out of and the course of his work injury.  
That defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
That defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as 
set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
That defendants are to be given credit for benefits previously paid. 
That defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
That defendant shall pay the costs of this matter pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33. 
Signed and filed this _14th __ day of April, 2021. 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE  
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Tom Drew (via WCES) 
Patrick Waldron (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal pe riod 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
