Case Number: 20011683.01
Case Title:  LAIRD, KRISTEN V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO
Doc Type:    Decision - Commissioner
Source:      Laird Kristin-20011683.01a.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
KRISTEN LAIRD, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
          File No. 20011683.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
                    
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
 
 
  : 
 
 APPEAL DECISION 
TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION 
  : 
D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO, 
  : 
      
 
 
  :                            
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
  :      Head Notes:  1108.20, 1402.30, 1802, 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
  1803, 3202, 2906 
 
 
  : 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
Defendant appeals from a June 25, 2025 arbitration decision.  Claimant cross-
appeals.  The presiding deputy commissioner held an arbitration hearing in this case on 
October 16, 2024, and the case was fully submitted before the deputy on December 4, 
2024. 
In the arbitration decision, the deputy commissioner found that claimant proved 
she contracted Covid-19 as a result of her work duties as a registered nurse at the 
employer’s hospital.  As a result of contracting Covid-19, the deputy found that claimant 
also sustained an aggravation of an underlying condition and developed sleep apnea, a 
heart arrythmia, leg edema, carpal tunnel syndrome in her left wrist as a result of lying 
with pressure on her median nerve while hospitalized, and ultimately developed post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  The deputy commissioner concluded that claimant’s 
injuries are unscheduled and that she is entitled to an award of industrial disability 
benefits because she no longer works for the employer.  Specifically, the deputy 
commissioner awarded a 55 percent industrial disability for claimant’s work injuries.   
The deputy also concluded that permanent partial disability benefits commence 
as soon as any alleged injury achieved maximum medical improvement (MMI).  
Defendant did not commence permanent disability upon claimant achieving MMI for the 
first condition to reach that status.  The deputy further found that defendant failed to 
provide a contemporaneous explanation for its delay in payment of permanent disability 
benefits.  Therefore, the deputy also concluded that claimant proved a delay in payment 
of benefits and awarded penalty benefits for an unreasonable delay in payment of 
permanent disability benefits.  Finally, the deputy ordered defendant to pay or reimburse 
claimant’s past medical expenses, independent medical evaluation charges, and costs. 
On appeal, defendant challenges the deputy’s decision in several respects.  First, 
defendant challenges causal connection of claimant’s sleep apnea and related medical 
bills.  Defendant further challenges various medical expenses sought by claimant. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2026-Jan-14  13:37:32     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 2 
 
 
Defendant further contends the deputy erred in concluding claimant is entitled to 
an award of industrial disability benefits.  Defendant contends that the arbitration 
decision is contrary to the Iowa Supreme Court’s decision in Den Hartog Industries v. 
Dungan, 26 N.W.3d 377 (Iowa 2025), and that claimant’s recovery is limited to a 
functional impairment award under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v).   
Defendant further challenges the deputy’s determination of the proper date for 
commencement of permanent disability benefits.  Defendant contends that claimant 
reached MMI for all conditions resulting from her work injury on April 5, 2022.  
Defendant contends that permanent disability benefits do not commence until MMI is 
obtained on all related conditions.   
Defendant next challenges the award of penalty benefits.  Finally, defendant 
challenges the reasonableness of Dr. Patra’s independent medical evaluation and its 
assessment as a cost. 
Claimant responds to the appeal and cross-appeals on two issues.  First, 
claimant contends the deputy erred in his determination that claimant has not achieved 
MMI for her mental health, or PTSD, condition.  Second, claimant contends the deputy 
erred in his calculation of the weekly workers’ compensation rate because he did not 
include short-staffing bonuses in his calculation of the gross weekly earnings. 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 10A.321 and section 17A.15(3), I performed a de 
novo review of the evidentiary record and the detailed arguments of the parties.  Those 
portions of the proposed arbitration decision pertaining to issues not raised on appeal 
are adopted as part of this appeal decision.  With respect to the issues properly raised 
on appeal, I provide the following analysis: 
Causal Connection of Medical Conditions 
Defendant challenges whether claimant’s sleep apnea is causally related to 
claimant contracting Covid-19 at work.  Defendant further challenges whether claimant 
proved her atrial fibrillation, leg edema, and left carpal tunnel syndrome are causally 
related to her work injury.  Defendant further challenges whether the medical expenses 
contained at Claimant’s Exhibit 7 and 8 are causally related to the work injury. 
I concur with the deputy commissioner’s analyses on these issues.  While a 
claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting injury or disease, 
its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  Rose v. John 
Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 908, 76 N.W.2d 756, 760-61 (1956).  If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 135, 115 N.W.2d 812, 815 
(1962); Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 374-75, 112 N.W.2d 299, 
302 (1961). 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 3 
 
 
In this case, it is likely that Ms. Laird had sleep apnea or attributes that made 
sleep apnea likely prior to contracting Covid-19 at work.  However, I concur with the 
deputy commissioner’s analysis that claimant’s Covid-19 and subsequent respiratory 
difficulties likely materially aggravated claimant’s underlying condition making sleep 
apnea more prevalent and something that required medical treatment.  Specifically, I 
accept the opinion of Dr. Kuhnlein as most credible and convincing on this issue when 
he opined: 
Even if she had the sleep apnea condition before, she developed 
significant pulmonary disease as a result of her COVID infection.  ARDS 
can have somewhere between an approximate 25% to almost 50% 
mortality and is associated with significant lung stiffness that makes 
ventilation difficult.  She not only had a significant COVID infection with 
COVID pneumonia, but she also had ARDS stacked on top of it, which 
together produced hypoxemic respiratory failure…. 
Even if she had undiagnosed obstructive sleep apnea before her COVID 
infection, she had no significant chronic pulmonary diseases or symptoms 
until after the COVID infection and the significant pulmonary disease it 
caused. 
It is more likely than not that Ms. Laird had undiagnosed obstructive sleep 
apnea before the original 2020 COVID infection, based on the notes in the 
record as quoted above, along with her risk factors.  However, it is also 
more likely than not that the COVID action and subsequent ARDS 
materially aggravated her pulmonary condition, materially worsening and 
aggravating her underlying disease and making her obstructive sleep 
apnea worse than it was before her COVID infection. 
(Joint Ex. 16, p. 217)  I affirm all findings pertaining to causal connection of claimant’s 
sleep apnea and related medical expenses. 
Defendant does not specifically challenge the causal connection of claimant’s 
atrial fibrillation or leg edema.  However, they appear to challenge the award of medical 
expenses related to such issues, particularly after claimant achieved MMI.  Regardless, 
to ensure this issue is fully addressed, I concur with the deputy commissioner’s analysis 
regarding claimant’s atrial fibrillation and leg edema.  Both appear to be directly related 
to claimant contracting Covid-19 and the subsequent treatment.  I accept Dr. Kuhnlein’s 
opinions on these issues as the most convincing and credible evidence in this record.   
With respect to the left carpal tunnel claim, I again concur with the findings, 
conclusions, and analysis of the deputy commissioner.  Although Ms. Laird had 
numerous risk factors for the development of carpal tunnel syndrome without 
contracting Covid-19, Ms. Laird was sedated and practically motionless for an extended 
period of time while undergoing treatment for Covid-19.  I concur with the deputy 
commissioner’s adoption of the opinions of claimant’s personal physician, Dr. Malicka-
Rozek, her treating orthopaedic surgeon, Dr. Naylor, and her independent medical 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 4 
 
 
evaluator, Dr. Kuhnlein, as the most credible and convincing opinions in this record.  I 
affirm the deputy commissioner’s findings and conclusions pertaining to all medical 
conditions related to claimant’s work injury, including her sleep apnea, leg edema, 
carpal tunnel syndrome, cognitive impairment, PTSD, and major depressive disorder. 
Award of Past Medical Expenses 
In its appeal brief, defendant challenges the award of medical expenses in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 7.  Defendant asserts that claimant “failed to meet her burden of 
proof with regard to such amounts as there are no medical records available to 
determine whether the unauthorized care was causally related, reasonable, and 
beneficial.”   
With respect to the expenses contained in the lien assertion documentation 
contained at Claimant’s Exhibit 8, defendant asserts in its appeal brief, “Claimant has 
further failed to meet her burden of proof with regard to the majority of the dates of 
service, as there are no medical records available in evidence to determine whether the 
unauthorized care was causally related, reasonable, and beneficial.”  (Defendant’s 
Appeal Brief, p. 34)  Defendant then identifies numerous medical bills and challenges 
those for various reasons, but primarily because there are no medical records in the 
record to support the claim. 
The parties completed a hearing report prior to the commencement of this 
hearing.  The deputy commissioner reviewed that hearing report on the record at the 
commencement of the hearing and ordered a revised hearing report be filed to 
accurately reflect the parties’ stipulations and document the applicable disputes for 
hearing.  The parties complied and filed a revised hearing report reflecting their 
stipulations and disputed issues. 
On the hearing report, defendant disputed whether the claimed medical 
expenses contained in Claimant’s Exhibits 7 and 8 are causally related to the work 
injury.  However, defendant also offered relevant stipulations on the hearing report.  
Specifically, defendant stipulated that the fees or prices contained in the disputed 
medical expenses are fair and reasonable.  Defendant further stipulated that the 
treatment reflected in the disputed medical expenses was reasonable and necessary.  
Finally, defendant stipulated that the listed medical expenses are causally connected to 
the medical conditions upon which the claim of injury is based.  (Hearing Report) 
Having entered into a stipulation at the time of hearing that the prices were fair 
and reasonable, defendant cannot now assert that claimant failed to carry her burden of 
proof that those charges are fair and reasonable.  Having entered into a stipulation at 
the time of hearing that the medical treatment reflected in the bills contained in 
Claimant’s Exhibits 7 and 8 was reasonable and necessary, defendant cannot now 
challenge that the care was not reasonable, necessary, or beneficial to claimant.  
Similarly, having stipulated that the expenses contained in Claimant’s Exhibits 7 and 8 
are causally connected to the medical conditions upon which the claim of injury is 
based, defendant cannot now assert that those medical charges are not related to 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 5 
 
 
medical conditions related to the injury claim.  The deputy found each of those 
conditions to be related to the claimant’s work injury.  I affirm that finding.  Therefore, I 
conclude that defendant is bound by its stipulations.  Given defendant’s stipulations on 
the hearing report, claimant was not required to enter corresponding medical evidence 
to document that each claimed expense in Claimants’ Exhibit 7 and 8 was reasonable, 
necessary, and causally related to the claimed injury.  Defendant’s attempt after the 
time of hearing and for the first time on appeal to assert claimant bears a burden to 
prove a stipulated issue is rejected.  Claimant is entitled to an award of the medical 
expenses contained at Claimant’s Exhibits 7 and 8.  The arbitration decision is affirmed 
in this respect. 
Permanent Partial Disability Benefits 
The deputy commissioner concluded that claimant is entitled to an award of 
industrial disability benefits.  Defendant challenges this conclusion and asserts that 
claimant’s recovery is limited to a functional impairment pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v) and Den Hartog Industries v. Dungan, 26 N.W.2d 377 (Iowa 2025).  Indeed, 
the deputy commissioner did not have the benefit of the Iowa Supreme Court’s analysis 
because the Dungan case was issued after the arbitration decision.  Nevertheless, 
Dungan clearly impacts the outcome of this case. 
It is clear that claimant sustained injuries beyond the scope of any scheduled 
members.  Covid-19 is clearly a systemic condition.  Pulmonary edema and mental 
health issues clearly are not within the scheduled injuries listed in Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(a)-(u).  This injury clearly falls under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
The dispute is whether the injury should be compensated with industrial disability 
or limited to a functional impairment.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) provides, in 
relevant part:  
If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or 
would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the 
employee received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment 
resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the employee’s earning 
capacity.  Notwithstanding section 85.26, subsection 2, if an employee 
who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work with 
the same employer and is compensated based only upon the employee’s 
functional impairment resulting from the injury as provided in this 
paragraph and is terminated from employment by that employer, the 
award or agreement for settlement for benefits under this chapter shall be 
reviewed upon commencement of reopening proceedings by the 
employee for a determination of any reduction in the employee’s earning 
capacity caused by the employee’s permanent partial disability. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 6 
 
 
The Iowa Supreme Court has interpreted Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) in a 
straightforward manner.  The statute provides for an award of industrial disability 
benefits if the injured worker does not return to work and is not offered work by the 
employer after the injury.  However, once an injured worker returns to work or is offered 
work with the employer at the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings, then the 
claimant is compensated “based only upon [her] functional impairment resulting from 
the injury and not in relation to [her] earning capacity.”  Dungan, 26 N.W.3d at 382 
(quoting Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v)).  As the court explained, sentence four of Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(v) does not apply and permit an award of industrial disability for a 
worker that has returned to work or been offered work at the same or greater salary, 
unless the employee is terminated from employment by the employer.  Id.  The Court 
specifically held, “If the employee returns to work at the same or greater earnings and 
isn’t terminated, then there is only one litigation process, in which benefits are 
calculated using the functional impairment method.”  Id. (emphasis in original). 
In this case, Ms. Laird became concerned that the employer was not going to 
continue to honor her medical restriction against caring for active Covid-19 patients.  As 
a result of her concern, claimant sought and accepted new employment.  She ultimately 
voluntarily resigned her employment with Trinity Health Corporation.  At the time of her 
resignation, the employer continued to honor her restriction and continued to offer her 
work at the same or greater earnings when compared to her pre-injury earnings.  
Accordingly, the fourth sentence of Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) is not applicable. 
Claimant was injured at work.  She ultimately returned to work at the same or 
greater earnings.  She voluntarily terminated her employment and was not terminated 
by the employer.  Therefore, I conclude claimant should be compensated with functional 
disability under the straightforward terms and application of Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v).  Dungan 26 N.W.3d at 382.  The deputy’s contrary conclusion is reversed in 
this respect. 
With respect to claimant’s entitlement to functional impairment, I concur with the 
deputy’s findings and accept the permanent impairment rating from Dr. Kuhnlein as the 
most convincing and credible impairment rating in this evidentiary record.  (Joint Ex. 16, 
pp. 219-220)  Therefore, I conclude claimant proved by a preponderance of the 
evidence that she sustained a 33 percent permanent functional impairment as a result 
of her work injuries. 
Claimant’s injuries are compensated proportional to the percentage of functional 
impairment in relation to 500 weeks.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v).  In other words, 
claimant is entitled to the equivalent of 33 percent of 500 weeks of permanent disability 
benefits, or 165 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  The arbitration decision 
is modified with respect to the permanent partial disability benefit award. 
Commencement of Permanent Partial Disability 
The next disputed issue raised by defendant is the proper commencement date 
for permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits.  The deputy commissioner held that the 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 7 
 
 
proper commencement date for PPD benefits is the earliest date upon which any of 
claimant’s related conditions or injuries achieved maximum medical improvement 
(MMI).  The deputy commissioner held, “This makes the commencement date for a 
whole person impairment the first date on which an injured employee reaches MMI for a 
body part or system that can be evaluated for permanent impairment using the Guides.”  
(Arbitration Decision, pp. 60-61) 
The deputy commissioner acknowledged that different physicians have 
determined claimant reached MMI for different conditions at different times.  The deputy 
commissioner reasoned that claimant achieved MMI for her cognitive issues and 
metabolic conditions on May 12, 2021.  The deputy commissioner, therefore, ordered 
that PPD commence on May 12, 2021.  
Defendant contends that the deputy erred because claimant did not achieve MMI 
for all related medical conditions until later.  In fact, the deputy found in the arbitration 
decision that claimant did not achieve MMI for her pulmonary conditions until April 5, 
2022, and that claimant failed to prove she achieved MMI from a mental health 
standpoint. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2) provides: 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is 
medically indicated that maximum medical improvement from the injury 
has been reached and that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment can be determined use of the guides to the evaluation of 
permanent impairment. 
Considering the plain language of Iowa Code section 85.34(2), I respectfully 
disagree with the deputy commissioner’s analysis and conclusion pertaining to the 
commencement date for PPD.  The statute provides that PPD commences when MMI 
“from the injury has been reached” and impairment can be determined pursuant to the 
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  The injury in this 
case is not isolated to claimant’s cognitive or metabolic conditions.  This is a Covid 
infection that clearly also affected claimant’s pulmonary condition and caused PTSD.  
“The injury” resulted in pulmonary issues, metabolic injuries, carpal tunnel syndrome, 
and mental health issues.  “The injury” did not achieve MMI until all of these conditions 
reached the point of maximum medical improvement. 
Interpreting the statutory language of “the injury” to require all conditions reach 
MMI is also consistent with the idea that it must be possible at that point in time to 
render a permanent impairment rating.  While it may have been possible to render a 
permanent impairment rating for claimant’s cognitive and metabolic issues once those 
conditions achieved MMI, those ratings could not be combined to an ultimate permanent 
impairment rating until all of claimant’s conditions reached MMI.   
In fact, as can be seen in Dr. Kuhnlein’s impairment rating, which was accepted 
by the deputy and the undersigned as credible and convincing, the cognitive and 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 8 
 
 
metabolic impairment ratings were ultimately combined with impairment ratings for other 
conditions to achieve an ultimate functional impairment rating.  In combining those 
impairment ratings, there is a mechanism within the AMA Guides to ensure they do not 
exceed 100 percent of the whole person.  On pages 604-605 of the AMA Guides, Fifth 
Edition, there is a “Combined Values Chart” that provides for the methodology to 
combine various impairment ratings to a final, whole person functional impairment 
rating. 
Review of Dr. Kuhnlein’s impairment rating, along with the Combined Values 
Chart in the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, demonstrates that Dr. Kuhnlein combined 
impairment ratings that were separately 14 percent, 10 percent, 6 percent, 6 percent, 
and 2 percent of the whole person.  (Joint Ex. 16, p. 220)  If added individually, these 
would total 38 percent of the whole person.  However, using the Combined Values 
Chart, Dr. Kuhnlein noted these various impairment ratings equal 33 percent of the 
whole person.  (Joint Ex. 16, p. 220) 
Considering each condition caused by a work injury separately reaches MMI is 
not consistent with determining when an impairment rating can be determined for “the 
injury.”  Rather, a permanent functional impairment rating for the entirety of “the injury” 
cannot be determined under the AMA Guides, Fifth Edition, until all conditions have 
achieved MMI and the impairment ratings can be combined.  Therefore, I conclude that 
permanent disability benefits commence once all conditions of “the injury” achieve MMI 
and a permanent impairment rating for “the injury” can be determined. 
I accept the deputy commissioner’s analysis and find that claimant achieved MMI 
for the cognitive and metabolic aspects of her injury by May 12, 2021.  I accept and 
adopt the finding that claimant achieved MMI for her pulmonary conditions on April 5, 
2022.  Accepting Dr. Naylor’s opinion on the issue, I find that claimant achieved MMI for 
her carpal tunnel syndrome and resulting surgery on May 10, 2021.  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 48) 
With respect to claimant’s mental health issues, the deputy commissioner found 
that claimant had not achieved MMI.  I respectfully disagree.  Although Dr. Patra 
recommended additional medical care for claimant’s mental health condition, claimant 
has not pursued mental health care since care was terminated by Mr. Church on 
November 8, 2023.  Although claimant may benefit from mental health treatment in the 
future, if she ever elects to pursue it again, I find that she achieved MMI for her mental 
health condition upon termination of treatment by Mr. Church on November 8, 2023.  
Therefore, I conclude permanent partial disability benefits should commence on 
November 9, 2023.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2). 
Penalty Benefits 
Having concluded that permanent disability benefits should commence in 2021, 
the deputy commissioner noted that permanent disability benefits were not paid by 
defendant until December 23, 2022.  Therefore, the deputy commissioner concluded 
that defendant issued weekly permanent partial disability benefits late and considered a 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 9 
 
 
penalty benefit claim.  Ultimately, the deputy commissioner concluded that defendant 
paid 84 weeks of PPD benefits late and imposed a penalty. 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 86.13(4) (subsequently transferred by the Iowa 
Code editor without substantive modification to Iowa Code section 10A.315(4)), penalty 
benefits are mandatory when weekly benefits are paid late unless the employer shows 
reasonable cause or excuse for the delay or denial.  Iowa Code § 10A.315(4) (2023); 
Robbennolt v. Snap-on Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229, 236-37 (Iowa 1996).  However, 
before penalty benefits are awarded, claimant must establish a denial, delay in 
payment, or termination of benefits.  Iowa Code section 86.13(4)(b)(1). 
Having concluded that MMI did not occur until November 8, 2023 and that PPD 
benefits should not commence until November 9, 2023, I similarly note that defendant 
paid PPD benefits on December 23, 2022.  Ultimately, claimant has not proven a late 
payment of benefits because PPD benefits were commenced prior to claimant achieving 
MMI for all related conditions of “the injury.” I conclude defendant’s payments were 
timely and that a penalty cannot be imposed pursuant to Iowa Code 86.13.  The 
arbitration decision is reversed and no penalty is imposed. 
Weekly Compensation Rate 
The issue pertaining to weekly rate surrounds the exclusion or inclusion of a 
short-staffing bonus.  Claimant contends that the short-staffing bonus should be 
included in the calculation of her gross weekly earnings.  Defendant contends the bonus 
is irregular and should not be included.  Neither party’s briefs reference the statutory 
language or any caselaw pertaining to bonuses. 
Iowa Code section 85.36 provides that the basis of compensation in workers’ 
compensation claims “shall be the weekly earnings of the injured employee at the time 
of the injury.”  It defines weekly earnings as claimant’s “gross salary, wages, or 
earnings” to which she would have been entitled had she worked the customary hours 
for the full pay period involved.  Iowa Code section 85.36. 
“Gross earnings” are defined by Iowa Code section 85.61(4) as “recurring 
payments by the employer to the employee for employment … excluding irregular 
bonuses, retroactive pay, overtime, penalty pay, reimbursement of expenses, expense 
allowances, and the employer’s contribution for welfare benefits.” 
Iowa Code section 85.36(6) provides the specific methodology for calculating 
claimant’s rate because Ms. Laird was paid hourly.  It provides, in pertinent part: 
In the case of an employee who is paid on a daily or hourly basis, or by 
the output of the employee, the weekly earnings shall be computed by 
dividing by thirteen the earnings, including shift differential pay but not 
including overtime or premium pay, of the employee earned in the employ 
of the employer in the last completed period of thirteen consecutive 
calendar weeks immediately preceding the injury. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 10 
 
 
The issue in this situation is whether the short-staffing bonus should be 
considered “premium pay” under Iowa Code section 85.36(6) or be considered an 
“irregular bonus” excluded from the definition of gross earnings under Iowa Code 
section 85.61((4).  The Iowa Supreme Court has cautioned against using an “overly 
formulistic approach to the calculation of an employee’s weekly earnings.”  Burton v. 
Hilltop Care Center, 813 N.W.2d 250, 262 (Iowa 2012). 
In Noel v. Rolscreen Co., 475 N.W.2d 666 (Iowa Ct. App. 1991), the Iowa Court 
of Appeals addressed the issue of irregular bonuses.  In that case, the employer paid a 
voluntary Christmas bonus to employees.  The bonus was paid entirely at the 
employer’s discretion and could be discontinued, modified, or replaced at the 
employer’s discretion.  Id. at 667.  The Court held that the Christmas bonus in Noel was 
not to be considered earnings because “it was not paid or received within the period of 
time specified in section 85.36(6).  Additionally, the bonus is not a regular bonus.”  Id. at 
668.  The Court reasoned that the Christmas bonus was not a regular bonus because it 
varied in amount each year, condition precedents were required to be established 
before the bonus was payable, and it was not fixed in terms of entitlement or amount 
until late in a fiscal year.  Id. 
The short-staffing bonus at issue in this case has some similarities to the 
Christmas bonus in Noel.  The short-staffing bonus was irregular in the sense that it was 
only instituted when the Covid-19 pandemic occurred and the employer was short-
staffed on nurses.  The obvious purpose of the bonus was to encourage nurses to pick 
up extra shifts to fill the staffing shortages.  Clearly, the short-staffing bonus was not 
long-standing, was subject to be discontinued, modified, or replaced at the employer’s 
discretion because it had not even been in place prior to the pandemic. 
On the other hand, the short-staffing bonus was payable based on fixed 
conditions precedent and based on fixed terms of entitlement.  If a nurse picked up 
extra shifts while the employer was short-staffed, the nurse would receive extra 
compensation above and beyond any overtime pay.   
It is reasonable to argue this bonus is irregular in the sense that it was not a 
typical bonus paid to nurses until the pandemic occurred.  However, unlike the 
Christmas bonus in Noel, the amount of the bonus payable to claimant was not 
discretionary or subject to change once she had worked the extra shifts.  Unlike the 
Christmas bonus in Noel, the bonus was no longer subject to be taken away, reduced, 
or modified once claimant agreed to and actually worked extra shifts for the employer. 
The goal in interpreting statutes is to effectuate the intent of the legislature.  
Jacobson Transp. Co. v. Harris, 778 N.W.2d 192, 197 (Iowa 2010).  The purposes of 
the Iowa workers’ compensation statues is to benefit injured workers.  Therefore, the 
statutes are interpreted “liberally in favor of the employee.”  Griffin Pipe Prod. Co. v. 
Guarino, 663 N.W.2d 862, 864 (Iowa 2003).  Moreover, Iowa Code section 85.36 is 
“meant to be applied, not mechanically nor technically, but flexibly, with a view always to 
achieving the ultimate objective of reflecting fairly the claimant’s probable future earning 
loss.”  Hanigan v. Hedstrom Concrete Products, Inc., 524 N.W.2d 158, 160 (Iowa 1994). 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 11 
 
 
The evidence demonstrates that claimant received the short-staffing bonus 
during the 13 weeks immediately preceding her injury.  She was entitled to the short-
staffing bonuses as soon as she worked the extra shifts.  Although the bonuses were 
not long-standing in nature and arose only during the pandemic, the purposes of the 
statutes was to benefit the employer by covering shifts without sufficient nurse coverage 
and presumably without having to hire additional nurses to do so.   
Given that the short-staffing bonus was payable as soon as an additional shift 
was worked by a nurse and that claimant had the opportunity to work the additional 
shifts to earn the additional bonus without other conditions precedent and without the 
bonus changing at the employer’s whim after the shift was worked, I conclude this is not 
akin to an irregular Christmas bonus.  Rather, I conclude that claimant established the 
short-staffing bonus was a part of regular compensation for nurses working for Trinity 
Health during the pandemic at the time of claimant’s injury.  The bonus was payable if a 
nurse elected to pick up an extra shift and was “earned” after the shift was worked.  As 
such, the short-staffing bonus would reflect claimant’s probable earning capacity at the 
time of her injury.  Hanigan, 524 N.W.2d at 160. 
I conclude that the short-staffing bonus should have been included.  Claimant’s 
rate calculations are accurate using this bonus.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 6)  Therefore, I 
conclude claimant established her gross weekly earnings prior to the injury date were 
$1,444.86 per week.  Claimant’s applicable weekly rate, as a married person entitled to 
three exemptions, is $924.56.1 
Assessment of Dr. Patra’s Report Expense as a Cost 
Hearing costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency.  Iowa Code section 
10A.328 (formerly Iowa Code section 86.40).  Agency rule 876 IAC 4.33(6) permits 
assessment of the “reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports.”  The Iowa Supreme Court has affirmed that the cost of obtaining 
a written report, in lieu of trial testimony, is a permissible cost pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 10A.328 and rule 4.33(6).  Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. 
Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015). 
I concur with the deputy’s assessment of the cost of Dr. Patra’s report totaling 
$3,175.00.  However, I decline to assess anything above that amount because further 
assessment is not permitted under Iowa Code section 10A.328 or rule 4.33(6). Young, 
867 N.W.2d at 845-846.  The assessment of Dr. Patra’s report fee totaling $3,175.00 is 
affirmed.  
 
 
 
1 The applicable Iowa Workers’ Compensation Ratebook Spreadsheet for the time period from 
July 1, 2020 through June 30, 2021 is available at https://dial.iowa.gov/media/8640/download?inline. 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 12 
 
 
ORDER 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED: 
The May 21, 2025 arbitration decision is affirmed in part, reversed in part, and 
amended as explained in this decision. 
Trinity shall pay to Laird one hundred sixty-five (165) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits at the rate of nine hundred twenty-four and 56/100 dollars ($924.56) 
per week from the commencement date of November 9, 2023. 
Trinity shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with interest at 
an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal 
reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  
Trinity is to be given the credit for benefits previously paid for the stipulated 
amount of one hundred twenty-one thousand eight hundred thirty-seven and 09/100 
dollars ($121,837.09). 
Trinity shall pay to Laird eight thousand eight hundred twenty-five and 00/100 
dollars ($8,825.00) for the reasonable costs of Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME. 
Trinity shall pay the medical expenses itemized in Exhibits 7 and 8. 
Trinity shall pay costs to Laird in the amount of three thousand one hundred 
seventy-five and 00/100 dollars ($3,175.00) for the reasonable costs of obtaining Dr. 
Patra’s report. 
Trinity shall bear the costs of appeal, including the cost of the hearing transcript. 
Trinity shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by Iowa Administrative 
Code rule 876—3.1(2). 
Signed and filed this ___14TH ___ day of January, 2026. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          INTERIM WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 

LAIRD V. TRINITY HEALTH CORPORATION D/B/A MERCYONE WATERLOO 
Page 13 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Corey Walker (via WCES) 
Lee Hook (via WCES) 
Alison Stewart (via WCES) 
Morgan Borron (via WCES) 
 
 
