Case Number: 20011866.01
Case Title:  WILLIAMS, RICHIE V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Williams Richie-20011866.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
RICHIE WILLIAMS, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
File No. 20011866.01 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
 
 
 
  :  
 
 
vs. 
 
  :                  
 
 
  :  
      ARBITRATION DECISION 
ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND, 
  : 
        
 
 
  : 
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
  :                 
 
Defendant. 
  :       Head Notes: 1106; 1402.30; 1403.30 
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Richie Williams, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Archer Daniels Midland, self-insured defendant employer.  
The hearing was held on December 15, 2022. Pursuant to an order from the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this case was heard via videoconference using 
Zoom with all parties and the court reporter appearing remotely.   
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration hearing.  
On the hearing report, the parties entered various stipulations. Those stipulations were 
accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision and no factual issues 
relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed in this decision. The parties 
are now bound by their stipulations.  
 
Richie Williams, Tyler Albert, Dean Petroff, and Nydel Cromwell testified live at the 
trial. The evidentiary record also includes amended joint exhibits 1-7, claimant’s amended 
exhibits 1-8, and defendants’ exhibits A-N.1  All exhibits were received into the record 
without objection.  
 
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on February 3, 2023, at which time the 
case was fully submitted to the undersigned.  
 
ISSUES 
 
The parties identified the following disputed issues on the hearing report: 
 
1. Whether the case is barred due to lack of timely notice under Iowa Code section 
85.23. 
 
                                                 
1At the hearing, defendants withdrew exhibits A, F, G, L, and M.   
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Jun-28  11:54:34     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

WILLIAMS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND 
Page 2 
 
2. Whether claimant sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of his 
employment with Archer Daniels Midland on May 21, 2020.  
 
3. Whether the claimant is entitled to temporary disability or healing period 
benefits because of the alleged injury. 
 
4. Whether the alleged injury resulted in any permanent disability; and if so, 
 
5. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits. 
 
6. The commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any are 
awarded. 
 
7. Claimant’s average weekly wage and weekly rate. 
 
8. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for medical expenses.  
 
9. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
examination pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
 
10. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care. 
 
11. Assessment of costs.  
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the record, 
finds as follows: 
 
At the time of the hearing the claimant, Richie Williams (hereinafter “Williams”) was 
41 years old. (Hearing Tr., p. 17). He lives in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. (Id.). He graduated 
from Jefferson High School in 2000. (Id. at 18; Ex. K, p. 74). Following high school, 
Williams attended Kirkwood Community College for one semester. (Tr., p. 18). His field 
of study is unknown. (Id.). He did not receive a degree. (Id.).  
  
From 2002 to 2004, Williams worked as a parts counter at Hawkeye International, 
filling work orders for auto parts. (Cl Ex. 4, p. 47). In 2004, he took a job as a DOT 
inspector at First Fleet Diesel, doing general maintenance and tire repair. (Id. at 47-48).   
From 2006 to 2008, Williams worked at Freightliner as a DOT inspector. (Id. at 48). In 
2008, he began working for CRST as a DOT inspector, performing general maintenance. 
(Id.).  CRST laid Williams off in 2010. (Id.).  While on lay-off, he worked as a night stocker 
at Target and drove a flatbed truck for All American Scaffolding. (Id.).   
 
In 2013, Archer Daniels Midland (hereinafter “ADM”), the defendant employer in 
this action. (See Cl Ex. 2, p. 33; Tr., p. 58). ADM washes and repairs railroad cars. (Tr., 
p. 87). Williams was hired to work in the repair shop, fixing tank and hopper cars. (Id. at 

WILLIAMS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND 
Page 3 
 
58).  Williams later moved to the wash bay. (Id.). In his exhibits, Williams submitted a job 
description for his work at ADM. (Cl Ex. 2, p. 33). The description is labeled “Repair and 
wash bay Physical Work Activities.” (Id.). Thus, it appears to encompass both of Williams’ 
positions at ADM. According to this description, he was required to walk, sit, climb stairs, 
reach, push, pull, kneel, squat with proper ergonomics, bend at the waist, twist, climb 
ladders, grind, and use a torch, spray paint, lift and carry a light-weight bucket with one 
hand, and two-handed carry up to 50 pounds. (Id.). However, at the hearing, Williams 
testified he was asked to lift up to 70 pounds, but “it’s usually, roughly, 50, maybe a little 
bit more.” (Id. at 59).   
 
Williams worked at ADM in the wash bay until July 2021, when he took a new 
position as a material handler at Parker Hannifin. (Cl Ex. 4, p. 48; Tr., p. 31; Ex. K, p. 80). 
He started in the Receiving Department, but prior to the hearing transferred to the Toro 
Department. (Tr., p. 31). In the Toro Department, Williams works in the warehouse, filling 
orders and stacking boxes on pallets. (Id. at 32). To do this, he uses a pallet machine and 
a forklift. (Id.). At the hearing, Williams testified that his job at Parker Hannifin is less 
physically demanding than his position at ADM. (Id. at 33). In their exhibits, defendant 
included a job description for Williams’ position at Parker Hannifin. (Ex. K, p. 80).  
According to this description, he is required to stand, bend, stoop, and twist, operate 
various types of assembly equipment, cutting equipment and forklifts, use measuring 
devices, as well as lift 20 pounds frequently, and 50 pounds occasionally.2 (Id.). Prior to 
starting at Parker Hannifin, Williams underwent a functional employment test. (Id. at 81). 
This test required he lift and carry 50 pounds for 20 feet. (Id.). Williams successfully 
completed the employment test. (Id.).  When he started in July 2021, he was working full-
time and making $17.50 an hour. (Id. at 82). However, at the time of the hearing, Williams 
was only working 20 hours per week—four hours a day, five days a week, because of 
restrictions. (Tr., p. 41). Williams was making $18.60 an hour. (Id.).   
 
Williams alleges an injury to his low back on May 21, 2020.3 (See Petition).  
Williams testified he had already clocked out of work and was in the locker room getting 
ready to change his clothes. (Tr., pp. 18-20).  Williams testified as follows: 
 
I was going to sit down. I felt the back of my butt cheek on the bench. I was 
getting up to readjust myself, I lost my balance, fell backwards towards the 
locker, hit my back, and then I fell to the concrete floor on my butt.  
 
(Id. 18-19). Williams testified that two of his co-workers witnessed the fall—Tyler Dange 
and Seth, last name unknown.4 (Id. at 19). He did not feel any pain immediately after the 
fall and did not report the incident right away. (Id.). Williams, however, testified that his 
                                                 
2Parker Hannifin’s functional employment test lists Williams’ position as being in the heavy demand 
category. (Ex. K, p. 81). During his 2020 deposition, Williams testified he is required to lift up to 70 pounds 
in his current job. (Cl Ex. 3, p. 40).  
3 During the hearing, Williams also indicated the fall may have happened in February 2020. (Tr., p. 
18).   
4According to defendants’ exhibits, the fall was actually witnessed by three of Williams’ co-workers. 
(Ex. C).   

WILLIAMS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND 
Page 4 
 
supervisor, Tyler Albert, asked him about the fall the next day, but his testimony did not 
provide any specifics about this conversation. (Id. at 20). The hearing transcript reads, 
 
Q. Okay.  In your deposition, you testified that your supervisor, Tyler 
Albert, came and talked to you about the fall the next day. Is that 
accurate? 
A.  Yes.  
Q.  Okay. And what did you guys talk about? 
A. We talked about the fall in the locker room. 
Q. Did he ask you questions? 
A. No, he just told me to take it easy for now. 
 
(Id.). Williams testified he did not think the fall qualified as a work injury because he was 
not on the clock. (Id. at 20-21). He indicated he did not report it as a work injury to Mr. 
Albert. (Id. at 21). Williams returned to work the next day full duty, full time. (See id. at 
20).   
 
Williams’ deposition was taken on September 29, 2020. (Ex. D, p. 11). During the 
deposition, he was asked about his alleged conversation with Mr. Albert.  Portions of that 
deposition transcript were submitted into evidence. It reads: 
 
Q. And the next day was it Tyler Albert, did he ask you about this fall? 
A. That I can remember, he did, but I’m not for sure if he – if somebody – 
who told him, but I’m thinking that he’s the one that asked me about it.  
Q. From what you remember, Tyler asked you about it the day after the fall? 
A.  Correct.  
 
(Id. at 13).   
 
 
Tyler Albert testified at the hearing. (Tr., p. 86). He is a supervisor at ADM; He was 
Williams’ direct supervisor. (Id. at 87). Mr. Albert has worked there since 2005. (Id.). He 
confirmed that Williams started out working as a welder in the repair shop, and later 
transferred to the wash bay, where he put on and took off valves. (Id. at 87-88). Mr. Albert 
also confirmed that the job description submitted by Williams was accurate but clarified 
that if an employee is asked to lift anything over 50 pounds, it is done as a team lift or 
with a crane. (Id. at 89). He testified that employees at ADM receive annual training on 
how to handle work injuries. (Id. at 90). According to Albert, in this training employees are 
instructed to immediately report any injury incurred on ADM’s premises to their direct 
supervisor. (Id.). If their direct supervisor is unavailable, they are instructed to notify the 
plant manager or the safety director. (Id. at 91). 
 
 
Mr. Albert testified that Williams had suffered previous work-related injuries while 
employed at ADM. (Tr., p. 91). On November 19, 2018, Williams suffered an injury to his 
right shoulder while working for ADM. See Williams v. Archer Daniels Midland, File No. 
5067813.02, 2021 WL 5235571 (Arb. Decision, Nov. 3, 2021). Williams reported that 
injury right away and received treatment the same day. Id.  Given this, Mr. Albert believed 

WILLIAMS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND 
Page 5 
 
that Williams knew how to report injuries occurring at ADM. (Tr., p. 91).  Mr. Albert testified 
that he was not notified about Williams’ fall until October 1, 2020. (Id. at 94). He stated 
that the next-day conversation described by Williams never occurred. (Id. at 94).  
According to Albert, on October 1, 2020, Williams “[w]alks into my office and said that he 
fell in the locker room and that he had told me. And I – I was – I was dumbfounded and 
confused. I’m like, I don’t even know what you’re talking about.” (Id. at 92). Mr. Albert then 
called the plant manager, Dean Petroff, and asked him to come to his office. (Id.).  
According to Mr. Albert, once both supervisors were present, Williams “proceeded to tell 
us that he fell in the locker room and that he had told me a couple months ago. And I was, 
like, you never told me anything about falling in the locker room, ever. I don’t know where 
this is coming from.” (Id. at 93). Williams then presented the supervisors with a hand-
written document labeled “Injury Report.” (Id.). A copy of it was submitted into evidence. 
(Ex. B, p. 4).  It states, 
   
About 4 or 5 months ago I was in the locker room to sit on the bench 
to change. When I starting to sit down I miss the bench fell down hitting my 
back on the locker, then my butt hit the floor. I was punch out at the time, 
did not think because I was punch out that I would have to fill out a report. 
 
(Id.). The day after the conversation with Williams, Mr. Albert sent an email documenting 
the exchange. (Id. at 6). In the email Albert writes that when Williams was challenged 
about the occurrence of the alleged next-day discussion, he stated “oh well I thought I did 
. . .well maybe I told somebody else, the other Tyler that is an hourly employee.”  (Id.).   
 
 
In October 2022, defendants took Williams’ deposition a second time. (Cl Ex. 3, 
p. 38).  At this deposition, he was once again asked whether he reported the locker 
room fall to ADM. (Id. at 42). The transcript reads as follows:  
 
Q. Did you report the fall off of that bench or that you just described to 
Tyler Albert or somebody else at the company? 
A. I think somebody told him, and if I remember correctly, he asked me 
the next day, but I’m not exactly for sure what day he actually said -- what 
day he actually came and talked to me about it.  
Q. Do you know who told Tyler Albert that you had fallen? 
A. No, I don’t know who. 
Q. All right. And tell me to the best of your recollection where the 
conversation with Tyler Albert took place at work.  Where were you? 
A.  I think I was -- actually, I don’t know exactly where. I just remember him 
saying something about it.  I just --  
Q. Was that the following day that you fell that Mr. Albert approached you 
about this accident? 
A. That I can remember, yes, that I can recall.  
Q. And I just need you to be as specific as you can recall. What did Mr. 
Tyler Albert say to you at that time? 
A. Just asked if I was okay. I can’t remember too much more than that, 
what he said that day exactly.  

WILLIAMS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND 
Page 6 
 
Q. And what did you tell Mr. Albert in response? 
A. I can’t remember exactly what I said that day either. I think -- 
Q. Did you tell him you were okay, or did you tell him that you needed 
medical care, or what do you recall? 
A.  The only think I can recall is I told him my back hurts. But I can’t 
remember exactly if I told him I needed medical attention or not for sure.  
 
(Id.). Williams was asked this same series of questions on cross-examination at the 
hearing. (Tr., p. 64). However, at the hearing, Williams testified the conversation took 
place outside of the locker room, and Tyler Albert approached him and stated, “I heard 
you fell in the locker room.” (Id.).  Williams was asked if he was certain, it was Tyler Albert 
that approached him. (Id.).  He replied, "No, I’m pretty sure it was Tyler Albert that next 
day, but I know Tyler Dange was in that locker room at the time I fell. So I could have 
talked to him.  I just got two days mixed up." (Id.).   
 
Dean Petroff also testified at the hearing. (Tr., p. 108). Mr. Petroff is the plant 
manager at the ADM workshop in Cedar Rapids. (Id. at 92, 109). He has been with ADM 
since 2005. (Id. at 108).  Petroff hired Williams in 2013. (Id. at 109). He testified that ADM 
employees receive training each year on how to report work injuries. (Id.). The training 
was set-up by Nydel Cromwell, the environmental health and safety coordinator at ADM. 
(Id. at 110, 121).  According to Petroff, Williams participated in the training each year and 
knew how to report a work injury at ADM. (Id. at 111).   
 
Mr. Petroff testified that he received notification of Williams’ alleged May 21, 2020 
fall on October 1, 2020. (Tr., p. 112). On that date, he received a phone call from Tyler 
Albert, asking him to come back to his office. (Id.). When he arrived there, Williams was 
in Albert’s office. (Id.). Williams presented him and Mr. Albert with his handwritten injury 
report, which detailed his fall in the locker room four or five months prior. (Id.). Prior to 
October 1, 2020, Mr. Petroff was unaware of Williams’ fall and alleged low back injury. 
(Id. at 113). Petroff testified that when an injury is reported at ADM, the protocol is to first 
seek any necessary medical care for the employee, then fill out a first report of injury, and 
start an investigation into the claim. (Id. at 116-117).  Mr. Petroff testified Williams did not 
request any medical care during the meeting. (Id. at 115).  
 
Nydel Cromwell was the final hearing witness. (Tr., p. 121). Mr. Cromwell is the 
environmental health and safety coordinator at the ADM plant in Cedar Rapids. (Id. at 
122). He was hired in 2006. (Id. at 121). Mr. Cromwell is responsible for environmental 
reporting, safety training, shop safety, and health screenings such as hearing and 
respiratory testing. (Id. at 122). He testified Williams participated in injury investigation 
and reporting training each year he was employed at ADM. (Id. at 123).  Cromwell 
reported that in the training, employees are instructed to report all injuries, minor or major, 
immediately. (Id. at 124).  
 
Mr. Cromwell is also responsible for investigating work-related injuries at ADM. 
(Tr., p.  122). He testified that he first heard about Williams’ alleged fall on October 1, 
2020, when Mr. Albert and Mr. Petroff gave him a copy of Williams’ handwritten injury 

WILLIAMS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND 
Page 7 
 
report. (Id. at 124-125). After receiving the report, Cromwell started an investigation into 
the alleged injury. (Id.). During this investigation, he discovered that there were three 
witnesses to Williams’ fall: Brandon Sortland, Seth Dunlin, and Tyler Dange. (Id. at 125). 
They were all co-workers of Williams. (Id. at 126). At Mr. Cromwell’s request, all three 
filled out statements on October 21, 2020. (Id. at 125). Those are contained in defendants’ 
hearing exhibits. (Ex. C, pp. 8-10). Two of the statements agree that Williams was looking 
at his cell phone and not paying attention, tried to sit down, missed the bench, and fell to 
the ground. (Id.). None of them mention him hitting the locker before falling to the ground.5 
Tyler’s statement indicates the incident took place sometime in May 2020, Seth states it 
was in May or June 2020, and Brandon reports the incident took place four to five months 
prior. (Id.). Cromwell testified none of the three witnesses informed him of the incident 
prior to October 1, 2020. (Tr., p. 126). I find that Williams was looking at his cell phone 
and attempted to sit down without looking, missed the bench, and fell to the ground.  
 
Williams’ testimony about the alleged next-day conversation with Tyler Albert is 
sparse and inconsistent. In contrast, Mr. Albert, Mr. Petroff, and Mr. Cromwell all credibly 
testified that Williams did not notify ADM about his May 21, 2020 fall until October 1, 2020.  
Their testimony is supported by all three witness statements from Williams’ co-workers, 
none of which mention informing Mr. Albert about the incident. Given this, I determine 
that there is insufficient evidence showing Williams notified Tyler Albert about the work 
injury the day after it occurred.  
 
 
According to the medical records, Williams did not seek medical care for his low 
back until July 2020. (JE 6, p. 146). On July 24, 2020, he presented to his family physician, 
Qadnana Anwar, M.D., for a medication check. (Id.). At the appointment, he told Dr. 
Anwar that he fell two months ago and hurt his tailbone, and he was still experiencing 
intermittent pain. (Id). Dr. Anwar ordered x-rays of his lumbar spine and coccyx. (Id. at 
147). They were normal—they did not show any fractures. (Id. at 149-150). Dr. Anwar did 
not recommend any treatment for his low back complaints. (Id. at 146-150).   
 
 
Williams returned to Dr. Anwar on August 7, 2020. (JE 6, p. 151).  He complained 
of increasing lower back pain, with pressure and radiating pain in his left buttock. (Id.).  
He told Dr. Anwar that he was unable to go to work that day because of his symptoms. 
(Id.). Dr. Anwar diagnosed him with lumbar back pain with radiculopathy affecting the left 
lower back and left upper leg. (Id. at 153). He ordered physical therapy and an MRI, as 
well as prescribed anti-inflammatory medication and a muscle relaxer. (Id.). He also 
provided Williams with a 20-pound lifting restriction and referred him to the pain clinic for 
further treatment. (Id.).   
 
 
Williams was evaluated by Kyle Morrissey, D.O. at the CRS Pain Clinic on August 
21, 2020. (JE 4, p. 91).  He told Dr. Morrissey that he had experienced back pain for years 
and had previously dealt with some radicular pain back in 2015, but never required any 
“interventions.” (Id.). A review of the medical records submitted at hearing shows Williams 
was first treated for low back and left buttock pain in February 2007 at Westside Family 
                                                 
5 Locker contact is also not mentioned in any of his treatment records.  See fact finding below.  

WILLIAMS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND 
Page 8 
 
Medicine. (JE 7, p. 174). At that time, he was diagnosed with lumbosacral back spasms 
and prescribed pain medication and muscle relaxers. (Id.). He returned in May 2007, with 
similar low back complaints after working on a pond. (Id.  at 175). He was diagnosed with 
lumbago, given pain medication, and briefly taken off work. (Id.).   
 
 
Williams continued to receive sporadic treatment for low back pain and radicular 
leg symptoms at Westside Family Medicine. (JE 7, pp. 174-194). He had appointments 
on August 1, 2007; April 12, 2008; October 28, 2008; February 16, 2011; November 26, 
2014; November 14, 2016; and August 28, 2017. (Id. at 176-189). In the fall of 2015, Dr. 
Anwar referred him to Kevin Eck, M.D., at Physicians’ Clinic of Iowa (PCI) for further 
treatment of his back symptoms. (JE 1, pp. 1-3). Dr. Eck diagnosed him with lumbar 
spondylosis and ordered an MRI of his spine. (Id. at 2-3). The MRI was performed on 
September 23, 2015. (Id. at 4). It showed moderate desiccation at L4-5 with a diffuse disc 
bulge, a small disc protrusion at L2-3, and mild degenerative changes. (Id. at 5). Dr. Eck 
reviewed the MRI on September 28, 2015. (Id. at 6). He recommended conservative care 
including weight loss, exercise, stretching, and core strengthening. (Id. at 7). Dr. Eck also 
referred Williams to pain management. (Id.). It is not clear whether Williams ever attended 
pain management for his back complaints back in 2015. Neither party submitted any pre-
injury pain management records at hearing. The last pre-injury treatment note in the 
record is an emergency room visit on October 8, 2019. (JE 2, p. 23). On that date, 
Williams presented at the St. Luke’s ER, complaining of right-sided low back pain that 
radiated down his right upper leg. (Id. at 24). He was also experiencing spasms. (Id.). He 
was given a Toradol injection and sent home. (Id. at 27-28).  
 
 
 
Dr. Morrissey diagnosed Williams with lumbar radiculopathy secondary to disc 
degeneration. He recommended and administered a trial epidural steroid injection at L4-
L5. (JE 4, pp. 92-93). At hearing, Williams testified the injection helped with his back pain 
for a while, but then the pain returned. (Tr., p. 26). On August 26, 2020, Williams 
underwent a second MRI of his lumbar spine. (JE 4, p. 96). It showed mild degenerative 
changes, like those seen in his 2015 MRI. (Id.). There were no areas of severe spinal 
canal or foraminal narrowing. (Id.). Williams underwent a second epidural steroid injection 
with Dr. Morrissey on September 17, 2020. (Id. at 98). He testified this injection also 
helped with his pain complains for a time, but the pain returned. (Tr., p. 26).   
 
 
 
At some point, Dr. Anwar referred Williams to the Neurosurgery Clinic at Unity 
Point. (JE 3, p. 67). On December 7, 2020, he was evaluated by Jeremy Glawatz, PA-C. 
(Id.). PA Glawatz diagnosed him with lumbar spondylosis and back pain. (Id. at 70).  He 
recommended a trial of facet injections. (Id.). Those were performed on December 16, 
2020 by Dr. Morrissey. (JE 4, pp. 99-101). On December 17, 2020, claimant’s counsel 
met with PA Glawatz to discuss his back complaints. (JE 3, pp. 72-74). After this 
conference, his counsel asked Glawatz to fill out a check the box report. (Id.). This report 
states Williams told Glawatz that he had missed a chair and fell onto the floor on his 
buttocks at work. (Id. at 72). It also stated that Williams had experienced back symptoms 
prior to the work fall, but those mostly resolved prior to this incident after receiving 
injections and physical therapy. (Id.). Williams told Glawatz that after the fall he started 
having pain down the back of his left leg. (Id.). Glawatz indicated that his back pain may 

WILLIAMS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND 
Page 9 
 
have been flared up by the fall. (Id. at 73). He recommended lumbar facet injections, as 
well as a work restriction of no lifting more than 30 pounds (Id.).  
  
 
The injections relieved Williams’ pain symptoms for approximately three months. 
(See Tr., p. 27). Williams returned to PA Glawatz on March 5, 2021. (JE 3, p. 75).  At that 
visit, he complained of increasing left-sided low back pain with occasional discomfort in 
his right leg to his knee. (Id. at 76). Glawatz assessed him with increasing low back pain 
and radicular pain in his legs. (Id. at 80). He ordered a new MRI, as well as prescribed 
Flexeril and anti-inflammatories. (Id.). He also provided a note taking him out of work for 
one week. (Id.). The MRI was performed on March 12, 2021. (Id. at 81). It revealed mild 
degenerative changes, similar to his prior MRI. (Id. at 82). It did not show any areas of 
severe spinal canal or foraminal narrowing. (Id.). On April 7, 2021, Williams underwent 
bilateral L4-L5 facet joint injections. (JE 4, pp. 103-104). Williams testified these helped 
with his pain, but also wore off. (Tr., p. 29).    
 
 
Williams returned to PA Glawatz on May 19, 2021. (JE 3, p. 83). He complained 
of increased pain in his low back since that Sunday, “a lot worse now than what it has 
ever been.” (Id. at 84). He indicated he was also having issues voiding and had been to 
the emergency room the day before and they did not find any red flags.6 (Id.). Glawatz 
assessed Williams with an acute onset of increased back pain, lumbar radiculopathy, and 
abnormal voiding. (Id. at 87). He ordered a new MRI due to Williams’ acute symptoms.  
(Id. at 88). The MRI was performed that day. (Id. at 89-90). It showed mild to moderate 
degenerative changes of the lumbar spine, most prominent at L4-L5. (Id. at 90). Glawatz 
did not see any acute changes. (Id. at 88). He prescribed a prednisone burst and taper. 
(Id.).   
 
 
On May 24, 2021, Williams returned to Dr. Anwar with back pain. (JE 6, p. 161).  
Dr. Anwar referred him to Kevin Eck, M.D. at PCI. (JE 1, p. 10). Dr. Eck evaluated him on 
June 8, 2021. (Id.). His treatment note states Williams was there for another opinion. (Id.). 
Dr. Eck diagnosed Williams with low back pain, lumbar spondylosis, and left leg pain. (Id. 
at 11).  After reviewing his prior MRIs, Dr. Eck opined that Williams’ back and leg 
symptoms might be caused by a posterolateral disc bulge at L4-L5. (Id.). Dr. Eck 
questioned whether he had some degree of lateral recess stenosis and possible 
impingement of the L5 nerve root. (Id.). He recommended a left-sided diagnostic L5 nerve 
block. (Id.).  
  
 
On September 7, 2021, Williams presented to the Unity Point Urgent Care Clinic 
with low back pain. (JE 7, pp. 190-191). He was diagnosed with acute bilateral low back 
pain with right-sided sciatica. (Id. at 191). He was given a Toradol injection and taken off 
work for two days. (Id.). Williams returned back to Dr. Eck on September 9, 2021. (JE 1, 
p. 13).  He stated, “his back pain intensified after starting a new job recently.” (Id.). 
Williams complained of increased low back and buttock pain when he tried to return to an 
                                                 
6 According to the records, Williams presented to the St. Luke’s ER on May 18, 2021, complaining 
of worsening lower back pain, radicular pain in both legs, and intermittent numbness in his left leg. (JE 2, 
p. 31).  The ER note states he had “no red flag symptoms”. (Id. at 32). He was given pain medication and 
told to follow-up with PA Glawatz. (Id. at 33).   

WILLIAMS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND 
Page 10 
 
upright position from sitting or when he stood for long periods of time, as well as when he 
repetitively lifted heavy objects. (Id.). Dr. Eck diagnosed lumbar facet joint irritation and 
recommended a period of rest. (Id. at 14). He also took Williams off work for one week. 
(Id.).   
 
 
Dr. Morrissey performed medial branch nerve blocks at L4-L5 on September 29, 
2021, and October 27, 2021. (JE 4, pp. 107-111). Williams reported these improved his 
pain. (Id. at 111). On November 30, 2021, Dr. Morrissey performed radiofrequency 
ablation of Williams’ medial branch nerves at L4 and L5 bilaterally. (Id. at 116). This 
helped Williams’ pain. (See JE 2, p. 35).   
 
 
Williams did not seek medical treatment again until March 2022. (JE 2, p. 35). On 
March 9, 2022, he went to the St. Luke’s ER for acute low back pain. (Id.). Williams 
reported he stepped down off a forklift at work and turned to the left when he felt extreme 
pain in his lower back. (Id.). The pain radiated down his right leg and he also had 
weakness in the leg. (Id.). He was diagnosed with acute midline low back pain with right-
sided sciatica. (Id. at 38). A new MRI was performed. (Id. at 41). It showed mild to 
moderate degenerative disc disease with disc desiccation and posterior annular disc 
bulging, broad based annular disc bulging at multiple levels, a shallow left paracentral 
disc protrusion at L1-L2, a posterior annular broad-based disc bulge at L2-L3, and a disc 
bulge and annular fissure at L4-L5. (Id. at 41-42). Williams was given pain medication, a 
Lidoderm patch, and referred to Joshua Barber, M.D., an orthopedic spine doctor at PCI. 
(Id. at 38). He was also provided with a work note. (Id.).   
 
 
Dr. Barber evaluated Williams on March 11, 2022. (JE 1, p. 16). Williams told Dr. 
Barber he was that he was lifting something at work on March 10, 2022, and had a sharp 
pain in his lower back when he stepped off the forklift. (Id.). He reported stabbing pain in 
his back, pain in the medial right thigh, and left leg paresthesias that went into the lateral 
aspect of his left foot. (Id.). Dr. Barber diagnosed him with musculoskeletal back pain.  
(Id. at 17). He recommended pain medications, Gabapentin and Meloxicam. (Id. at 17).  
He did not think surgery was indicated. (Id.). Dr. Barber referred Williams to Justin Gilbert, 
M.D., for consideration of repeat medial branch blocks and radiofrequency ablation. (Id. 
at 17-18). Williams saw Dr. Gilbert on March 30, 2022. (Id. at 21). Dr. Gilbert diagnosed 
him with chronic pain, and lumbago with sciatica, left side. (Id.). He recommended a 
bilateral L5-S1 transforaminal epidural steroid injection for diagnostic purposes. (Id.). His 
treatment note states, “in the absence of any benefits, we can consider updating his MRI 
given new onset injury.” (Id.). Dr. Gilbert performed the injection that day. (Id.). Williams 
testified the injection helped with his pain complaints, but later wore off. (Tr., p. 36).  
  
 
Williams did not seek medical attention for his back again until August 17, 2022. 
(JE 7, p. 192). On that date, Williams presented to the UnityPoint Urgent Care Clinic with 
low back pain. (Id. at 193). The note states that his back started bothering him two days 
prior, he wasn’t sure what exactly what he had done, but he “went to work the last 2 days 
and does a lot of lifting and today just could not do it.” (Id.). He requested a work excuse 
until Monday when he could see his family provider. (Id.). He was diagnosed with acute 
bilateral low back pain without sciatica and given a work excuse. (Id. at 193-195).  

WILLIAMS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND 
Page 11 
 
Williams saw Dr. Anwar on August 22, 2022. (JE 6, pp. 165-168). Dr. Anwar diagnosed 
him with acute right-sided low back pain, lumbar back pain with radiculopathy affecting 
his left lower extremity, and foraminal stenosis of the lumbar region. (Id. at 167). Dr. Anwar 
advised him to increase his use of Celebrex and prescribed a seven-day dose of 
prednisone. (Id. at 168). Williams requested a note taking him off work for the week. (Id.).  
It was provided. (Id.).   
 
 
On September 6, 2022, Dr. Morrissey performed another radiofrequency ablation 
of Williams’ medial branch nerves at L4 and L5. (JE 4, pp. 118-121). Williams also had a 
follow-up visit with Dr. Anwar on that date. (JE 7, p. 169). Dr. Anwar returned him back to 
work with restrictions of no repeated lifting or bending and avoid lifting more than 20 
pounds for the next two weeks. (Id. at 173).   
 
 
On October 13, 2022, Williams presented to the St. Luke’s ER with worsening low 
back pain, which had radiated to his left thigh and lateral leg for the past two days.7 (JE 
2, p. 44). He was having trouble walking secondary to pain. (Id.). Williams was diagnosed 
with lumbar back pain with radiculopathy affecting his left lower extremity and admitted to 
the hospital. (Id. at 47). His intake paperwork notes he had experienced some trauma to 
the low back about a year ago and was diagnosed with some bulging discs, but “thinks 
this is different from then.” (Id. at 48). He reported tingling and pain in his lower legs with 
movement. (Id. at 50). A new MRI was obtained. (Id. at 52-53). It showed relatively mild 
multilevel lumbar spondylosis, mild to moderate spondylosis at L4-L5, and multilevel disc 
bulge/shallow central disc protrusions. (Id.). There was no significant spinal canal or 
foraminal narrowing. (Id.).  Williams was given several rounds of Dilaudid and Valium. (Id. 
at 50).  His pain did not improve. (Id.). He was evaluated by Stanley Mathew, M.D., a pain 
management physician. (Id.). Dr. Mathew started him on a Medrol dose pack, 
methocarbamol, and tramadol. (Id.).  He was also sent to physical therapy. (Id.).  Williams 
has a history of kidney stones, so CT scans of his abdomen and pelvis were taken. (Id.).  
They were normal. (Id.). His pain improved. (Id.). He was discharged from the hospital on 
October 15, 2022, with restrictions of no lifting more than 5 pounds and take frequent rest 
breaks.8 (Id.). He was instructed to follow-up with CRS Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation (CRS) in two weeks. (Id. at 50).    
 
 
On November 4, 2022, Williams was evaluated by Jennifer Driscoll, ARNP, at 
CRS. (JE 5, p. 127). He was still experiencing back pain with bending and twisting. (Id. at 
129). He also noticed left leg weakness when walking longer distances. (Id.).  Williams 
reported that he worked at a warehouse with “a lot of lifting, twisting and bending,” and 
he felt “unable to return to work as any type of twisting or bending at home will flare-up 
his pain.” (Id.). Nurse Driscoll diagnosed him with lumbar spondylosis, chronic bilateral 
low back pain with left-sided sciatica, and protrusion of the lumbar intervertebral disc. (Id. 
at 132). She recommended he continue using his pain medications. (Id.). She also 
suggested a trial of Lyrica, a referral to Clark and Associates for a lumbar spine orthosis 
                                                 
7 This note indicates that Williams was also receiving treatment for chronic fatigue, migraines, 
nocturia, hepatomegaly, and morbid obesity. (JE 2, p. 54). 
8 The ER note states that Williams works in a warehouse where he is required to perform heavy 
lifting. (JE 2, p. 50).  

WILLIAMS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND 
Page 12 
 
evaluation, and another injection. (Id. at 130-132). She provided Williams with a note 
taking him off work until November 18, 2022. (Id. at 134). Williams had a follow-up visit 
with Nurse Driscoll on November 18, 2022. (Id. at 135-137). His back pain had improved, 
and he was no longer having shooting pain down his leg. (Id. at 137). Williams requested 
a note returning him to work. (Id.). Nurse Driscoll returned him to work three days a week 
working four-hour shifts. (Id. at 137-141). She also gave him restrictions of not lifting 
greater than 10 pounds, no twisting or bending at the waist, and no sitting or standing for 
longer than 30 minutes at a time. (Id. at 141).   
 
 
On November 30, 2022, Dr. Morrissey performed another lumbar epidural steroid 
injection. (JE 4, p. 122). Williams had a follow-up appointment with Nurse Driscoll on 
December 7, 2022. (JE 5, p. 142). Williams indicated that the treatments she and Dr. 
Morrissey provided had “been helping to control his back pain,” and he was “no longer 
having the shooting leg pains as he was prior.” (Id.). Williams thought he could increase 
his work hours to five days a week with four-hour shifts. (Id.). Nurse Driscoll provided him 
with a new work note increasing his permissible work hours as requested. (Id. at 145).  
She maintained the same physical restrictions she had given on November 18, 2022. 
(Id.). This is the last treatment note in the record prior to the hearing date. (Id.). The note 
indicates that Williams was to return to her office on January 4, 2023 to reevaluate his 
symptoms and see how he is tolerating work. (Id.).  
 
 
At the behest of his attorney, Williams attended an independent medical exam 
(IME) with Farid Manshadi, M.D. on October 20, 2022. (Cl Ex. 1, p. 12). His report was 
issued on November 7, 2022. (Id.). Prior to the examination, Dr. Manshadi reviewed 
medical records from Williams’ prior right shoulder injury, his 2015 lumbar MRI, and his 
post-injury-date treatment records. (Id. at 12-15). Dr. Manshadi diagnosed Williams with 
lumbosacral radiculopathy, most likely at L4-L5, resulting in reduced sensation along the 
left L4 dermatome, as well as reduced lumbar range of motion. (Id. at 17). He opined that 
the fall at ADM in May 2020 materially aggravated his pre-existing back condition and 
was a substantial contributing factor in producing his current left-sided low back pain and 
L4-L5 radiculopathy. (Id.). Williams told Dr. Manshadi that he had never experienced left-
sided leg pain before the fall. (Id.). Dr. Manshadi recommended continued physical 
therapy and injections for his pain complaints. (Id. at 17). He also suggested an evaluation 
to see if decompression surgery was warranted. (Id.). Dr. Manshadi stated Williams was 
at maximum medical improvement (MMI) for his back injury, if he chose not to pursue 
further treatment, but he did not provide an actual MMI date. (Id.). He stated Williams fell 
under DRE Lumbar Category 2 and assigned him 8 percent permanent impairment to the 
whole body, citing to Table 15-3 of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition. (Id.). Dr. Manshadi recommended restrictions of avoiding any 
activities which require bending, stooping, or twisting at the waist, and no lifting more than 
20 pounds (Id.).   
 
 
At the request of defendants, Williams underwent a second IME with Jonathon 
Fields, M.D. on November 10, 2022. (Ex. H, p. 28). Prior to the examination, Dr. Fields 
reviewed medical records for Williams’ prior right shoulder injury, his pre-injury lumbar 
treatment, his 2015 lumbar MRI, his post-injury lumbar treatment records, and Dr. 

WILLIAMS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND 
Page 13 
 
Manshadi’s IME report. (Id. at 29). Dr. Fields diagnosed Williams with chronic 
degenerative lumbar spondylosis that pre-existed the May 2020 fall at ADM. (Id. at 34). 
He also diagnosed him with a minor coccyx contusion as a result of the fall on May 21, 
2020, which temporarily exacerbated his chronic symptomatology. (Id.). However, Dr. 
Fields opined that these conditions were not causally related to Williams’ work at ADM 
because he was off work and playing on his cell phone when he fell. (Id.). According to 
Dr. Fields, the fall did not cause any material or permanent aggravation of Williams’ pre-
existing back condition, and his current complaints are related to his chronic condition, 
not the fall at work. (Id.). As support for this assertion, Dr. Fields points to Williams’ 
multiple post-injury MRIs, which do not show any acute changes from his 2015 lumbar 
MRI. (Id.). Dr. Fields placed Williams at MMI on June 21, 2020, for the coccyx contusion. 
(Id. at 35). Dr. Fields noted that under the AMA Guides Fifth Edition, ambiguous or 
controversial pain is considered unratable. (Id.). Dr. Fields did not assign him any 
permanent impairment or suggest work restrictions for the May 2020 fall.9  
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has the 
burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
 
Defendants assert a notice defense. Iowa Code section 85.23 requires an 
employee to give notice of the occurrence of an injury to the employer within 90 days from 
the date of the occurrence, unless the employer has actual knowledge of the occurrence.  
The purpose of the 90-day notice or actual knowledge requirement is to give the employer 
an opportunity to timely investigate the facts surrounding the injury. The actual knowledge 
alternative to notice is met when the employer, as a reasonably conscientious manager, 
is alerted to the possibility of a potential compensation claim through information which 
makes the employer aware that the injury occurred and that it may be work related. 
Dillinger v. City of Sioux City, 368 N.W.2d 176 (Iowa 1985); Robinson v. Dep't of Transp., 
296 N.W.2d 809 (Iowa 1980). The time period for giving notice does not begin to run until 
the claimant, as a reasonable person, should recognize the nature, seriousness and 
probable compensable character of the injury. The reasonableness of claimant's conduct 
is to be judged in light of claimant's education and intelligence. Claimant must know 
enough about the condition or incident to realize that it is both serious and work 
connected. Positive medical information is unnecessary if information from any source 
give notice of the condition's probable compensability. Robinson, 296 N.W.2d at 812.  
Failure to give notice is an affirmative defense which the employer must prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence. DeLong v. Highway Comm'n, 229 Iowa 700, 295 N.W. 
91 (1940). 
 
 
Above, I found that ADM did not have actual knowledge of Williams’ May 21, 2020 
fall until October 1, 2020, the day he reported it to Tyler Albert and Dean Petroff.  
                                                 
9 In November 2022, claimant’s counsel asked Dr. Manshadi to review an additional pre-injury 
record and Dr. Field’s IME report. (Cl Ex. 1, p. 31). After reviewing the documents, he did not change his 
opinion. (Id. at 32).   

WILLIAMS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND 
Page 14 
 
However, under the law, the 90 days does not begin to run until Williams recognized the 
nature, seriousness, and compensability of the injury. See Robinson, 296 N.W.2d at 812.  
Williams returned to full duty work the day after the incident, and he did not seek any 
treatment for his low back until July 24, 2020. Under these facts, this is the earliest date 
Williams could be credited with understanding the nature and seriousness of his low back 
condition. July 24, 2020 to October 1, 2020, is a period of 69 days. Williams reported the 
injury to ADM within 90 days of the “occurrence” under the law. Defendants have failed 
to prove their notice defense.   
 
 
The next issue that must be addressed is whether Williams sustained an injury that 
arose out of and in the course of his employment with ADM on May 21, 2020. In his brief, 
Williams argues that his fall in the ADM locker room “is a work injury as long as it was on 
employer premises.”10 (Claimant’s post-hearing brief, p. 15). In their brief, defendants 
argue his low back injury did not arise out of and in the course of his employment as he 
was off the clock and fell to the floor because he was distracted and looking at his 
personal cell phone. (Defendants’ post-hearing brief, p. 36). Defendants argue that under 
these facts, there was no hazard or circumstance of the work environment that caused 
him to fall. (Id.).   
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995). An 
injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the injury 
and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309. The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment. Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
 
An employer should expect a worker to be at the workplace at times during non-
work hours. Consequently, being present at the workplace at such times is incidental to 
employment. See, e.g., Suljevic v. Dudden Farms, Inc., File No. 5031167, 2010 WL 
5383984 (Arb. Decision, Dec. 23, 2010). At the time of the injury in this case, Williams 
was clocked out, but still in the locker room at ADM. Generally, injuries occurring while a 
                                                 
10 In Lakeside Casino v. Blue, the Iowa Supreme Court expressly rejected the “positional-risk” 
doctrine. 743 N.W.2d 169, 177 (Iowa 2007). Under the positional-risk doctrine, injuries are compensable 
“in situations where ‘the only connection of the employment with the injury is that its obligations placed the 
employee in the particular place at the particular time’ when the employee ‘was injured by some neutral 
force, meaning by “neutral” neither personal to the claimant nor distinctly associated with the employment.’ 
” Ottumwa Reg. Health Ctr. v. Mitchell, 752 N.W.2d 35, 2008 WL 1699806 at *3 (Iowa Ct. App. 2008) (table) 
(citations omitted). 

WILLIAMS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND 
Page 15 
 
worker is going to and from work off an employer’s premises are not compensable. Otto 
v. Independent Sch. Dist., 237 Iowa 991, 994; 23 N.W.2d 915, 916 (1946). However, 
injuries on an employer’s premises at or near employment hours are almost always 
compensable. See 15 Iowa Practice Series, Workers’ Compensation § 6:2 (2019). It 
appears Williams’ injury occurred in the course of his employment. The harder question 
is whether his injury arose out of his employment with ADM.   
 
The first step in this analysis is to determine whether Williams’ fall was idiopathic, 
unexplained, or explained by a condition existing in the workplace. See Lapcheske v. Polk 
County, File No. 5055505, 2019 WL 7759785 (Appeal Decision, Nov. 6, 2019). Above, I 
found Williams was looking at his cell phone and attempted to sit down without looking, 
missed the bench, and fell to the ground. This finding is supported by the witness 
statements, and the explanations provided in Williams’ medical treatment records. Given 
this fact pattern, Williams’ fall does not appear to fit neatly into any of these categories.  
It is not idiopathic.11 Nor can it be explained by any specific hazardous condition at ADM.  
Williams’ employment at ADM did not subject him to the risk of falling on a level floor in 
the locker room. His distraction with his cell phone subjected him to that risk. This is a 
reason personal to him and unrelated to his employment. It appears Williams fell on a 
concrete floor. However, nothing in the record indicates the floor of the locker room 
presented a specific hazard to Williams. Unlike in Lapcheske, the hearing record does 
not contain any factual evidence about the hardness of the floor he fell upon, nor does it 
contain any medical opinions indicating that it was the floor material specifically that 
caused his injury. Given this, there is insufficient evidence that Williams’ fall can be 
explained by a hazard or condition of his workplace.  
 
The greater weight of the evidence suggests he fell due to inattention, making 
unexplained the most appropriate category in which to analyze this claim. Prior to July 
2019, claimants with unexplained falls could satisfy their burden to prove an injury arising 
out of employment under the “actual risk” rule. Bluml v. Dee Jay’s Inc., 920 N.W.2d 82, 
91 n.1 (Iowa 2018). Under the actual-risk rule, the claimant must show “ ‘the employment 
subjected [the] claimant to the actual risk that caused the injury.’ ” Lakeside Casino v. 
Blue, 920 N.W.2d 169, 176 (Iowa 2007) (quoting 1 Arthur Larson & Lex K. Larson, 
Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Law § 3.04, at 3-5 (2007)). More specifically, under the 
actual-risk doctrine, the injury must result from a condition, risk, or hazard of employment. 
Id. at 178; see also Hanson v. Reichelt, 452 N.W.2d 164, 168 (Iowa 1990) (“If the nature 
of the employment exposes the employee to the risk of such an injury, the employee 
suffers an accidental injury arising out of and during the course of the employment.”). In 
this case, Williams was injured because he got distracted by his cell phone and fell on the 
floor; there is insufficient evidence in the record that his injury resulted from a risk of his 
employment.  
 
                                                 
11 An idiopathic fall is defined as “a fall due to the employee’s personal condition.”  Bluml v. Dee 
Jay’s Inc., 920 N.W.2d 82, 86 (Iowa 2018).   
 

WILLIAMS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND 
Page 16 
 
Additionally, in July of 2019, the legislature amended Iowa Code section 
85.61(7)(c) to include the following paragraph, “Personal injuries due to idiopathic or 
unexplained falls from a level surface onto the same level surface do not arise out of and 
in the course of employment and are not compensable under this chapter.” Iowa Code 
Section 85.61(7)(c) (2019).12 Williams’ alleged date of injury is May 21, 2020, and he 
suffered an unexplained fall from a level surface onto the same level surface. Accordingly, 
under the language of the revised statute, his claim is not compensable. Williams has not 
proven that his low back injury arose out of his employment with ADM.13 Claimant shall 
take nothing from these proceedings.  
 
Williams is seeking reimbursement for his IME with Dr. Manshadi. A claimant’s 
right to reimbursement for an IME exam is controlled by Iowa Code section 85.39. This 
section permits an employee to be reimbursed for a subsequent examination by a 
physician of the employee’s choice where an employer-retained physician has previously 
evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes that the initial evaluation is 
too low. Iowa Code section 85.39(2)(2019). However, this right to reimbursement is also 
dependent upon the claimant’s success at hearing. Iowa Code section 85.39(2), states, 
 
An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined to be compensable under this 
chapter or chapter 85A or 85B. An employer is not liable for the cost of such 
an examination if the injury for which the employee is being examined is 
determined not to be a compensable injury. 
Id.  
 
Defendants are not liable for this claim. Williams has not established the 
prerequisites for reimbursement of Dr. Manshadi’s evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.39. 
 
                                                 
12 According to the Iowa Practice Series,  
 
In 2018, the Iowa Supreme Court clarified that the actual-risk rule adopted 
in Lakeside did not overturn the “Increased Risk Standard,” which is applicable for 
idiopathic falls in the work place. In Bluml v. Dee Jay's Inc., the Iowa Supreme 
Court held that an idiopathic fall may be compensable if the condition of the 
employment “increased the risk of injury” and that is a question of fact, not a 
question of law. 
In response to Bluml, in 2019, the Iowa legislature amended Iowa Code section 
85.61 to state that “personal injuries due to idiopathic or unexplained falls from a 
level surface onto the same level surface do not arise out of and in the course of 
employment and are not compensable under [Chapter 85].” 
§ 54:10. Arising out of and in the course of employment, 3 Ia. Prac., Methods of Practice § 54:10. 
13 The undersigned recognizes that the statute also refers to “in the course of employment,” but 
Williams was clearly in the ADM locker room immediately after his shift when the incident occurred.  

WILLIAMS V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND 
Page 17 
 
Williams also asserts a claim for costs. Specifically, Williams seeks costs for Dr. 
Manshadi’s supplemental report, his filing fee, and his deposition transcript. (Cl Ex. 6, p. 
54). Williams failed to prove a compensable claim; therefore, I conclude that none of his 
costs should be assessed. Defendants are also asserting a claim for costs. They are 
seeking the cost of Dr. Field’s IME. (Ex. N). The compensability of this case was a close 
call that required careful legal analysis. Given this, I decline to award defendants costs 
and conclude that each party should bear its own costs.  
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings.   
 
Each party shall bear their own costs. 
 
Signed and filed this    28th    day of June, 2023. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
 
         AMANDA R. RUTHERFORD 
              DEPUTY WORKERS’  
    COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
 
Andrew Giller (via WCES) 
 
Peter Thill (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days from 
the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal must be filed 
via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been granted, the notice of 
appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ 
Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal must be received by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be extended to 
the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
 
 
 
