Case Number: 22700870.01
Case Title:  CABRERA MARTINEZ, CARLOS V. TYSON FOODS, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Cabrera Martinez Carlos-22700870.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
CARLOS CABRERA MARTINEZ, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
File No. 22700870.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :               ARBITRATION DECISION 
TYSON FOODS, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  : 
Head Note Nos:  1108.50, 1402.20,  
 
Defendant. 
  : 
 
 
      1402.40, 2907 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Carlos Cabrera Martinez, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Tyson Foods, Inc., self-insured employer as defendant.  
Hearing was held via Zoom videoconference on September 21, 2023.     
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Carlos Cabrera Martinez was the only witness to testify live at trial.  He testified 
via an interpreter, Alina Salvat.  The evidentiary record also includes Joint Exhibits 1-5, 
Claimant’s Exhibits 1-5, and Defendant’s Exhibits A-G.  All exhibits were received 
without objection.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration 
hearing.       
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on October 16, 2023, at which time the 
case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of 
his employment on March 29, 2022. 
 
2. Whether the alleged injury was the cause of any temporary disability. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Jan-26  08:35:16     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

CABRERA MARTINEZ V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 2 
 
3. Whether the alleged injury was the cause of any permanent disability.  If so, 
the nature and extent of permanent disability. 
 
4. The appropriate commencement date for any permanent disability benefits. 
 
5. Claimant’s gross earnings at the time of the alleged injury. 
 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to payment of past medical expenses. 
 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to additional medical care. 
 
8. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for his IME pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.39. 
 
9. Assessment of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Mr. Carlos Cabrera Martinez has alleged an injury date of March 29, 2022.  He 
alleges he injured his right shoulder and his right long finger.  Defendant denies that 
Carlos sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of his employment.  
Carlos began working for IBP, the predecessor to Tyson, in 1996.  He has 
worked in various positions which involve the use of his hands and the use of knives 
since that time.  (Transcript, page 18) On the date of the alleged injury, March 29, 2022, 
Carlos was working at Tyson as a cooler janitor.  In the area he worked, hogs were 
moved on an assembly line.  Carlos’s job was to move hogs that fell off the assembly 
line.  When hogs fell, he used a metal hook in the shape of a J to drag the hogs onto a 
cart.  The hook had a handle with the thickness of an ordinary sausage.  The number of 
hogs that fell each day varied.  When there were mechanical issues, like on the date of 
the alleged injury, the number of hogs that fell increased.  When there were an 
increased number of hogs that fell, the hogs would be stacked on top of each other 
before they were dragged away.  Each hog weighed approximately 215 pounds and 
needed to be drug 6 to 8 feet.  Carlos testified that he was injured when he was pulling 
the hogs from the pile.  During direct examination, Carlos agreed that pulling the hogs 
off the pile was continuous and repetitive.  (Tr. pp. 19-22, 40-42; Defendant’s Exhibit D, 
pp. 29-30) 
On Friday, March 29, 2022, Carlos reported an injury to his right hand and right 
shoulder to Denise Allen, RN at Occupational Health Services at Tyson.  (Tr. p. 22) The 
medical record report indicated Carlos went to OHS with his supervisor, Sonya Evans, 
to report an incident that had just occurred.  Carlos reported, “I was doing my job I to 
pull the hog with the hook in the hogs tendon and I felt a sharp sudden pain that shoot 
up to my right shoulder.  From right hand to my right shoulder.”  (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 22) 

CABRERA MARTINEZ V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 3 
 
He reported that on March 29, 2022, approximately 50 hogs fell which resulted in a 
workload increase. He complained of right middle finger pain that radiated to his right 
upper extremity.  He rated the shoulder pain as 5 and the right middle finger pain as 2 
out of 10.  The assessment was, “FAROM of RUE and right middle finger without 
difficulty.”  The plan was to provide him with extra help in the cooler and for him to 
return to the clinic on March 31, 2022.  (JE1, pp. 22-23) 
Carlos returned to the OHS on March 31, 2022.  He had full active range of 
motion of his right upper extremity and right middle finger without difficulty.  He reported 
that he was not able to make a fist and that the right middle finger would not bend all the 
way.  He was to continue to have extra help when in the cooler.  (JE1, p. 23) 
On April 4, 2022, Carlos reported to OHS that he had right middle finger pain that 
radiated to his right arm.  He also had right shoulder pain.  He only had pain in his right 
middle finger if he bumped it while working; otherwise, he had no pain.  He was to 
continue to have help performing his job duties.  Carlos noted that he was not getting 
better, and he requested to see a doctor.  An appointment was scheduled for him at 
MOHA On-Site Physician Services.  (JE1, pp. 23-24) 
Also on April 4, 2022, a Team Member Statement of Injury/Illness form was 
completed.  The report indicated that he was pulling a hog onto a cart with a hook when 
he injured his right arm.  The diagram on the form indicates that the areas of pain were 
the right shoulder, right upper arm, and the right long finger.  (Claimant’s Ex. 5) 
Carlos was seen at MOHA On-Site Physician Services by Robert L. Gordon, 
M.D. on April 18, 2022.  Carlos presented for evaluation of his right shoulder and right 
long digit, most notably the right long digit MCP joint region.  Carlos reported that two 
months ago, he was performing his job of janitor during a time when there were 
approximately forty or so hogs per day that were coming off the overhead rail system, 
when there were typically only about seven.  He had to pull the carcasses onto a dump 
cart.  Each carcass weighed around 160-170 pounds.  He reported that he developed 
right shoulder pain, primarily on the lateral aspect of his right shoulder over time.  He did 
not believe his right shoulder pain was due to an acute related incident.  
Additionally, Carlos reported that for some period, he had been noting pain of his 
right long digit MCP joint; this was not acute. He believed this was possibly from utilizing 
a hook in his right hand to pull the carcass onto the cart.  Carlos denied any loss of 
range of motion in his right shoulder, but he did note pain and a sensation of decreased 
strength.  He had not been utilizing any medication routinely for his right shoulder or 
right long digit MCP joint region.  Carlos also denied any history of trauma of his right 
long digit.  Dr. Gordon noted full range of motion and full strength of his right shoulder.  
Carlos had a positive apprehension test.  There was generalized bulkiness of the right 
long digit MCP joint region.  Carlos lacked 20 degrees of full flexion at the MCP joint of 
the right long digit.  He also lacked 1.5 cm from bringing the tip of the right long digit into 
the palm.  The impression was right shoulder pain and right long digit pain in the region 
of the MCP joint with bulkiness/bogginess.  Dr. Gordon completed an “Occupational 
Injury/Illness Medical Treatment & Work Status Summary” form.  (JE2, p. 30) He 

CABRERA MARTINEZ V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
recommended x-rays of his right shoulder and hand.  He also prescribed Naproxen.  
Carlos was performing full duty with prudence and was instructed that he may continue.  
He was to follow-up in two weeks.  (JE2, pp. 28-30)      
Dr. Gordon saw Carlos again on May 3, 2022.  X-rays of his right shoulder from 
April 18, 2022 did not note any acute osseous abnormalities.  The x-rays of his right 
hand showed arthropathy of the metacarpophalangeal joints.  At the long digit MCP joint 
there was noted to be moderate narrowing and osteophyte formation.  Dr. Gordon 
asked Carlos if he could recall any trauma to the joint region on his long finger; he could 
not.  He had full range of motion and full strength of his right shoulder.  He did lack 
approximately 30 degrees of full flexion at the MCP joint of the right long digit.  Carlos 
reported that his right shoulder pain overall was not bad; the pain waxed and waned.  At 
times he did have pain at rest.  Dr. Gordon completed an “Occupational Injury/Illness 
Medical Treatment & Work Status Summary” form.  (JE2, p. 33) The diagnoses were 
right shoulder pain with no functional limitation on examination and right long digit MCP 
joint pain with notable arthropathy per the x-ray.  Dr. Gordon discharged Carlos from 
care without any permanent restrictions or permanent impairment.  He was released to 
full duty.  (JE2, pp. 31-33)    
On September 13, 2022, Carlos returned to Dr. Gordon for reevaluation of his 
right shoulder and right long digit MCP joint.  Since May 2022, he had noted right 
shoulder pain and right long digit pain in the region of the MCP joint.  He had not had a 
new injury.  He had been working as a cooler janitor and had been lifting product off the 
floor.  He had full range of motion and full strength about the right shoulder.  He had 
pain within the painful arc of abduction and with flexion past 90 degrees.  He had mildly 
positive impingement features.  His right long digit had generalized bulkiness of the 
MCP joint consistent with arthritis.  He had full extension at the MCP joint of the right 
long digit.  He lacked 30 degrees of full extension.  His sensation was intact throughout 
the right long digit.  Dr. Gordon’s impression was right shoulder pain.  He noted that he 
had previously evaluated him and his right shoulder was doing well, but Carlos had 
noticed increasing pain since May 2022.  Dr. Gordon placed Carlos at MMI for his right 
long digit MCP arthritis. Dr. Gordon prescribed prednisone and physical therapy.  He 
was allowed to perform full job duties.  He was to return in two weeks. (JE2, pp. 34-35)   
Carlos began physical therapy at Select Physical Therapy on September 16, 
2022.  The therapist noted pain in right shoulder and the mechanism of injury was 
gradual onset.  He reported that his symptoms waxed and waned.  His pain was a 2 or 
3 out of 10.  The therapist noted that Carlos had full range of motion of his right 
shoulder.  Carlos was to attend therapy 3 times a week for 2 weeks.  (JE4, pp. 55-61) 
Carlos returned to Dr. Gordon on October 11, 2022.  Carlos reported that his 
right shoulder was doing well.  There were times when he was pain-free and other times 
when he had minimal pain.  He had no functional limitation and was performing his job 
without any issues.  The physical therapist reported that Carlos had done very well in 
therapy.  Dr. Gordon noted full range of motion and full strength of his right shoulder.  
Dr. Gordon opined that Carlos did not have any functional limitation due to his right 

CABRERA MARTINEZ V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
shoulder and placed him at MMI.  He discharged him from care without any permanent 
restrictions or permanent impairment.  (JE2, pp. 36-38)  
On October 12, 2022, Carlos attended his last physical therapy appointment.  
The therapist noted Carlos made good progress.  He had full range of motion of his right 
shoulder in all planes including functional strength.  The therapist encouraged Carlos to 
perform home exercises 4 to 5 days per week.  Carlos had completed the program and 
was discharged to a home exercise program.  (JE4, pp. 62-65) 
Carlos returned to see Dr. Gordon on January 17, 2023.  He reported that he 
recently saw a doctor in Mexico who discussed some sort of tendon transfer.  
Regarding his right shoulder, Carlos noted pain of his right shoulder in the lateral 
glenohumeral region.  He had a dull pain most of the time, and noted increased pain 
whether he was at work or at home.  Dr. Gordon’s impression was right shoulder pain of 
the glenohumeral region.  He noted full range of motion and full strength of the right 
shoulder with no functional limitation.  Dr. Gordon noted that the right long digit MCP 
joint arthritis was not work related and he was still at MMI.  Dr. Gordon performed a right 
shoulder subacromial corticosteroid injection.  Following the injection Carlos was 
symptom free.  He was restricted to no lifting greater than 5 pounds with the right upper 
extremity, no above chest activity of the right upper extremity.  He was to follow up in 
two weeks.  (JE2, pp. 39-41)   
On February 15, 2023 Carlos returned to see Dr. Gordon.  He reported that his 
right shoulder was much better since the injection.  Infrequently his pain might go as 
high as a 4 out of 10.  He had full range of motion and strength of his right shoulder.  
The impression was right shoulder pain, doing well post-injection.  No functional 
limitation.  Dr. Gordon discharged Carlos without any permanent restrictions or 
permanent impairment.  He was allowed to progress back to full duty with his position of 
cooler janitor.  (JE2, p. 42) 
Carlos returned to Dr. Gordon on March 14, 2023.  He noted occasional right 
shoulder pain.  Sometimes he had pain at work and sometimes he had it at home.  He 
did not know why but most of his pain occurred at home.  He denied any loss of range 
of motion or loss of strength of his right shoulder.  He reported that his subacromial 
corticosteroid injection on January 17, 2023 helped for approximately three days.  
However, Dr. Gordon noted that this was not consistent with what Carlos told him when 
he saw him on January 31, 2023.  In January, Carlos reported to Dr. Gordon that it took 
approximately 10 days for the injection to have its full effect and he was doing well at 
that time.  Carlos had been performing the job of Cooler Operator since Dr. Gordon last 
saw him. In this position he did not have to perform any notable strenuous activities with 
his arms.  He was monitoring to ensure that the overhead rail system was functioning 
correctly.  He was not picking up product, not pushing or pulling hogs.   
On exam, Carlos had full range of motion and strength of his right shoulder.  Dr. 
Gordon noted Carlos’s shoulder pain, at that time, was periodic.  Carlos noted more 
right shoulder pain while at home than at work.  No notable functional limitation, but he 
did complain of pain and would like further investigation.  Dr. Gordon recommended an 

CABRERA MARTINEZ V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 6 
 
MRI of the right shoulder.  He also recommended Diclofenac Gel for the right shoulder 
area.  He was allowed to perform full duty as a cooler operator.  Carlos was to return to 
Dr. Gordon after the MRI.  (JE2, pp. 43-44)     
On April 4, 2023, Dr. Gordon saw Carlos to review his MRI.  Carlos reported that 
his right shoulder pain waxed and waned and most of the time he did not have pain with 
activity.  Periodically he would get a sharp pain of his right shoulder when pulling or 
lifting.  However, the pain was fleeting and did resolve.  The March 24, 2023 MRI 
revealed an undersurface tear of the supraspinatus tendon of approximately 50 percent 
thickness; concealed interstitial tearing of the infraspinatus tendon, no full thickness 
tear, mild capsulitis and bursitis.  The MRI also showed degenerative change of the AC 
joint along with degenerative cyst formation of the greater tuberosity.   
On exam, Carlos had full range of motion and strength of his right shoulder.  Dr. 
Gordon’s impression was right shoulder pain.  He noted that from a functional 
standpoint Carlos was doing well.  Dr. Gordon discussed the MRI results with Carlos.  
He recommended that Carlos utilize either oral or topical anti-inflammatory medication 
as needed.  He encouraged Carlos to continue with a home exercise program.  Dr. 
Gordon discharged him from care on that date without any permanent restrictions or 
impairment.  (JE2, pp. 45-47; JE5, p. 66) 
On June 1, 2023, at the request of his attorney, Carlos saw Mark Taylor, M.D. for 
an independent medical examination (IME). Carlos described persistent pain in his 
shoulder, but at rest the pain was minimal.  However, with use, such as reaching, he 
noted occasional sharper pains that reached to 7 out of 10 in severity.  The sharp pains 
did not persist.  Otherwise with use, his pain averaged 5-6 out of 10.  His current job, 
cooler operator, was more tolerable because it required much less reaching.  He could 
lift a case of water if he kept the right arm close to his body.  However, if he extended 
his arms out away from his body there was an increase in pain.  His right third finger 
MCP joint was especially painful if he bumped it.  His symptoms had remained stable 
over recent months.   
On exam, the shoulder range of motion was flexion 140/155 degrees (right/left), 
and extension was 45/65 degrees.  Adduction1 was 145/160, and adduction was 30/43 
degrees, internal rotation was 40/70 degrees, and external rotation was 85/90 degrees.  
Dr. Taylor noted that Carlos demonstrated full range of motion of his elbows and wrists.  
Dr. Taylor noted the range of motion was essentially symmetric other than at the MP 
joint.  The MP joint flexion was 45/70 degrees and extension was 10/10 degrees.  Dr. 
Taylor’s diagnoses were:  Right shoulder arthralgia with rotator cuff tearing and 
impingement and right hand third MCP joint arthropathy and synovitis.  Assuming 
Carlos did not undergo any additional treatment, Dr. Taylor placed him at MMI for his 
March 29, 2022 injury as of April 4, 2023, the date of his last appointment with Dr. 
Gordon.  Dr. Taylor assigned 6 percent impairment of the right upper extremity due to 
decreased motion of his shoulder.  He cited Figures 16-40, 16-43 and 16-46 on pages 
476-479 of The Guides.  For the right long digit Dr. Taylor set forth several approaches 
                                                 
1 Dr. Taylor’s report incorrectly listed this as adduction rather than abduction. 

CABRERA MARTINEZ V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 7 
 
that could be used to assign impairment.  Dr. Taylor noted these approaches generated 
similar results and settled on 3 percent of the right hand impairment.  With regard to 
permanent restrictions for the right shoulder, Dr. Taylor recommended occasional 
overhead reaching with his right arm.  He noted most lifting activities should occur with 
the right arm as close to his body as possible.  With his right arm close to his body, 
Carlos may be able to handle 40-45 pounds on a rare to occasional basis.  For his right 
hand, Carlos was allowed to use the hand frequently to constantly, if not forceful.  He 
recommended no more than occasional forceful gripping or grasping because that 
would involve the third digit.  Notably, Dr. Taylor does not render an opinion on the 
issue of causation. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 6-17) 
On August 11, 2023, at the request of the defendant, claimant underwent an IME 
with Charles D. Mooney, M.D.  Carlos reported ongoing pain in his right shoulder.  He 
rated it as a 3 at rest and up to a 5 or 6 with activity. He had more pain with lifting, 
pushing and pulling, and occasionally he had pain with overhead motion.  He was not 
taking any medications or using topical medications.  Carlos had occasional shock-like 
pain in the anterolateral aspect of the shoulder.  On March 29, 2022, Carlos was 
removing pigs that fell off the trolley.  There was an excessive number that he was 
pulling onto a cart.  Carlos demonstrated using a hook in his right hand pulling the 
carcass into an inclined cart that he would then remove the carcass in.  Carlos did not 
report any significant right upper extremity activity that was performed above shoulder 
height.  Carlos specifically noted that the majority of his work was either below his 
shoulder height or just below waist level or at chest height.   
On exam, bilateral shoulders revealed range of motion to be entirely intact and 
symmetric.  Carlos demonstrated 170 degrees of flexion and abduction, 75 degrees of 
external rotation and 70 degrees of internal rotation. Dr. Mooney stated that Carlos 
demonstrated evidence of rotator cuff partial thickness tearing with acromioclavicular 
arthropathy and impingement.  Dr. Mooney stated,  
In my discussion with Mr. Martinez today I could find no evidence of 
specific occupational risk factors in his duties at Tyson’s that would cause 
or permanently aggravate his shoulder condition.  It is my opinion that his 
findings are personal in nature and not related to any specific injury or 
activity.  That being said, it is possible that actions such as pulling heavy 
carcasses could increase his symptoms of shoulder pain.  Despite this, it 
does not make the activity directly causal to the diagnosed condition or 
cause permanent aggravation or objective advancement.         
(Def. Ex. B, p. 18) 
Dr. Mooney referred to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Disease and injury 
Causation to support his opinion regarding causation and that the pathophysiology of 
shoulder tendinopathy, impingement and rotator cuff tears is not completely understood.  
Additionally, Dr. Mooney listed nonoccupational risk factors for shoulder tendinopathy, 
impingement, and rotator cuff tears.  (Def. Ex. B, pp. 18-20) 

CABRERA MARTINEZ V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 8 
 
Dr. Mooney agreed with the treating physician that Carlos reached MMI as of 
January 31, 2023.  Dr. Mooney opined that according to the Fifth Edition AMA Guides 
that Carlos demonstrated no evidence of partial permanent impairment as it related to 
his right shoulder.  He explained that although Carlos had continued intermittent 
symptoms he demonstrated an entirely normal range of motion, symmetrical strength 
and no impairment.  He further opined that Carlos did not require restrictions in activity 
related to his right shoulder.  (Def. Ex. B, pp. 18-21)  
Regarding his right middle finger, he noted pain predominantly with striking the 
finger on a solid object.  He reported difficulty with motion of the MCP joint of the middle 
finger with difficulties making a full fist.  Dr. Mooney noted enlargement of the right MCP 
joint of the middle finger and also tenderness with pressure against resistance.  Dr. 
Mooney stated Carlos demonstrated evidence of metacarpophalangeal arthropathy, 
unknown etiology.  Dr. Mooney opined that this was most likely from remote trauma and 
would not be considered a work-related condition despite his regular use of his right 
hand.  Regardless of causation, Dr. Mooney assigned 3 percent impairment of the hand 
based on the AMA Guides.  He did not assign any permanent restrictions to Carlos due 
to the right long finger.  (Def. Ex. B, pp. 18-21)       
Carlos testified that prior to March 29, 2022, he had experienced problems with 
soreness and pain in his right hand, fingers, and right shoulder.  Joint Exhibit 1 contains 
medical record reports from Tyson Foods, Inc., that range from March 28, 1997 through 
December 6, 2007, which reflect the symptoms Carlos experienced.  Carlos did not 
have any permanent restrictions placed on him as the result of this treatment.  (Tr. pp. 
18-19, 26-27; JE1, pp. 1-21)   
The first issue to be addressed in this case is whether Carlos sustained an injury 
that arose out of and in the course of his employment with Tyson on March 29, 2022.  
This is a difficult case. Carlos provided credible testimony about the increased number 
of hogs that fell due to a problem with the rail system and his need to drag the hogs with 
the hook.  Additionally, he credibly testified that he experienced pain in his right long 
finger, right arm, and right shoulder.  Carlos also testified that he had never fallen and 
injured his right middle finger and he had never jammed it.  Following the reported 
injury, he received medical treatment that was authorized by the defendant.  At hearing 
Carlos testified that he continued to experience pain in his right shoulder, especially if 
he performed activities above shoulder level.  He did not experience these problems 
prior to March 29, 2022.  He continued to have problems with his long finger on his right 
hand.  He has pain if he strikes it on something.  At hearing, he demonstrated that he is 
not able to make a closed fist with his right hand.  (Tr. pp. 27-32) There does seem to 
be a temporal relationship between the reported work injury and Carlos’s reported 
symptoms.  Unfortunately, the evidentiary record in this case lacks an expert medical 
opinion to support his claim for a work injury.   
Dr. Gordon treated Carlos for his alleged injury from April 18, 2022 through April 
4, 2023.  Dr. Gordon does not render an opinion on causation.  There are “Job Activity 
Notification” forms dated from April 4, 2022 through May 3, 2022 which appear to be 
from Dr. Gordon’s office.  However, these are signed by a nurse; not by Dr. Gordon.  

CABRERA MARTINEZ V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 9 
 
Additionally, although a box on these forms next to “OCC INJURY” is checked, these 
forms do not amount to an expert providing a causation opinion.  (JE2, pp. 47-51)        
At the request of his attorney, Carlos saw Dr. Taylor who issued a report on June 
22, 2023.  Dr. Taylor provides a detailed, twelve-page report.  He sets forth his opinions 
on issues such as diagnoses, MMI date, permanent impairment, permanent restrictions, 
and additional medical treatment.  Unfortunately, Dr. Taylor does not provide his opinion 
regarding mechanism of injury.  He also does not provide his opinion on whether the 
conditions he diagnoses are causally connected to the alleged work injury.  (Cl. Ex. 1)   
The only physician in this case to provide his opinion on causation was Dr. 
Mooney who conducted an IME at the request of the defendant.  As set forth above, Dr. 
Mooney stated that the etiology for Carlos’s right long middle finger was unknown and 
was most likely from remote trauma.  Dr. Mooney opined that he could not find any 
evidence of specific occupational risk factors in Carlos’s duties at Tyson that would 
cause or permanently aggravate his shoulder condition.  In his post-hearing brief, 
claimant contends that Dr. Mooney’s opinion should be discounted because Tyson did 
not provide the doctor with a written job description.  It is noted that Carlos 
demonstrated the motions of his job for Dr. Mooney at the IME.  Regardless, even if the 
undersigned were to discount Dr. Mooney’s opinion regarding causation, the record still 
lacks an expert opinion to causally connect the right shoulder and right long finger to the 
alleged work injury.  I find that claimant failed to prove that his right shoulder and right 
long finger conditions are related to the work injury.       
 Because claimant failed to prove that he sustained a work injury on March 29, 
2022, all other issues are rendered moot. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 

CABRERA MARTINEZ V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 10 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  The 
weight to be given to an expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be 
affected by the accuracy of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding 
circumstances.  The expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. 
Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 
410 (Iowa 2001); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 
1995).  Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert 
medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, 
Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that claimant failed to carry his 
burden of proof to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that he sustained 
an injury that arose out of and in the course of his employment on March 29, 2022.  
Although generally claimant provided credible testimony, there is simply a lack of an 
expert medical opinion to support his contention that his right shoulder and right long 
finger conditions are related to his alleged work injury.  The only medical expert in this 
case to render an opinion on causation was Dr. Mooney and that opinion does not 
support the claimant’s case.  Therefore, I must conclude that claimant failed to carry his 
burden of proof.   
Claimant is seeking an assessment of costs as set out in his exhibit 3.  Costs are 
to be assessed at the discretion of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner or 
the hearing deputy.  I find that claimant was not successful in his case and exercise my 
discretion to not assess costs against the defendant.  Therefore, each party shall bear 
their own costs.   
Because claimant failed to demonstrate that he sustained an injury which arose 
out of and in the course of his employment, all other issues are rendered moot.  
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings. 
Each party shall bear their own costs. 

CABRERA MARTINEZ V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 11 
 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this __26th __ day of January, 2024. 
 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Gary Nelson (via WCES) 
Jason Wiltfang (via WCES) 
Charles Showalter (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
                ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
