Case Number: 22005791.02
Case Title:  MALJKOVIC, GOJKO V. TYSON FRESH MEATS, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Maljkovic Gojko - 22005791.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
GOJKO MALJKOVIC, 
  : 
            FILE NO. 22005791.02 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
              A R B I T R A T I O N 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
         D E C I S I O N 
 
 
  :                           
TYSON FOODS, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                               
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
  : 
       Head Notes: 1108, 1802, 1803 
 
 
  :                                 
 
Defendant. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
I. 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant Gojko Maljkovic seeks workers’ compensation benefits from the defendant, 
self-insured employer Tyson Foods, Inc. (Tyson). The undersigned presided over an 
arbitration hearing on May 14, 2024. Maljkovic participated personally and through 
attorney John S. Pieters, Jr. The defendants participated by and through attorney Jason 
P. Wiltfang. 
II. 
SUFFICIENCY OF THE PLEADINGS 
In Maljkovic’s petition, he contends he sustained a work injury on February 1, 2022, that 
has affected or disabled his neck, back, and both shoulders. The petition contains no 
allegation of any leg or arm injuries. After filing the petition on March 8, 2023, Maljkovic 
did not move to amend it.  
Claimant’s counsel sent defense counsel a letter dated April 11, 2023, requesting care 
for Maljkovic’s bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. (Ex. 4, p. 20) In a letter dated April 18, 
2024, defense counsel sent claimant’s counsel a letter expressly denying liability for any 
alleged injury to the lumbar spine or cervical spine. (Ex. 4, p. 18) Claimant’s counsel 
sent defense counsel a letter dated May 2, 2023, requesting care for Maljkovic’s 
bilateral carpal syndrome and bilateral knee condition. (Ex. 4, pp. 20–21) 
Farid Manshadi, M.D., issued his independent medical evaluation (IME) report on April 
10, 2024. (Ex. 6, p. 61) It is unclear when claimant’s counsel received it or when it was 
served on defense counsel. In the IME Report, Dr. Manshadi addressed causation of 
conditions or injuries to the bilateral upper extremities and bilateral lower extremities in 
addition to those listed in the petition. (Ex. 6, pp. 68–70). It appears based on the record 
currently before the agency that this IME report from Dr. Manshadi is the first time a 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Feb-20  10:45:24     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 2 
physician opined Maljkovic’s bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome or bilateral knee 
complaints were related to his work with Tyson. 
In Maljkovic’s answers to interrogatories, which were served on April 28, 2023, 
Maljkovic stated he was alleging injuries to his bilateral arms and knees. (Ex. 1, pp. 1, 
5–6) Maljkovic served the answers a little over a year prior to the May 14, 2024, 
hearing, well in advance of the deadlines regarding exhibits under the hearing 
assignment order and Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.19(d). (Ex. 1, p. 1; Hr’g 
Assignment Order p. 2) But Maljkovic did not move to amend the petition to alleged 
injuries to his upper or lower extremities to reflect the interrogatory answers or file 
additional petitions alleging such injuries occurred on any alternative dates. 
In Tyson’s post-hearing brief, the company argues that the failure to expressly identify 
injuries to the legs and arms in the petition or subsequently move to amend the petition 
to include such injuries precludes Maljkovic from seeking recovery of workers’ 
compensation benefits relating to any such injuries in this proceeding. Tyson further 
asserts that the failure to expressly identify any leg or arm injuries in the hearing report 
has the same effect. Tyson contends that this case is focused only on the work injuries 
Maljkovic expressly identified in the petition, those to his neck, back, and both 
shoulders. 
In Maljkovic’s post-hearing brief, it is clear that he is seeking workers’ compensation 
benefits relating to alleged bilateral arm and leg injuries in addition to those to his neck, 
back, and bilateral shoulders. Malkjovic does not address the defense argument 
regarding the sufficiency of the petition. In his post-hearing brief, he argues he has 
shown he is entitled to workers’ compensation benefits relating to injuries to his arms 
and legs, but he does not address the failure to allege such injuries in his petition. And 
the parties did not identify the sufficiency of the pleadings as disputed in their hearing 
report. 
Iowa Code section 86.14(1)1 provides, “In an original proceeding, all matters relevant to 
a dispute are subject to inquiry.” Section 86.17(1) states, “The deputy commissioner or 
the commissioner may make such inquiries in contested case proceedings as shall be 
deemed necessary, so long as such inquiries do not violate any of the provisions of 
section 17A.17.” And under section 86.18(1), “Evidence, process and procedure in 
contested case proceedings … shall be as summary as practicable consistent with the 
requirements of chapter 17A.”  
                                                 
1 Effective July 1, 2023, the legislature transferred Iowa Code chapter 86 to Iowa Code section 
10A303 et seq. as part of a bill reorganizing state government. 2023 Iowa Acts ch. 19, § 1477. The 
edition of the Iowa Code in effect at the time of the alleged work injury governs in cases before the 
agency. See Stiles v. Annett Holdings, Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 5064673, 2020 WL 
6037539, at *2 (App., Oct. 2, 2020). This decision cites to chapter 86 because the alleged injury date here 
occurred before the 2023 changes to the Iowa Code took effect. 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 3 
The “as summary as practicable” statutory language dates back substantively to the 
Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act’s inception. See 1913 Iowa Acts ch. 147, § 25. The 
Iowa Supreme Court has held the analogous provision in the original version of the 
statute demonstrates, “It was the purpose of the legislature to create a tribunal to do 
rough justice—speedy, summary, informal, untechnical.’” Zomer v. West River Farms, 
Inc., 666 N.W.2d 130, 133 (Iowa 2003) (quoting Flint v. City of Eldon, 191 Iowa 845, 
847, 183 N.W. 344, 345 (1921)). Under Iowa Code section 84A.5(5), the division of 
workers’ compensation “is responsible for the administration of the laws of this state 
relating to workers’ compensation” and the executive head of the division is the 
commissioner. Iowa Code section 86.8(1)(a) states the commissioner “shall” adopt rules 
necessary to implement Iowa’s workers’ compensation statues. 
To that end, the commissioner has promulgated rules governing contested cases 
codified in Iowa Administrative Code chapter 876. Rule 876—3.1(7) establishes the 
forms to be used as an original notice and petition in certain types of cases and advises 
consultation with rule 876—4.6 for further descriptions. Iowa Administrative Code rule 
876—4.6 states that a petitioner’s filed Form 100 “shall contain factors relevant to the 
contested case proceedings listed in rule 876—4.1,” such as an arbitration proceeding 
under Iowa Code section 86.14, which we have here. Moreover, rule 876—4.6 provides 
in pertinent part: 
A separate original notice and petition shall be filed for each claim that 
seeks benefits due to the occurrence of an injury, occupational disease or 
occupational hearing loss. The original notice and petition shall allege a 
specific date of occurrence consisting of a day, month and year. Alternate 
or multiple dates of occurrence may be alleged in the same original notice 
and petition if the claim or claims arose from the same occurrence or 
series of occurrences and uncertainty exists concerning the correct date of 
occurrence or the number of occurrences. 
The Iowa Supreme Court has held, “An application for arbitration is not a formal 
pleading and is not to be judged by the technical rules of pleading. Nor is the same 
conformity of proof to allegation necessary as in ordinary actions.” Yeager v. Firestone 
Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 373–74, 112 N.W.2d 299, 301–02 (1961). “‘The 
whole idea is to get away from cumbersome procedures and technicalities of pleading, 
and to reach a right decision by the shortest and quickest possible route.’” Hoenig v. 
Mason & Hanger, Inc., 162 N.W.2d 188, 192–93 (Iowa 1968) (quoting Larson, The Law 
of Workmen’s Compensation, Vol. 2, § 78.10). 
But the court has also recognized “‘there is a point beyond which the sweeping-aside of 
“technicalities” cannot go, since evidentiary and procedural rules usually have an 
irreducible hard core of necessary function which cannot be dispensed with in any 
orderly investigate on of the merits of a case.’” Id. (quoting Larson, The Law of 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 4 
Workmen’s Compensation, Vol. 2, § 78.10). “When an employer is confronted with a 
petition for arbitration it has a substantive right to be at least generally informed as to 
the basic material facts upon which the employee relies as a basis for compensation in 
order to prepare and defend.” Id. at 192. And this right is “a counterbalancing factor that 
cannot be ignored” when assessing the sufficiency of what the claimant has alleged in 
the petition. Id. 
Here, Tyson had a right to know from Maljkovic’s petition the material facts on which the 
claim for workers’ compensation benefits were based. There is perhaps no fact more 
material in cases brought under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act than the body 
part(s) the claimant alleges have been affected or disabled by a work injury. This 
information dictates the type of disability analysis the agency uses—functional or 
industrial—when determining entitlement to compensation under Iowa Code section 
85.34(2). See Chavez v. MS Tech. LLC, 972 N.W.2d 662, 666–67 (Iowa 2022). And in 
some cases, it can trigger the possibility of permanent total disability (PTD) benefits 
under section 85.34(3). See Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Shank, 516 N.W.2d 808, 
814–15 (Iowa 1994); see also Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(t). 
In this case, Maljkovic relies on alleged injuries to his bilateral arms and bilateral legs to 
support a claim for permanent total disability (PTD) benefits under sections 85.34(2)(t) 
and 85.34(3)—meaning that the opinion of a vocational expert may be needed in 
addition to those of medical experts regarding the specific body parts in question. 
Moreover, adding possible bilateral leg and arm impairments and work restrictions 
significantly alters the defense approach when compared to the case presented in the 
petition—one focused solely on the shoulders, neck, and back. Injuries to the bilateral 
arms and legs and their resultant functional limitations alter the factual and legal 
analysis in this case to such a degree that failing to include them in the petition creates 
significant prejudice to Tyson.  
Another fact material to workers’ compensation is the injury date. Here, Maljkovic has 
filed one petition with one alleged injury date for four injured body parts. Based on the 
current record, it is unclear how—if at all—the arm and leg injuries would stem from this 
injury date and the undersigned does not wade into those waters here. Nonetheless, it 
appears that the petition fails to comply with the requirement in rule 876—4.6 that a 
petitioner such as Maljkovic must file a separate original notice and petition for each 
claim that seeks benefits due to an injury and allege the specific date of occurrence. 
Maljkovic should have filed a separate Form 100 for each claim with a distinct injury 
date in order to notify Tyson of the material facts upon which he relies for his claim to 
workers’ compensation benefits. 
While it is true that claimant’s counsel requested care for Maljkovic’s bilateral carpal 
tunnel syndrome as well as his knees in 2023, that is not enough to communicate to 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 5 
Tyson that he was seeking workers’ compensation benefits relating to those conditions 
in this case. Without a motion to amend the petition or the filing of another petition, it 
would have been reasonable for Tyson to conclude that Maljkovic was not pursuing 
benefits relating to those alleged injuries in this case. And while Dr. Manshadi’s IME 
report arguably put Tyson on notice with respect to this case, it was so close to hearing 
that it effectively denied Tyson the opportunity to fully develop any defense. The same 
is true of the interrogatory answers served on Tyson less than thirty days before 
hearing. Without identifying the body parts in the petition, or moving to amend the 
petition to include them, Tyson was left to speculate about what injuries Maljkovic was 
asserting in this case and based on the alleged date of injury and failure to mention the 
bilateral arms or legs, it was reasonable to conclude the arms and legs were not a part 
of this dispute. 
Another consideration is Tyson’s ability to assert one or more affirmative defenses with 
respect to any alleged injuries to the bilateral upper or lower extremities. See Hr’g 
Report § 7. Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.35 makes the Iowa Rules of Civil 
Procedure applicable in cases before the agency unless provision of a rule is in conflict 
with Iowa workers’ compensation law. Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 1.421 governs 
affirmative defenses and does not conflict with any area of Iowa workers’ compensation 
law. Thus, as with civil actions in district court, a workers’ compensation defendant’s 
failure to assert an affirmative defense in its answer precludes the assertion of that 
defense in the case. See Smith v. Smith, 646 N.W.2d 412, 415 (Iowa 2002); see also 
Coale v. Barr-Nun Transp., Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 5064468, 2020 WL 
7091549, *10–*11 (Arb., Nov. 18, 2020).  
Maljkovic’s failure to plead the bilateral arm or leg injuries in the petition effectively 
limited Tyson’s ability to deploy affirmative defenses with respect to claims based on 
those injuries in this case. It would significantly prejudice Tyson to deny the employer 
the opportunity to assert any affirmative defenses to the alleged bilateral arm or leg 
injuries because they were not asserted in the answer to Maljkovic’s petition after the 
petition did not include any mention of those alleged injuries, while allowing him to 
pursue those claims in this action. Fairness dictates precluding Maljkovic from pursuing 
claims for injuries not identified in the petition when the failure to do so limits Tyson’s 
ability to assert affirmative defenses with respect to the unmentioned claims. 
The legislature’s desire for speedy justice meted out by an informal tribunal does not 
override an employer’s right to know the material facts upon which an injured worker 
relies as the basis for workers’ compensation benefits. Maljkovic’s failure to identify in 
the petition his arms and legs as body parts that allegedly sustained work injuries and 
the date(s) for such denied Tyson a full and fair opportunity to develop a defense 
regarding the factual and legal issues attendant to their inclusion. Therefore, even under 
the lax pleading standard in cases before the agency, the failure to allege injury to the 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 6 
arms and legs in Maljkovic’s petition is too prejudicial to Tyson to allow Maljkovic to 
pursue those claims in this case. Any reference to the bilateral arms or legs in this 
decision is for clarity with respect to the issues stemming from the injuries alleged in the 
petition. 
III. 
ISSUES 
Under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.19(3)(f), the parties jointly submitted a 
hearing report defining the claims, defenses, and issues submitted to the presiding 
deputy commissioner. The hearing report was approved and entered into the record via 
an order because it is a correct representation of the disputed issues and stipulations in 
this case. The parties identified the following disputed issues in the hearing report: 
1) Is Maljkovic entitled to temporary total disability (TTD) or healing period (HP) 
benefits from March 8, 2023, through November 22, 2023? 
2) What is the nature and extent of permanent disability, if any, caused by the 
alleged injury? 
3) What is the commencement date for permanency benefits, if any are 
awarded? 
4) If Maljkovic is entitled to workers’ compensation, what were his gross 
earnings per week and what is the weekly rate? 
5) Is Maljkovic entitled to payment of the medical expenses in Exhibit 7? 
6) With reference to the disputed medical expenses: 
a) Are the fees or prices charged by providers fair and reasonable? 
b) Was the treatment reasonable and necessary? 
c) Are the listed expenses causally connected to the work injury? 
d) Were the requested expenses authorized by Tyson? 
7) Is Maljkovic entitled to recover the cost of an independent medical 
examination (IME) under Iowa Code section 85.39? 
8) Is Maljkovic entitled to a penalty under Iowa Code section 85.60? 
9) Is Maljkovic entitled to taxation of any costs against the defendants? 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 7 
IV. 
STIPULATIONS 
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between Maljkovic and Tyson at 
the time of the alleged injury. 
2) Maljkovic sustained an injury on February 1, 2022, which arose out of and in 
the course of his employment with Tyson. 
3) The alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
4) Although entitlement to HP benefits cannot be stipulated, Maljokic was off 
work from March 8, 2023, through November 22, 2023. 
5) The commencement date for permanency benefits, if any are awarded, is 
November 22, 2023. 
6) At the time of the stipulated injury: 
a) Maljkovic was married. 
b) Maljkovic was entitled to two exemptions. 
7) With respect to the disputed medical expenses: 
a) Although disputed, the medical providers would testify as to the 
reasonableness of their fees and/or treatment set forth in the listed 
expenses and defendants are not offering contrary evidence. 
b) Although causal connection of the expenses to a work injury cannot be 
stipulated, the listed expenses are at least causally connected to the 
medical condition(s) upon which the claim of injury is based. 
8) Prior to hearing, the defendants paid to Maljkovic 20.43 weeks of 
compensation at the rate of $602.67 per week. 
The parties’ stipulations in the hearing report are accepted and incorporated into this 
arbitration decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. This decision contains 
no discussion of any factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations except as 
necessary for clarity with respect to disputed factual and legal issues. 
V. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The evidentiary record in this case consists of the following:  
 Joint Exhibits JE1 through JE12; 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 8 
 Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 8;  
 Defendants’ Exhibits A through F; and 
 Hearing testimony by Maljkovic.  
After careful consideration of the evidence and the parties’ post-hearing briefs, the 
undersigned enters the following findings of fact.  
A. 
Injury, Care, & IMEs 
Maljkovic is right-hand dominant. He was born and raised in Croatia, where he earned a 
general high school degree and a postsecondary degree in traffic dispatch. Maljkovic 
was 63 years of age at the time of hearing. (Testimony) 
Maljkovic moved to the United States in the year 2000. English is not Maljkovic’s first 
language. He has a limited understanding of written and spoken English. Consequently, 
Maljkovic required an interpreter to participate in the hearing. No negative inference 
regarding his credibility stems from his use of an interpreter. (Testimony) 
Maljkovic’s first job in the United States was as a janitor in Nashville, Tennessee. In 
2001, Maljkovic moved to Iowa and began working for Tyson at a facility in Waterloo, 
Iowa. He worked at Tyson for over 20 years in multiple positions. (Testimony) 
Maljkovic worked in the job of “Remove Back Ribs” for roughly his first five years with 
Tyson. The job entailed standing at a belt line moving loins with ribs down it. Maljkovic 
stood with his head tilted forward, over the belt line and loins he had to cut. He held a 
knife in his right hand that he used to make three cuts to remove the ribs from the loin. 
He then lifted the removed ribs with his left hand and placed them on another belt line. 
Maljkovic performed the same motions for each rib removal throughout each shift, which 
was typically eight hours long. (Testimony) 
Maljkovic’s next position at Tyson was called “Skin Patch.” Workers up the line removed 
the skin from the meat. Maljkovic stood over the belt line with his head bent, looking 
down, similar to the position he often held his head while working in his first position 
with the company. He used a wizard knife with his right hand to remove the remaining 
skin while he held the piece of meat with his left hand. Maljkovic worked in this job for 
about nine years. (Testimony)  
Both the “Remove Back Ribs” and “Skin Patch” jobs were on the belt line. Working on a 
belt line meant fast-paced work. Tyson’s process at the plant was set up for two workers 
in the skin patch job. However, staffing levels regularly meant that Maljkovic covered the 
“Skin Patch” duties alone. (Testimony) 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 9 
Maljkovic experienced right shoulder issues while working in skin patch. His symptoms 
ultimately required an injection in his shoulder. Maljkovic’s doctor suggested he change 
jobs because of his shoulder issues. (Testimony)  
Maljkovic changed jobs to the position of “Reject Butcher.” He had to pick up meat that 
fell on the floor while being processed on the belt line. Maljkovic then washed the meat, 
cut away dirt, and returned it to the line. He credibly described the job duties as 
demanding because of the pace of the belt line, how much meat fell on the floor, and 
the meat falling in locations that made it awkward for him to pick up. The meat pieces 
he handled in the job ranged from five to as much as fifty pounds in weight. (Testimony) 
In the job of “Reject Butcher,” Maljkovic continued to experience right shoulder pain. 
The amount of pain varied based on how much he worked and the way in which he 
used his right shoulder when working. Maljkovic reported the pain to his supervisor on 
more than one occasion. (Testimony) 
On or about February 1, 2022, Maljkovic was working in the reject butcher position 
when he reported right shoulder pain. A nurse working at the Tyson facility assigned 
him work restrictions. Tyson provided light duty, but his symptoms continued. 
(Testimony)  
Ultimately, Tyson arranged for care by Robert Gordon, M.D., on March 1, 2022. (Ex. 
JE1, pp. 2–3) Dr. Gordon noted Maljkovic’s symptoms started in early February while 
performing his job duties and that he reported, “there, lately, has been excessive 
product on the floor that he has had to process.” (Ex. JE1, p. 2) Maljkovic complained of 
pain in his right glenohumeral/right parascapular region” with no neck pain or radiation, 
numbness or tingling in his right arm. (Ex. JE1, p. 2) Dr. Gordon noted that Maljkovic 
had similar symptoms in 2021 and responded well to conservative care. (Ex. JE1, p. 2) 
He prescribed prednisone and work restrictions for his right arm of no lifting more than 
five pounds and no above-shoulder activity. (Ex. JE1, p. 3) 
Two weeks later, Maljkovic followed up with Dr. Gordon, who noted, “Right shoulder 
pain, most consistent with rotator cuff dysfunction/subacromial bursitis.” (Ex. JE2, p. 4) 
He continued the previously prescribed work restrictions, directed Malkjovic to finish the 
course of prednisone, and ordered magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the shoulder. 
(Ex. JE2, p. 4) Dr. Gordon planned to determine the course of care based on the MRI 
findings. (Ex. JE2, p. 4) 
On March 18, 2022, Maljkovic underwent an MRI that showed:  
 Full-thickness, partial width tear of the conjoined supraspinatus and 
infraspinatus tendons, with minimal central tendon retraction, and 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 10 
preservation of the attachment sites of the supraspinatus along the anterior 
leading edge and infraspinatus along the causal foot print; 
 Superior labrum anterior and posterior (SLAP) tear; 
 Mild degenerative changes of the acromioclavicular (AC) joint with 
subacromial bursitis; and 
 Biceps intact. (Ex. JE2, p. 6)  
Maljkovic continued to complain of right shoulder pain, especially when raising his 
shoulder to the side, in front, or in back of him. (Ex. JE2, p. 6) Dr. Gordon maintained 
the work restrictions, prescribed Mobic, initiated therapy, and recommended 
consultation with an orthopedic specialist. (Ex. JE2, p. 7) 
Maljkovic saw Mark Mysnyk, M.D., at Steindler Orthopedic Clinic on April 22, 2022. (Ex. 
JE4, p. 40) Dr. Mysnyk did not have the MRI of Maljkovic’s injured shoulder at the time 
of the appointment, but recounted the interpretation documented in medical records 
provided for his review. (Ex. JE4, p. 40) He diagnosed Maljkovic with right shoulder 
pain, “possibly due to a combination of AC joint inflammation and rotator cuff tear 
evident on MRI.” (Ex. JE4, p. 42) Dr. Mysnyk discussed treatment options, including the 
possibility of surgery. (Ex. JE4, p. 42) 
On May 19, 2022, Dr. Mysnyk performed surgery on Maljkovic’s right shoulder 
consisting of: 
1) Biceps tenotomy; 
2) Open distal clavicle excision; 
3) Subacromial decompression; 
4) Bursectomy; and  
5) Rotator cuff repair. (Ex. JE4, pp. 44–45) 
Tyson assigned Maljkovic to work the light duty job of “Pick Trim,” which is on a long 
belt line. All of the trimmings from meat processed at the plant are placed on a wide belt 
line ending in refuse. Maljkovic’s job was to pick the pieces of meat that were still useful 
and could be processed from the wide belt line and place them on a narrower belt line 
between him and the wide belt line leading to refuse. To perform the job, he had to bend 
over the belt line to have his head over the wide belt line so he could look at the meat 
and pick it up. (Testimony)  

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 11 
The job description for the pick trim position states that lifting is confined to three 
pounds or less for restricted work duties. (Ex. 2, p. 13) The majority of the meat 
Maljkovic had to work with in the position weighed one pound or less. (Ex. JE-2, p. 8) 
During Maljkovic’s hearing testimony, he confirmed this was typical of his duties. 
However, according to Maljkovic, he would occasionally have to lift meat weighing in 
excess of his work restrictions. Sometimes he would have to climb under the thin belt 
line in order to be able to pick a useable piece of meat off the wide refuse line. 
(Testimony) 
Maljkovic continued to treat with Dr. Mysnyk during his rehabilitation from surgery. On 
May 27, 2022, Dr. Mysnyk noted on examination Maljkovic was “lagging on his passive 
range of motion compared to where I would expect him to be at this time.” (Ex. JE4, p. 
46) As a result, Dr. Mysnyk thought it best for Maljkovic to start formal physical therapy 
the next week. (Ex. JE4, p. 46) He also laid out the plan moving forward for gradually 
increasing Maljkovic’s activity levels. (Ex. JE4, p. 46) 
Maljkovic next followed up with Dr. Mysnyk on July 15, 2022. (Ex. JE4, p. 49) He 
reported his shoulder was still painful, but getting better, and his range of motion was 
improving. (Ex. JE4, p. 49) Nonetheless, Dr. Mysnyk noted he was “still lagging on his 
motion compared to what he should be” and “he need[ed] to be working regularly on his 
own in addition to therapy.” (Ex. JE4, p. 49) He released Maljkovic to begin writing with 
his right arm at work but maintained the prohibit on lifting anything more than a pound 
and then, only with his arm next to his side. (Ex. JE4, p. 49) 
During Maljkovic’s August 24, 2022, appointment, Dr. Mysnyk noted that even though 
he reported he felt he was getting better, it sounded like he had “plateaued.” (Ex. JE4, 
p. 53) On examination, Dr. Mysnyk noted Maljkovic had pain complaints during range-
of-motion testing—even when going from a seated to lying position on the exam table, 
which he described as “a bit unusual” and opined, “I cannot explain that.” (Ex. JE4, p. 
54) Dr. Mysnyk further noted that Maljkovic was having more pain than is typical and his 
range of motion was also less than what was to be expected six weeks out from 
surgery. (Ex. JE4, p. 54) Due to Maljkovic’s ongoing symptoms, he continued his work 
restrictions. (Ex. JE4, p. 54) 
Dr. Gordon examined Maljkovic on October 11, 2022, for his left shoulder complaints. 
(Ex. JE2, p. 8) Dr. Gordon noted that Maljkovic had been on light duty status, working in 
“Pick Trim,” since Dr. Mysnyk performed surgery on his right shoulder. (Ex. JE2, p. 8) 
It is of note that I do know the biomechanical factors of this job, as I have 
performed this job myself personally. This is a light duty job for both upper 
extremities. 
(Ex. JE2, p. 8)  

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 12 
Maljkovic reported that the majority of the duties he performed were at waist level and 
that the majority of the product weighed less than one pound, though he would 
infrequently have to handle a rib or loin that might be heavier. (Ex. JE2, p. 8) Dr. Gordon 
opined that “the job of ‘Pick Trim’ would not have caused, aggravated, or otherwise 
accelerated any disorder of the cervical region/left trapezial region/left shoulder girdle 
region as the required job duties are very low in intensity.” (Ex. JE2, p. 9) Dr. Gordon 
also ordered an MRI of Maljkovic’s left shoulder. (Ex. JE2, p. 11) 
Maljkovic followed up with Dr. Mysnyk on October 19, 2022, and reported his right 
shoulder was still painful with certain movements but was nonetheless much improved. 
(Ex. JE4, p. 56) He also complained that his left shoulder was “going downhill.” (Ex. 
JE4, p. 56) Dr. Mysnyk and Maljkovic did not discuss his left shoulder complaints 
because Tyson had not approved the body part for a workers’ compensation 
examination like it had his right shoulder. (Ex. JE4, p. 61) Dr. Mysnyk felt it appropriate 
to move forward with work hardening for his recovering right shoulder. (Ex. JE4, p. 57) 
On November 9, 2022, Maljkovic underwent an MRI of his left shoulder. (Ex. JE2, p. 11) 
Kirby Clark, M.D., interpreted the MRI to show: 
1) High-grade partial thickness tear at the footplate of the supraspinatus tendon; 
2) Tendinosis and concealed interstitial delamination tear involving the 
infraspinatus tendon; and  
3) Mild bursitis. (Ex. JE2, p. 11) 
Maljkovic followed up with Dr. Gordon on November 29, 2022. (Ex. JE2, p. 12) He 
informed Dr. Gordon that “he had never had left shoulder pain or left cervicotrapezial 
pain except for after his right shoulder surgical intervention.” (Ex. JE2, p. 12) Maljkovic 
expressed his belief that “his left shoulder pain/left cervicotrapezial pain came about 
due [to] the performance of the light duty job of ‘Pick Trim,’” “denie[d] any acute onset of 
pain of these regions,” and “report[ed] that his pain came on gradually.” (Ex. JE2, p. 12) 
As part of the assessment of Maljkovic’s left shoulder injury, Dr. Gordon reviewed video 
of him performing the job of “Pick Trim.” (Ex. JE2, p. 12) He also reviewed the Tyson job 
analysis summary for the position. (Ex. JE2, p. 12) This allowed Dr. Gordon to assess 
the biomechanical demands of the cervical region and left shoulder girdle region. (Ex. 
JE2, p. 12) He concluded: 
The meat product is very rarely greater than 4 pounds and up to 25 
pounds – I am very familiar with this job, and processing product with this 
weight is exceedingly rare. Based upon my evaluation of him performing 
the job himself in the video, the cervical region is not placed in any 
awkward or sustained postures, he is able to move at his cervical freely, 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 13 
and there is no significant force imparted upon or generated by the 
cervical region to perform the job tasks. With regards to the left shoulder, 
there was no kinematically deleterious activity, the force generated by or 
incurred upon the left shoulder was light and not deleterious, and he 
worked at a non-rushed pace. 
The job would not cause, precipitate, accelerate, or otherwise aggravate 
any cervical or left shoulder girdle region condition due to the lack of 
sufficient biomechanically stressors. 
(Ex. JE2, p. 12–13) 
Dr. Gordon assigned “non-occupationally related” work restrictions of no lifting more 
than 10 pounds with his left arm and no activity above shoulder level with his left arm. 
(Ex. JE2, p. 13) He released Maljkovic from care because of his opinion that his 
diagnoses were not work related. (Ex. JE2, p. 13) Dr. Gordon advised Malkjovic to 
follow up with his personal physician. (Ex. JE2, p. 13) 
Maljkovic saw Dr. Mysnyk for his left shoulder on December 21, 2022. (Ex. JE4, p. 61) 
Dr. Mysnyk examined Maljkovic and diagnosed him with left shoulder pain “of uncertain 
etiology” that “may be related to the partial thickness rotator cuff tears noted on MRI or 
possible bursitis.” (Ex. JE4, p. 62) Dr. Mysnyk further opined: 
As far as causation, I reviewed Dr. Gordon’s note in which []he reviewed 
the light duty activity he was doing at the time [h]is left shoulder started 
hurting and Dr. Gordon did not feel that should have caused the pain. I 
agree that I do not think that activity would have caused the change noted 
on MRI. I believe those developed chronically. However, the fact that this 
pain came on when he was doing predominantly left-hand work since he 
was recovering from the right shoulder, and the fact that he has worked at 
this job 21+ years, makes it most likely that the changes on MRI [and] his 
current pain are related to his work. 
([I]f it was documented that he does significant physical work on his own, 
outside of his formal employment, or . . . had an injury outside [of] work, 
then obviously my impression [would] change. However, without that 
information, then I would assume this is work related.) 
(Ex. JE4, p. 62–63) 
Dr. Mysnyk did not believe surgery was necessary at that time. (Ex. JE4, p. 63) Instead, 
he recommended a diagnostic subacromial and intra-articular injection followed by 
appropriate cortisone injection if one is effective. (Ex. JE4, p. 63) And if the injections 
were ineffective, physical therapy. (Ex. JE4, p. 63) 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 14 
Maljkovic saw Daniel Jones, M.D., for the diagnostic injections over several days in 
February 2023. (Ex. JE4, p. 71). The left shoulder injections provided little relief in the 
glenohumeral or acromioclavicular joints; however, Maljkovic experienced a reduction in 
pain of about 75 percent with the subacromial injection. (Ex. JE4, pp. 71–76) The 
diagnostic injections to the right shoulder provided no relief to his acromioclavicular 
joint, limited relief to his glenohumeral joint, and about 60 percent relief to the bursa. 
(Ex. JE4, p. 77) Based on the diagnostic injection results, Dr. Jones administered 
subacromial corticosteroid injections to both shoulders. (Ex. JE4, p. 77) 
On March 8, 2023, Maljkovic went to Cedar Valley Medical Specialists, P.C., for an 
evaluation of his neck pain and bilateral arm numbness and tingling by Ivo Bekavac, 
M.D. (Ex. JE6, p. 157) Dr. Bekavac noted that Maljkovic reported that during the 
summer of 2022, he "developed neck pain going in both upper extremities as well as 
numbness and tingling and also pain go[ing] to bilateral occipital area.” (Ex. JE6, p. 157) 
Dr. Bekavac also noted that his other issues were “low back pain which started two 
months ago shooting distally” with “no injury and no associated weakness” and “bilateral 
knee pain, which is getting worse[,] particularly [with] prolonged standing.” (Ex. JE6, p. 
157)  
Dr. Bekavac ordered an EMG of the upper and lower extremities and MRIs of the 
bilateral knees, cervical spine, and lumbosacral spine. (Ex. JE6, p. 158) He took 
Maljkovic off work because he was “still symptomatic.” (Ex. JE6, p. 158) The focus of 
Maljkovic’s visit to Dr. Bekavac supports the finding that it is more likely than not the 
symptoms he references are those relating to all of his neck, back, arms, and legs. 
Maljkovic underwent an MRI of the cervical spine on March 9, 2023, which Dr. Bekavac 
interpreted to show: 
 Level C2-C3, normal; 
 Level C3-C4, disc bulging central producing mild cervical spinal canal 
stenosis; 
 Level C4-C5, normal; 
 Level C5-C6, disc bulging producing mild central spinal canal stenosis as well 
as moderate bilateral neuroforaminal stenosis; 
 Level C6-C7, disc bulging producing mild cervical spinal canal stenosis as 
well as mild bilateral neuroforaminal stenosis and also degenerative disc 
changes involving same level; and 
 Level C7-T1, normal. (Ex. JE6, p. 159) 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 15 
And the next day, Maljkovic underwent an EMG of both upper extremities that was 
remarkable for bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome that was moderate in degree and more 
pronounced on the right side. (Ex. JE6, p. 160, 162–64) He followed up with Dr. 
Bekavac to go over the MRI and EMG results. (Ex. JE6, p. 160) Dr. Bekavac 
recommended massage therapy of the cervical spine and wrist splints to help mitigate 
the symptoms of his bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. (Ex. JE6, p. 160) Dr. Bekavac 
maintained his desire for MRIs of the lumbosacral spine and both lower extremities. (Ex. 
JE6, p. 160) 
Maljkovic saw Dr. Mysnyk for his shoulder injuries on March 17, 2023. (Ex. JE4, p. 78) 
Dr. Maljkovic reported his arms were better due to the subacromial cortisone injections 
because he experienced “minimal pain” when slowly lifting his arms even if lifting them 
quickly was “somewhat painful.” (Ex. JE4, p. 78) Dr. Mysnyk opined that the results of 
the diagnostic and corticosteroid injections suggested “a major component of his pain is 
subacromial bursitis.” (Ex. JE4, p. 79) He recommended Meloxicam to help manage 
residual pain and inflammation. (Ex. JE4, pp. 79–80) Dr. Mysnyk lifted all work 
restrictions relating to his shoulders only. (Ex. JE4, p. 80) 
Maljkovic underwent an MRI of the lumbar spine on March 24, 2023, interpreted by 
Gurmett Dhillon, M.D. (Ex. JE4, p. 171) Dr. Dhillon found: 
 Degenerative disc disease involving the lumbar spine without evidence of 
lumbar disc herniation or conus or cauda equina compression; 
 Facet arthropathy involving the lower lumbar spine without foraminal stenosis; 
and 
 Normal conus and cauda equina. (Ex. JE6, p. 171) 
On March 29, 2023, Maljkovic followed up with Dr. Bekavac for his neck, back, arms, 
and legs. (Ex. JE6, p. 172) Dr. Bekavac made a treatment plan that included physical 
and massage therapy of the lumbosacral area for his degenerative disc disease, 
continue to wear the wrist splints for his bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome, and be off 
work because of his back symptoms. (Ex. JE6, pp. 172–73)  
Dr. Bekavac performed trigger point injections on May 1, 2023, in Maljkovic’s cervical 
paraspinals. (Ex. JE6, p. 178) He instructed Maljkovic to continue physical and 
massage therapy. (Ex. JE6, p. 178) Dr. Bekavac maintained Maljkovic’s work status due 
to his ongoing symptoms. (Ex. JE6, p. 178) He referred Maljkovic to Rafael Serrano, 
M.D., an orthopedic surgeon. (Ex. JE6, p. 178) 
Maljkovic followed up with Dr. Bekavac on June 5, 2023, and reported he felt better 
after the trigger point injections and therapy. (Ex. JE6, p. 179) Dr. Bekavac noted that 
Tyson had arranged care with Dr. Gordon, which had prevented Maljkovic from 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 16 
following through on the May 1, 2023 referral to Dr. Serrano. (Ex. JE6, p. 179) Dr. 
Bekavac kept Maljkovic off work due to his continuing symptoms and directed him to 
follow up in one month’s time. (Ex. JE6, p. 179)  
On June 29, 2023, Maljkovic followed up with Dr. Bekavac and reported that he felt his 
symptoms were not completely controlled despite physical therapy. (Ex. JE6, p. 180) He 
complained his left knee pain was getting worse. (Ex. JE6, p. 180) Dr. Bekavac noted 
Maljkovic had an appointment with Dr. Serrano scheduled for his knee complaints. (Ex. 
JE6, p. 180) He referred Maljkovic to a pain specialist for his neck pain. (Ex. JE6, p. 
180) 
Maljkovic saw Alexa Ginther, A.R.N.P., at UnityPoint Clinic Orthopedics – Waterloo for 
his bilateral knee symptoms on July 6, 2023. (Ex. JE9, pp. 230–40) Ginther noted 
Maljkovic’s bilateral knee pain “began back in 2015.” (Ex. JE9, p. 231) She noted he 
described his pain as “aching” and “all throughout the knee, but especially on the 
anterior aspect.” (Ex. JE9, p. 231)  
Ginther ordered x-rays, which showed compartment joint space narrowing with 
osteophyte formation, patellofemoral arthritis with spurring, no fractures or dislocations, 
and no acute findings. (Ex. JE9, p. 233) She diagnosed Maljkovic with bilateral knee 
arthritis, especially noted in the patellofemoral joint space. (Ex. JE9, p. 233) After 
discussing treatment options, Ginther performed bilateral Toradol injections for pain 
management with the understanding they can be performed every three to six months. 
(Ex. JE9, p. 234) 
Maljkovic returned to UnityPoint Clinic Orthopedics – Waterloo on July 11, 2023, for an 
appointment with Dr. Serrano focused on his bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and neck 
pain. (Ex. JE9, p. 242) After x-rays and an examination, Dr. Serrano noted Maljkovic 
“has had numbness and tingling going from his neck down to his hands.” (Ex. JE9, p. 
242) He opined he did not think carpal tunnel syndrome was Maljkovic’s primary issue 
and that he was most concerned about Maljkovic’s cervical spine at that point in time. 
(Ex. JE9, p. 249) Consequently, Dr. Serrano made a neurosurgical referral. (Ex. JE9, p. 
245) 
On August 2, 2023, Maljkovic saw Ashar Afzal, M.D., at the UnityPoint pain clinic. (Ex. 
JE10, pp. 272–) He described his pain as all over, but was unable to pinpoint exactly 
where. (Ex. JE10, p. 273) Dr. Afzal administered a cervical epidural injection at C6-C7 
on September 11, 2023. (Ex. JE10, pp. 308–10) 
Maljkovic saw Dr. Mysnyk again for his shoulders on September 8, 2023. (Ex. JE4, p. 
95) Dr. Mysnyk noted Maljkovic was not working at the time due to his back and knee 
issues. (Ex. JE4, p. 95) Maljkovic reported that he felt his shoulders were worse 
because therapy was “hard and aggressive,” which caused him shoulder pain that woke 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 17 
him in the night. (Ex. JE4, p. 95) Dr. Mysnyk opined, “Obviously, it is a catch 22—to get 
stronger he needs to be doing strengthening exercises, but he feels the strengthening 
exercises that he is doing in therapy are making the pain worse.” (Ex. JE4, p. 97) He 
suggested adjusting therapy to focus on range of motion and develop an at-home 
program that allowed Maljkovic to work on strength at his own pace. (Ex. JE4, p. 97) Dr. 
Mysnyk noted Maljkovic’s shoulder injuries did not require restrictions that prevented 
him from working. (Ex. JE4, p. 97) 
Ginther saw Maljkovic in follow-up for his knee complaints at UnityPoint Clinic 
Orthopedics – Waterloo on October 4, 2023. (Ex. JE9, p. 253) Maljkovic described the 
Toradol injections as “somewhat helpful” and rated his pain at three or four out of ten at 
the time of the appointment and at six or seven out of ten when standing. (Ex. JE9, p. 
253) He further stated he felt physical therapy was beneficial. (Ex. JE9, p. 253) Ginther 
administered another round of bilateral Toradol injections to manage his pain. (Ex. JE9, 
pp. 254–55) 
On October 11, 2023, Athletico discharged Maljkovic from physical therapy because he 
had recovered in full with no remaining deficits. (Ex. JE11, pp. 362–63) The discharge 
summary states Maljkovic provided good effort during treatment and that his subjective 
reports were consistent with objective findings. (Ex. JE11, p. 362) He demonstrated 
knowledge and understanding of his home exercise program (HEP). (Ex. JE11, p. 362) 
Maljkovic saw Vinko Bogdanic, M.D., on October 12, 2023, for his neck pain, knee pain, 
right shoulder pain, and bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. (Ex. JE8, p. 226) Specifically, 
he sought help with paperwork relating to leave under the federal Family and Medical 
Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA) and long-term disability. (Ex. JE8, p. 226) Dr. Bogdanic 
informed Maljkovic that he lacked the information necessary to assist him with the 
paperwork and he should go to one of his treating specialists for it. (Ex. JE8, p. 229) 
Maljkovic had another appointment with Dr. Mysnyk on November 22, 2023, for his 
shoulders. (Ex. JE4, pp. 102–05) Maljkovic reported his shoulders still hurt the same, 
often waking him in the night. (Ex. JE4, p. 102) On examination, Dr. Mysnyk noted: 
He has active forward elevation to 132 degrees on the right with pain on 
the way and down (using his left arm to help it down), and to 133 degrees 
on the left, with pain especially on the way down. External rotation 
strength is symmetric, (it may be decreased—but if so, it is decreased 
symmetrically) and testing it is painful. Internal rotation strength is difficult 
to assess because testing it is painful. Abduction causes severe pain (and 
therefore I cannot assess strength). Forward elevation strength testing 
causes severe pain, likewise making it difficult to assess strength. When 
testing his abduction motion, it becomes painful at about 80 degrees on 
both, and he has further abduction on the right to 139 degrees and the left 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 18 
to 146.5 degrees. Internal rotation is 40 degrees on the left, 10–15 on the 
right. External rotation is 85 degrees bilaterally, his biceps is balled up 
distally on the right. He has a negative Yergason test. I could not recreate 
his shoulder pain with any position of his head or neck, but he does have 
neck pain with neck motion. Supine active forward elevation is to 146 
degrees on the left with pain on the way up and down; and to 150 degrees 
on the right with pain on the way up and down.  
(Ex. JE4, p. 104) Dr. Mysnyk assigned Maljkovic permanent work restrictions 
necessitated by his shoulder injuries of no work at shoulder height or higher and no 
lifting more than five pounds with either arm. (Ex. JE4, p. 104) 
Tyson requested an opinion on permanent disability from Dr. Mysnyk and he responded 
in a letter dated January 2, 2024. (Ex. JE4, p. 108) Dr. Mysnyk cautioned that 
“calculation of an impairment based on weakness is difficult because he had significant 
pain with strength testing making it difficult to objectively assess strength” before using 
the Fifth Edition of the American Medical Association Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment to opine: 
In any event, although when tested sitting on the exam table, he had some 
limitations of motion with flexion, abduction, and external rotation; I do not 
believe those limitations were due to actual loss of motion but more due to 
pain and weakness. As such, there is no impairment for those decreased 
motions on exam. He did have 30 [degrees] less internal rotation on the 
right compared [to] the left (and compared to normal), and from figure 16-
46, page 479 of [the Guides], this is a 2% upper extremity impairment. 
I would estimate internal rotation strength (please note my comment 
above relative to strength testing), is decreased 20%, and flexion and 
shoulder abduction strength are decreased 40% bilaterally. From table 16-
35 on page 510, for the internal rotation strength deficit, this is a 1.6% 
upper extremity impairment for each extremity (3.2 total). 
For the abduction weakness, this is a 2.5% upper extremity impairment for 
each side (a 5% total). And for shoulder flexion this is a 4.75% upper 
extremity impairment for each extremity (9.5% total)[.] Adding these 
together is a 20% upper extremity impairment (19.7 rounded to the 
nearest number). If desired in terms of whole person, from table 16-3 on 
page 439, a 20% upper extremity impairment is a 12% whole person 
impairment. 
(Ex. JE4, p. 108) Dr. Mysnyk affirmed that the permanent work restrictions he previously 
assigned remained appropriate in his opinion. (Ex. JE4, p. 108) 
In a letter dated December 18, 2023, Tyson offered Maljkovic to return to work in the 
position of “Pick Lean,” as the company had determined this was within Dr. Serrano’s 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 19 
prescribed work restrictions. (Ex. 4, p. 27) Unlike his initial stint in the position, he used 
only his left arm to perform the duties of the pick lean job. (Testimony) 
On January 31, 2024, Maljkovic underwent an MRI of his cervical spine interpreted by 
Dr. Dhillon to show: 
 Central C5-6 disc herniation indenting the anterior thecal sac; 
 Central C6-7 disc herniation indenting the anterior thecal sac; 
 Degenerative disc disease involving the cervical spine with no other sites of 
cervical disc herniation or cervical spinal stenosis or cervical cord 
compression; and 
 Moderate bilateral C5-6 and moderate bilateral C6-7 foraminal stenosis. 
(Ex. JE4, p. 38)  
On January 4, 2024, Maljkovic returned to see Ginther at UnityPoint Clinic Orthopedics 
– Waterloo for his knees. (Ex. JE9, p. 259) He reported that the injection helped for 
three or four weeks, but his pain level was unchanged. (Ex. JE9, pp. 259–60) Maljkovic 
had completed physical therapy before the appointment. (Ex. JE9, p. 260) Ginther 
planned for bilateral knee hyaluronic acid (HA) injections and encouraged Maljkovic to 
continue to do his home exercises to increase his quadricep strength, which could help 
reduce his knee pain. (Ex. JE9, p. 261) 
Claimant’s counsel arranged for Maljkovic to undergo an IME with Dr. Manshadi on 
March 14, 2024. (Ex. 6, p. 61) Dr. Manshadi reviewed medical records relating to care 
Maljkovic had received for his shoulders, upper extremities, legs, cervical spine, and 
lumbar spine. (Ex. 6, p. 61) He also performed an in-person examination of 
Maljkovic.(Ex. 6, p. 61) He then issued a report that details this work and contains his 
opinions on questions in dispute in this case. (Ex. 6) 
On the question of causation regarding Maljkovic’s cervical spine, lumbar spine, 
bilateral upper extremities, bilateral knees, and shoulders, Dr. Manshadi opined: 
After reviewing the provided medical records and evaluation and 
examination and interview of Mr. Gojko Maljkovic it is my professional 
medical opinion that he has sustained multiple injuries as a result of his 
work activities at Tyson Foods, Inc. where he has worked for over 20 
years. His jobs there required use of wizard knives. His jobs also required 
him to be in standing position for a prolonged time on concrete floors, and 
required going up and down stairs and ladders. In fact, on numerous 
occasions, Mr. Maljkovic slipped on the greasy floors, stopping, and 
catching himself, which caused stress upon his lower extremities and 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 20 
specifically to his knees. He is also 6 feet tall, and his job required him to 
have his neck in a flexed position for long periods of time. Also prolonged 
standing was required, which stressed his lower back. He also injured his 
right shoulder and then, after accommodating for the right shoulder, he 
used his left shoulder and left arm while performing light duty work, which 
led to left shoulder injury. He also sustained injuries to his hands as a 
result of repetitious work activities and gripping activities. 
Specifically regarding his neck, he has evidence of cervical disc disease 
and degenerative joint disease of the neck. He currently has significantly 
reduced active range of motion of his neck. He has bilateral shoulder pain 
with reduced active range of motion and is currently status post right 
shoulder arthroscopic surgery for biceps tenotomy and open distal clavicle 
excision and subacromial decompression, bursectomy and rotator cuff 
repair. He remains with persistent right-sided shoulder pain. He also has 
evidence of high-grade partial thickness tear of the supraspinatus tendon 
and tendinosis of the infraspinatus and mild bursitis involving the left 
shoulder, as noted by an MRI of 11/09/22, and he continues to have left-
sided shoulder pain similar to the right side and reduced active range of 
motion. 
Mr. Maljkovic also has evidence of bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome with 
reduced strength of the bilateral abductor pollicis brevis muscles, well-
documented by EMG studies performed by Dr. Bekavac.  
It is also well-documented that Mr. Maljkovic has chronic low back pain 
with MRI findings for degenerative disc disease, as well as facet 
arthropathy involving the lower lumbar spine without foraminal stenosis, 
and he currently has reduced active range of motion of the lumbar region. 
Finally, Mr. Malkovic has bilateral knee pain felt to be secondary to 
osteoarthritis with reduced active range of motion. 
Please note all the above injuries and diagnoses are as a result of Mr. 
Maljkovic’s work activities while working at Tyson Foods, and the work is a 
substantial contributing factor in bringing about the above-mentioned 
diagnoses. 
(Ex. 6, pp. 68–69) 
On examination, Dr. Manshadi performed measured components of Maljkovic’s right 
shoulder range of motion as follows: 
 Forward flexion, 90 degrees; 
 Extension, 40 degrees; 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 21 
 Abduction, 70 degrees; 
 External rotation, 25 degrees; 
 Internal rotation, 16 degrees; 
 Adduction, 22 degrees. (Ex. 6, p. 67) 
Dr. Manshadi then used the Guides to assign the following impairment rating: 
I used chapter 16, Pages 475 – 479 and as such, I assign eighteen (18) 
percent impairment of the right upper extremity. Since there was a distal 
clavicle excision on the right side, under Table 16-27, I add another ten 
(10) percent impairment of the right upper extremity. I also add another 
two (2) percent impairment of the right upper extremity due to loss of 
elbow flexion. Then using the Combined Values Chart, the total 
impairment for the right upper extremity will be thirty-six (36) percent, or 
twenty-two (22) percent impairment of the whole person. 
(Ex. 6, pp. 69–70) 
Dr. Mandhadi recorded the following range-of-motion measurements for the left 
shoulder: 
 Forward flexion, 80 degrees; 
 Extension, 30 degrees; 
 Abduction, 68 degrees; 
 External rotation, 28 degrees; 
 Internal rotation, 20 degrees; and 
 Adduction, 27 degrees. (Ex. 6, p. 67) 
He then used the Guides to opine, “On the left side for the left shoulder, I again used 
[the Guides], Pages 475 – 479. As such, I assign nineteen (19) percent impairment of 
the left upper extremity or (11) percent impairment of the whole person.” (Ex. 6, p. 70) 
With respect to Maljkovic’s cervical and lumbar spine, Dr. Manshadi opined on 
permanency. “Regarding the lumbar, [Dr. Manshadi] used Table 15-3, Page 384 and he 
falls under DRE Lumbar Category 2, and [he] assigned[ed] five (5) percent impairment 
of the whole person.” (Ex. 6, p. 69) And for the neck, Dr. Manshdi “used Chapter 15, 
Page 392, Table 15-5 and Mr. Maljkovic falls under DRE Cervical Category 2 and [he] 
assign[ed] five (5) percent impairment of the whole person.” (Ex. 6, p. 69) 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 22 
The defendants retained Charlies Mooney, M.D., for an IME that included an in-person 
examination, records review, which consisted of medical records relating to Maljkovic’s 
care and Tyson records relating to the positions he held with the company, and report. 
(Ex. D) Dr. Mooney issued a report dated March 28, 2024. (Ex. D, p. 14) Dr. Mooney 
addressed multiple alleged injuries in his report and used the Second Edition AMA 
Guides to the Evaluation of Disease and Injury Causation to help inform his opinions.2 
With respect to the right shoulder, Dr. Mooney recognized the diagnoses and surgical 
repair but opined his current condition consisted of “findings consistent with 
impingement of the shoulder” which he characterized as “an anatomical condition” that 
“follows a natural progression.” (Ex. D, p. 37) Dr. Mooney recognized that the medical 
consensus when shoulder impingement syndrome “occurs in the setting of a repetitive 
motion job it is rarely the result of a single factor” and “causation is usually multifactorial 
with both patient and work-related factors acting concomitantly to produce SIS.” (Ex. D, 
p. 38) He did not address the number of years Maljkovic worked for Tyson or the job 
duties he performed in his various positions with the company over that time, but 
nonetheless concluded he did not believe Maljkovic’s right shoulder injury was work 
related. (Ex. D, pp. 38–39) 
Dr. Mooney opined on the question of the work-relatedness of Maljkovic’s left shoulder 
condition, stating he has “subacromial impingement, which is chronic and follows a 
natural course as described by Neer above.” (Ex. D, pp. 40–41) Dr. Mooney did not 
discuss how, if at all, Maljkovic’s employment history of over two decades or the specific 
job duties he performed over those years might factor into his reasoning. Instead, he 
focused solely on the job duties he performed while working light duty. (Ex. D, p. 34) 
This incomplete understanding of Maljkovic’s employment activities significantly 
undermines Dr. Mooney’s opinion, which is based on an artificially narrow 
understanding of the scope of Maljkovic’s job duties over the course of his employment 
with Tyson. 
With respect to Maljkovic’s cervical and lumbar spine, Dr. Mooney consulted the Guides 
to the Evaluation of Disease and Injury Causation for the notion that over 100 peer-
reviewed articles in investigating potential causal factors of cervical and lumbar pain 
establish that disc degeneration is now considered a condition that is determined largely 
by genetics the effects of heavy physical loading on changes in the disc remain 
inconclusive. (Ex. D, pp. 43, 46) According to Dr. Mooney’s recitation, the reference 
concludes that there exists insufficient scientific evidence to conclusively establish that 
any occupational or ergonomic risk factor is actually a medical cause of work age adult 
                                                 
2 The legislature has mandated use of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment in cases before the agency but not the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Disease and Injury 
Causation, so this reference book is not binding in this case. 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 23 
low back pain. (Ex. D, pp. 43, 46) As a result, Dr. Mooney opined that the medical 
literature does not support the conclusion that his work activities, as described, caused 
his cervical condition. (Ex. D, p. 44) Also according to Dr. Mooney, there is no evidence 
that Mr. Maljkovic’s work activities at Tyson’s Fresh Meats would be a significant 
contributor to his lumbar complaints.  
B. 
Earnings 
The parties identified rate as a disputed issue; specifically, Maljkovic’s gross earnings at 
the time of the work injury. The hearing report states Maljkovic asserted his average 
weekly wage was $917.80 and Tyson alleges $911.34. Maljkovic included 
documentation relating to his earnings in the weeks leading up to the stipulated injury 
date, but he did not address the issue in his brief, so it is unclear what the contours of 
the dispute are. The defendants included a breakdown in their brief but not exhibits. 
Taken together, the undersigned finds Maljkovic has failed to meet his burden of proof 
on the earnings question. The weight of the evidence supports Tyson’s calculation of 
Maljkovic’s gross earnings and therefore its determination of the weekly workers’ 
compensation rate. 
C. 
Causation 
1. 
Shoulders 
With respect to the shoulder injuries, Dr. Mysnyk’s opinion on causation is the most 
persuasive. It also benefits from a foundation in common sense. Dr. Mysnyk properly 
considered as a backdrop Maljkovic’s long employment history working repetitive 
motion jobs on the line for Tyson. The same is true of Dr. Manshadi’s opinion. In 
contrast, Dr. Gordon and Dr. Mooney’s opinions do not adequately consider the entirety 
of the work Maljkovic performed for Tyson or how it more likely than not impacted his 
shoulder health. For these reasons, the weight of the evidence establishes that 
Maljkovic’s work for Tyson was a significant factor in causing his shoulder injuries, the 
need for care to treat them, and permanent impairment. 
2. 
Lumbar Spine & Cervical Spine/Neck 
Tyson has identified one of the “main stressors” on the low back for employees are 
standing requirements for workers on the line. (Ex. 2, p. 12) Maljkovic held jobs for over 
20 years that required him to stand while working on the line. He now has a lumbar 
spine injury.  
On the question of causation, Dr. Gordon and Dr. Mooney attempt to artificially narrow 
the window of time during which Maljkovic’s employment with Tyson could have been a 
substantial causative factor in developing his lumbar and cervical spine symptoms. 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 24 
They also fail to consider that Tyson recognizes standing, as Maljkovic did for much of 
the time he spent working for Tyson, as a main stressor on the low back. Dr. 
Manshadi’s opinion on causation gives proper consideration to the physical demands of 
Maljkovic’s employment over 21 years with Tyson. His opinion on causation for the 
lumbar and cervical spine is therefore adopted. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Workers’ compensation is “a creature of statute.” Darrow v. Quaker Oats Co., 570 
N.W.2d 649, 652 (Iowa 1997). This means an injured employee’s “right to workers' 
compensation is purely statutory.” Downs v. A & H Const., Ltd., 481 N.W.2d 520, 527 
(Iowa 1992).  And “it is the legislature’s prerogative to fix the conditions under which the 
act’s benefits may be obtained.” Darrow, 570 N.W.2d at 652. Consequently, the first 
step in a contested case before the commissioner is a plain reading of the text the 
legislature codified to determine if there exists any reasonable disagreement with 
respect to its meaning when applied to the facts. See Chavez v. MS Tech. LLC, 972 
N.W.2d 662, 667 (Iowa 2022); see also Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Strable, 14 
N.W.3d 742, 748 (Iowa 2024) (“We started (and ended), as we do here, with the 
language of the relevant statute . . .”). The edition of the Iowa Code in effect on the 
alleged injury date governs. See Stiles v. Annett Holdings, Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. 
Comm’r No. 5064673, 2020 WL 6037539, at *2 (App., Oct. 2, 2020). 
While the legislature has not empowered the agency to interpret the Iowa Workers' 
Compensation Act, the commissioner and deputies necessarily must do so when 
performing our quasi-judicial function as the tribunal responsible for providing the 
exclusive remedy in contested case proceedings under the Act. See Neal v. Annett 
Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 518-19 (Iowa 2012); see also Iowa Ins. Inst. v. Core 
Group of Iowa Ass'n for Justice, 867 N.W.2d 58, 68 (Iowa 2015); Martinez v. Pavlich, 
Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 5063900., (App. July 30, 2020).  
A. 
Causation 
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act “covers any and all personal injuries” relating to 
an employee’s work. Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 176 N.W. 823, 824 (1920). 
Under section 85.3(1), an employer covered by the Act must “provide, secure, and pay 
compensation according to the provisions of this chapter for any and all personal 
injuries sustained by an employee arising out of and in the course of the employment.” 
The legislature has codified a partial definition of “personal injury” in section 85.61(4) 
that is not applicable in the current case. Rather, the expanded definition of “personal 
injury” as articulated by the Iowa Supreme Court in its seminal Almquist v. Shenandoah 
Nurseries, Inc. holding governs: 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 25 
“an injury to the body, the impairment of health, or a disease, not excluded 
by the act, which comes about, not through the natural building up and 
tearing down of the human body, but because of a traumatic or other hurt 
or damage to the health or body of an employee. . . . The injury to the 
human body here contemplated must be something, whether an accident 
or not, that acts extraneously to the natural processes of nature, and 
thereby impairs the health, overcomes, injures, interrupts, or destroys 
some function of the body, or otherwise damages or injures a part or all of 
the body.”  
Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire & Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 850–51 (Iowa 1995) (quoting 
Almquist, 218 Iowa 724, 732, 254 N.W. 35, 39 (1934)) (citations omitted in Dunlavey). 
“In order for an injury to be compensable in Iowa, there must be ‘a connection between 
the injury and the work.’” Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 169, 173 (Iowa 2007) 
(quoting Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 221 (Iowa 2006)). To recover, a claimant 
must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the injury for which the claimant is 
seeking workers’ compensation arose: 
1) Out of the claimant’s employment; and 
 
2) In the course of the claimant’s employment. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 
N.W.2d 646, 652 (Iowa 2000) (citing Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 
143, 150 (Iowa 1996)); see also Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 
(Iowa 1996).  
“‘The two tests are separate and distinct.’” Blue, 743 N.W.2d at 174 (quoting Miedema, 
551 N.W.2d at 311). Under Iowa law, “‘both must be satisfied in order for an injury to be 
deemed compensable.’” Id. (quoting Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311). In this case, the 
parties dispute whether Malkjovic’s alleged injuries to his neck, back, and left shoulder 
arose out of his employment with Tyson.  
“An injury ‘arises out of’ employment if there is a causal connection between the 
employment and the injury.” Gray, 604 N.W.2d at 652 (citing Bailey v. Batchelder, 576 
N.W.2d 334, 338 (Iowa 1998)). “‘In other words, the injury must not have coincidentally 
occurred while at work, but must in some way be caused by or related to the working 
environment or the conditions of [the] employment.’” Blue, 743 N.W.2d at 174. (quoting 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311).  
Taking the words themselves, one is first struck by the fact that in the 
“arising” phrase the function of the employment is passive while in the 
“caused by” phrase it is active. When one speaks of an event “arising out 
of employment,” the initiative, the moving force, is something other than 
the employment; the employment is thought of more as a condition out of 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 26 
which the event arises than as the force producing the event in affirmative 
fashion. 
Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 223 (Iowa 2006) (quoting 1 Arthur Larson & Lex K. 
Larson, Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Law (2005) § 3.06, at 3-7 to 3-8 (emphasis in 
original)). 
More specifically, the question to be decided is whether Malkjovic sustained cumulative 
injury to those body parts while performing his job duties at Tyson. “The cumulative-
injury doctrine was first recognized by [the Iowa Supreme C]ourt in McKeever Custom 
Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368, 373–74 (Iowa 1986). It relates to the type of injury 
that develops over time from performing work-related activities. . . .” Ellingson v. 
Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440, 444 (Iowa 1999), overruled on other grounds by 
Waldinger Corp. v. Mettler, 817 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2012). 
“Whether an injury has a direct causal connection with the employment or arose 
independently thereof is ordinarily established by expert testimony.” Gray, 604 N.W.2d 
at 652. Characteristics that impact the persuasiveness of the expert’s opinion include 
completeness, thoroughness, and accuracy. See IBP, Inc. v. Al-Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 
621, 631 (Iowa 2000). Other surrounding circumstances may also impact its credibility. 
Id. The agency, as finder of fact, may reject an expert’s opinion in whole or in part. Id. If 
an expert’s opinion is uncontroverted, the agency may not reject it without explaining 
why. Id. 
“A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary.” Frye v. Smith-
Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa App. 1997) (citing Schofield v. White, 
250 Iowa 571, 95 N.W.2d 40 (Iowa 1959) and Holmes v. Bruce Motor Freight, Inc., 215 
N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). The claimant must prove by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the employment in question was a substantial factor in bringing about the 
injury or condition alleged in the petition. See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60, 64 (Iowa 1981). To be a substantial factor, employment need only be one 
cause—not the only cause—of the alleged injury or condition. See id. 
As found above, Maljkovic has met his burden of proof on causation with respect to both 
shoulder injuries as well as the injuries to his lumbar spine and cervical spine/neck. The 
evidence shows it is more likely than not his employment at Tyson is a significant factor 
in causing the injuries, need for care, and functional impairment.  
B. 
Compensation 
An employer covered by the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act must “provide, secure, 
and pay compensation according to the provisions of this chapter for any and all 
personal injuries sustained by an employee arising out of and in the course of the 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 27 
employment, and in such cases, the employer shall be relieved from other liability for 
recovery of damages or other compensation for such personal injury.” Iowa Code 
§ 85.3(1). The “broad purpose of workers’ compensation” is “to award compensation 
(apart from medical benefits), not for the injury itself, but the disability produced by a 
physical injury.” Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, (Iowa 
2010) (citing 4 Arthur Larson & Lex K. Larson, Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Law 
§ 80.02, at 80–2 (2009)). “Permanent benefits and temporary benefits are very different. 
Temporary benefits compensate the employee for lost wages until he or she is able to 
return to work, whereas permanent benefits compensate either a disability to a 
scheduled member or a loss in earning capacity (industrial disability).” Mannes v. 
Fleetguard, Inc., 770 N.W.2d 826, 830 (Iowa 2009) (citing Iowa Code §§ 85.33, 85.34). 
1. 
TTD/HP Benefits 
An injured employee is entitled to TTD or HP benefits when the employee is unable to 
work during a period of convalescence caused by a work injury. Iowa Code §§ 85.33(1), 
85.34(1). Whether an employee’s injury causes a permanent disability dictates whether 
the employee’s temporary benefits are considered TTD or HP. Bell Bros. Heating & Air 
Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 200 (Iowa 2010) (citing Clark v. Vicorp Rests., 
Inc., 696 N.W.2d 596, 604–05 (Iowa 2005)). If there is a permanent disability, the 
benefits are considered HP; if not, they are TTD. See id.  
Maljkovic is seeking TTD/HP benefits from March 8, 2023, through November 22, 2023. 
The parties stipulated that Maljkovic was off work for this time period. Nonetheless, 
Tyson disputes Maljkovic’s entitlement to these benefits because his cervical and 
lumbar symptoms were but one factor that led Dr. Bekavac to take him off work on 
March 8, 2023, and keep him off work as well as the assertion that Tyson paid TTD/HP 
benefits for his shoulder from May 24, 2023, through June 29, 2023. 
Under Iowa workers’ compensation law, there are two types of causation. One is the 
type discussed above—whether an injury or condition arose out of and in the course of 
the claimant’s employment. The other is whether there exists a causal connection 
between a work injury or condition and a disability or impairment. The standard is the 
same regardless of the type under consideration. See Kubli, 312 N.W.2d at 64. Applied 
here: Was Maljkovic’s work a significant factor in causing Maljkovic a period of 
temporary total disability or healing period? See id. 
Dr. Bekavac examined Maljkovic for complaints regarding his bilateral upper 
extremities, bilateral low extremities, cervical spine, and lumbar spine. He then took 
Maljkovic off work beginning on March 8, 2023, because he was “still symptomatic.” 
This statement in the medical records accurately described Maljkovic’s cervical and 
lumbar spine as well as his bilateral upper and lower extremities at the time. Thus, the 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 28 
weight of the evidence shows that a significant factor in Dr. Bekavac taking Maljkovic off 
work was his cervical and lumbar spine symptoms. He is therefore entitled to benefits 
during the time period he was off work due to his ongoing symptoms, which included his 
cervical and lumbar spine, minus any TTD/HP benefits paid to Maljkovic for his shoulder 
injuries for weeks falling between March 8, 2023, and November 22, 2023. 
2. 
Permanency Benefits 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2) governs permanent partial disabilities that result from work 
injuries and provides: 
The compensation shall be based upon the extent of the disability and 
upon the basis of eighty percent per week of the employee’s average 
spendable weekly earnings, but not more than a weekly benefit amount, 
rounded to the nearest dollar, equal to one hundred eighty-four percent of 
the statewide average weekly wage paid employees as determined by the 
department of workforce development under section 96.1A, subsection 35, 
and in effect at the time of the injury. 
The statute further requires that “all cases of permanent partial disability compensation 
shall be paid” based on the paragraphs in section 85.34(2), “divides permanent partial 
disability into either a scheduled or unscheduled loss.” Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 
N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993) (citing Iowa Code § 85.34(2). Compensation for work 
injuries to body parts listed in the schedule are limited to functional disability over a 
number of weeks set by the statutory schedule. Id. Injuries to body parts not included in 
the statutory list are considered unscheduled and to the body as a whole. Id.  Disability 
caused by such injuries is deemed to the whole body and compensation is based on 
industrial disability, the impact on the injured worker’s earning capacity. Id. 
Consequently, the maximum amount of compensation to which an injured worker is 
entitled under the statute can “differ radically” depending on whether the worker’s injury 
is to a scheduled member or the body as a whole. Id.  
“‘The very purpose of the schedule is to make certain the amount of compensation in 
the case of specific injuries and to avoid controversies . . . .’” Gilleland v. Armstrong 
Rubber Co., 524 N.W.2d 404, 407 (Iowa 1994) (quoting Dailey v. Pooley Lumber Co., 
10 N.W.2d 569, 571 (Iowa 1943)). “‘The schedule brings a windfall to the worker in 
some cases and gross hardship to the worker in others.’” Id. at 409 (Lavarto, J., 
concurring specially) (quoting Graves v. Eagle Iron Works, 331 N.W.2d 116, 119–20 
(Iowa 1983 (McCormick, J., concurring specially)). Thus, the legislative purpose of the 
schedule is not so much beneficence to the worker, though that sometimes is the result, 
as cost certainty and limiting controversies resolved by litigation. McSpadden v. Big Ben 
Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 188 (Iowa 1980) (citing Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. 
Cady, 278 N.W.2d 298, 299 (Iowa 1979); Wetzel v. Wilson, 276 N.W.2d 410, 411-12 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 29 
(Iowa 1979); and Hoenig v. Mason & Hanger, Inc., 162 N.W.2d 188, 190 (Iowa 1968)) 
(“The primary purpose of the workers' compensation statute is to benefit the worker and 
his or her dependents, insofar as statutory requirements permit.”). 
Before 2017, the shoulder was not included in the statutory list of scheduled 
members. See Second Injury Fund v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258, 269 (Iowa 1995) 
(citing Lauhoff Grain Co. v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834, 837–39 (Iowa 1986) and Alm v. 
Morris Barick Cattle Co., 38 N.W.2d 161, 163 (Iowa 1949)).  Instead, shoulder injuries 
such as the one at issue in this case were considered unscheduled injuries under Iowa 
law. Alm, 38 N.W.2d at 163; Westling v. Hormel Foods Corp., 810 N.W.2d at 252 (Iowa 
2012). Permanent partial disability caused by shoulder injuries that occurred before July 
1, 2017, was considered industrial. Id.; Westling, 810 N.W.2d at 252. Compensation 
was therefore based on the loss of earning capacity the worker suffered due to the 
work-related shoulder injury. Id.; Westling, 810 N.W.2d at 252. 
In 2017, the legislature enacted a bill that made multiple changes to the statutory 
framework governing workers’ compensation in Iowa. See 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23. As 
part of the 2017 amendments, the legislature expanded the schedule by adding the 
shoulder to the codified list of members. 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23, § 7 (now codified at 
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(n)). Under the statute, as amended, work injuries to the shoulder 
that occur on or after July 1, 2017, are treated as scheduled member injuries and the 
award of benefits is consequently limited in the interest of cost certainty and limiting 
controversies to the injured employee’s functional impairment. See Chavez v. MS Tech. 
LLC, 972 N.W.2d 662, 666–67 (Iowa 2022). 
When amending the statute in 2017 to move shoulder injuries from unscheduled to 
scheduled, the legislature did not add shoulders to section 85.34(2)(t), which provides: 
The loss of both arms, or both hands, or both feet, or both legs, or both 
eyes, or any two thereof, caused by a single accident, shall equal five 
hundred weeks and shall be compensated as such; however, if said 
employee is permanently and totally disabled the employee may be 
entitled to benefits under subsection 3. 
Relatedly, Iowa Code section 4.1 contains the legislatures codified directives on how to 
interpret its enactments and section 4.1(17) states, “Unless otherwise specifically 
provided by law the singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular.” 
One might conclude that in the plain text of section 85.34(2)(t), the legislature 
“specifically provided” that injuries to more than one of the listed scheduled members—
“the plural,” id.—are compensated on a 500-week schedule and may result in 
entitlement to permanent total disability (PTD) benefits, which means that bilateral 
injuries to unlisted scheduled members fall under the industrial disability framework 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 30 
dictated by section 85.34(2)(v) as a “case of permanent partial disability other than 
those described or referred to in paragraphs “a” through “u,”” but one would be 
incorrect. Indeed, the commissioner did just that. See Carmer v. Nordstrom, Inc., Iowa 
Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 1656062.01, 2021 WL (App. Dec. 29, 2021). 
But in Bridgestone Americas, Inc. v. Anderson, the Iowa Supreme Court reversed the 
commissioner’s interpretation of the statute. 4 N.W.3d 676, 683 (Iowa 2024). In its 
reasoning, the court did not discuss the “‘rule of statutory interpretation deeply 
embedded throughout [its] caselaw’” that the court “‘liberally construe[s] workers’ 
compensation statutes in claimants’ favor to effectuate the statute’s humanitarian and 
beneficent purpose.’” Delaney v. Second Injury Fund of Iowa, 6 N.W.3d 714, 717 (Iowa 
2024) (quoting Baker v. Bridgestone/Firestone, 872 N.W.2d 672, 676 (Iowa 2015); 
Instead, the court articulated the new “most natural reading” standard and, without 
delineating its contours, applied it to section 85.34(2)(t) to hold that nothing in the 
paragraph’s text precluded compensation for multiple cumulative injuries to scheduled 
members that do not fall within its text from being compensated individually under the 
applicable paragraph in the statutory schedule. Id. The court concluded that section 
85.34(2)(t) does not support the conclusion that work injuries to the arm and shoulder 
are compensated based on an industrial disability analysis because the injuries at issue 
in the case were cumulative in nature and section 85.34(2)(t) only “applies to some 
situations in which multiple injuries are ‘caused by a single accident.’” Id., at 684 
(quoting Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(t)).  
The rule that emerges in Anderson is: When a worker sustains cumulative injuries to 
two scheduled members not listed in section 85.34(2)(t), the injured worker is entitled to 
compensation for the functional disability caused to each member individually. See id., 
at 683–86. In the wake of Anderson, the Iowa Court of Appeals held that the rule 
applies to bilateral cumulative shoulder injuries. Nordstrom, Inc. v. Carmer, 8 N.W.3d 
198 at *4–*5 (Iowa App. 2024) (Table). Under Anderson and Carmer, a worker who 
sustains bilateral cumulative shoulder injuries is entitled to compensation for functional 
disability out of 800 weeks by applying the 400-week statutory schedule under section 
85.34(2)(n) instead of industrial disability out of 500 weeks under section 85.34(2)(u). 
Here, Maljkovic has satisfied his burden of proof on the question of causation with 
respect to the cumulative injuries he alleged in his petition to the lumbar and cervical 
spine as well as both shoulders. In Anderson, the court reaffirmed its holding in 
Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp. that, “‘when there is injury to some scheduled member and 
also to parts of the body not included in the schedule, the resulting disability is 
compensated on the basis of an unscheduled injury.’” Anderson, 4 N.W.3d at 687 
(quoting 502 N.W.2d 12, 16 (Iowa 1993)). Therefore, Maljkovic is entitled to 
permanency benefits under section 85.34(2)(v). 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 31 
However, the evidence does not establish Maljkovic had reached MMI at the time of 
hearing for the lumbar or cervical spine injuries—meaning the question of permanent 
disability to the unscheduled back or neck is not ripe for determination. It is axiomatic 
that the question of lost earning capacity caused by all four work injuries under section 
85.34(2)(v) is likewise not ripe for determination. But this does not mean that Maljkovic 
is not presently entitled to any permanency benefits. 
Also, via the 2017 amendments, the legislature changed how the Guides are used in 
cases before the agency: 
[W]hen determining functional disability and not loss of earning capacity, 
the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be 
determined solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent 
impairment, published by the American medical association, as adopted 
by the workers’ compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 
17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not be utilized in determining 
loss or percentage of permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity. 
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(x).  
After the 2017 amendments, section 85.34(2) mandates use of only the Guides as 
adopted by the commissioner under the IAPA for the determination of permanent 
functional disability or impairment. The commissioner has adopted the Fifth Edition of 
the Guides for use in determining permanent impairment in cases before the agency. 
Iowa Admin. Code r. 876—a2.4 (2022). In the Guides, the AMA sets forth the definition 
of “impairment” as follows: 
The Guides continues to define impairment as “a loss, loss of use, or 
derangement of any body part, organ system, or organ function.” 
This definition of impairment is retained in this edition. A medical 
impairment can develop from an illness or injury. An impairment is 
considered permanent when it has reached maximal medical 
improvement (MMI), meaning it is well stabilized and unlikely to change 
substantially in the next year with or without medical treatment. The term 
impairment in the Guides refers to permanent impairment, which is the 
focus of the Guides. 
An impairment can be manifested objectively, for example, by a fracture, 
and/or subjectively, through fatigue and pain. Although the Guides 
emphasizes objective assessment, subjective symptoms are included 
within the diagnostic criteria. According to the Guides, determining 
whether an injury or illness results in permanent impairment requires a 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 32 
medical assessment performed by a physician. An impairment may lead to 
functional limitations or the inability to perform the activities of daily living. 
Guides, p. 2 (bold-face and italics in original). 
The Guides further provide: 
In evaluating impairment, the Guides considers both anatomic and 
functional loss. Some chapters place a greater emphasis on either 
anatomic or functional loss, depending upon common practice in that 
specialty. Anatomic loss refers to damage to the organ system or body 
structure, while functional loss refers to a change in function for the organ 
or body system. An example of an anatomic deviation is development of 
heart enlargement; functional loss includes a loss in ejection fraction or 
the ability of the heart to pump adequately. Anatomic loss receives greater 
emphasis in the musculoskeletal system, as in measures such as range of 
motion. Functional considerations receive greater emphasis in the mental 
and behavioral section. 
Id. at 4 (emphasis in original).  
And the Guides expressly provide: 
Impairment percentages or ratings developed by medical specialists are 
consensus-derived estimates that reflect the severity of the medical 
condition and the degree to which the impairment decreases an 
individual’s ability to perform common activities of daily living (ADL), 
excluding work. Impairment ratings were designed to reflect functional 
limitations and not disability. The whole person impairment 
percentages listed in the Guides estimate the impact of the impairment 
on the individual’s overall ability to perform activities of daily living, 
excluding work, as listed in Table 1-2. 
Id., at 4 (bold-face and italics in original). Table 1-2, entitled “Activities of Daily Living 
Commonly Measured in Activities of Daily Living (ADL) and Instrumental Activities of 
Daily Living (IADL) Scales,” from Page 4 of the Guides, is recreated below. 
Activity 
Example 
Self-care, personal hygiene 
Urinating, defecating, 
brushing teeth, combing 
hair, bathing, dressing 
oneself, eating 
Communication 
Writing, typing, seeing, 
hearing, speaking 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 33 
Physical activity 
Standing, sitting, reclining, 
walking, climbing 
Sensory function 
Hearing, seeing, tactile 
feeling, tasting, smelling 
Nonspecialized hand 
activities 
Grasping, lifting, tactile, 
discrimination 
Travel 
Riding, driving, flying 
Sexual function 
Orgasm, ejaculation, 
lubrication, erection 
Sleep 
Restful, nocturnal sleep 
pattern 
The Guides further explain their approach to impairment in pertinent part: 
The medical judgment used to determine the original impairment 
percentages could not account for the diversity or complexity of work but 
could account for daily activities common to most people. Work is not 
included in the clinical judgment for impairment percentages for several 
reasons: (1) work involves many simple and complex activities; (2) work is 
highly individualized, making generalizations inaccurate; (3) impairment 
percentages are unchanged for stable conditions, but work and 
occupations change; and (4) impairments interact with such other factors 
as the worker’s age, education, and prior work experience to determine 
the extent of work disability. For example, an individual who receives a 
30% whole person impairment due to pericardial heart disease is 
considered from a clinical standpoint to have a 30% reduction in general 
functioning as represented by a decrease in the ability to perform activities 
of daily living. For individuals who work in sedentary jobs, there may be no 
decline in their work ability although their overall functioning is decreased. 
Thus, 30% impairment rating does not correspond to a 30% reduction in 
work capability. Similarly, a manual laborer with this 30% impairment 
rating due to pericardial disease may be completely unable to do his or 
her regular job and, thus, may have a 100% work disability. 
As a result, impairment ratings are not intended for use as direct 
determinants of work disability. When a physician is asked to evaluate 
work-related disability, it is appropriate for a physician knowledgeable 
about the work activities of the patient to discuss the specific activities the 
worker can and cannot do, given the permanent impairment. 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 34 
Id. at 5. “The Guides impairment ratings reflect the severity and limitations of the 
organ/body system impairment and resulting functional limitations.” Id. at p. 9 (bold-
face in original). 
The Guides use “impairment” and “disability” as two distinct terms, each with its own 
meaning. While “impairment” encompasses ADLs and excludes work, 
The Guides continues to define disability as an alteration of an 
individual’s capacity to meet personal, social, or occupational 
demands or statutory or regulatory requirements because of an 
impairment. An individual can have a disability in performing a specific 
work activity but not have a disability in any other social role. Physicians 
have the education and training to evaluate a person’s health status and 
determine the presence or absence of an impairment. If the physician has 
the expertise and is well acquainted with the individual’s activities and 
needs, the physician may also express an opinion about the presence or 
absence of a specific disability. For example, an occupational medicine 
physician who understands the job requirements in a particular workplace 
can provide insights on how the impairment could contribute to a 
workplace disability. 
Id. at p. 8 (bold-face in original). 
The Guides further elaborate on impairment versus disability. Under the Guides, “The 
impairment evaluation . . . is only one aspect of disability determination.” Id. 
The Guides is not intended to be used for direct estimates of work 
disability. Impairment percentages derived according to the Guides criteria 
do not measure work disability. Therefore, it is inappropriate to use the 
Guides’ criteria or ratings to make direct estimates of work disability. 
Id. at p. 9. 
The legislature may act as its own lexicographer. P.M. v. T.B., 907 N.W.2d 522, 540 
(Iowa 2018) (quoting In re J.C., 857 N.W.2d 495, 500 (Iowa 2014)). Definitions codified 
by the legislature for purposes of a statute are dispositive on the question of what a 
statutory term means. Id. (quoting In re J.C., 857 N.W.2d at 500).  While the legislature 
has statutorily prescribed meanings for some terms used in the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act, it has not defined impairment or its permutations for purposes of the 
Act. See Iowa Code §§ 85.34, 85.61. This creates ambiguity as to the meaning of 
“permanent impairment,” “functional impairment,” and “impairment” in the statute, terms 
that did not appear in it until the 2017 amendments. See Chavez, 972 N.W.2d at 667; 
see also 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23, §§ 6, 8, 9, 15. 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 35 
Thus, the 2017 amendments incorporate the contours of the term “impairment” as 
articulated in the Guides and mandate their use in cases before the agency. Impairment 
is “a loss, loss of use or derangement of any body part, organ system, or organ 
function.” Guides, at p. 2 (internal emphasis omitted). However, “Impairment 
percentages derived according to the Guides criteria do not measure work disability.” Id. 
at 9. And with respect to determining the extent of permanent disability under the Act, 
the Guides make clear that “[t]he impairment evaluation . . . is only one aspect of 
disability determination.” Id. at 9. After using the Guides to determine percentage of 
permanent impairment, the agency must then consider the evidentiary record as a 
whole to determine the extent of permanent disability—“alteration of an individual’s 
capacity to meet personal, social, or occupational demands or statutory or regulatory 
requirements because of an impairment,” Guides, p. 8—and entitlement to PPD 
benefits. 
This two-step process is reflected in Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—2.4, which the 
agency amended to reflect the changes the legislature made to the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Act via the 2017 amendments. The rule mandates use of the Fifth 
Edition of the Guides “for determining the extent of loss or percentage of impairment for 
permanent partial disabilities.” Iowa Admin. Code r. 876—2.4. It further provides: 
Nothing in this rule shall be construed to prevent the presentations of 
other medical opinions or other material evidence for the purpose of 
establishing that the degree of permanent disability to which the claimant 
would be entitled would be more or less than the entitlement indicated in 
the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, when 
the reduction in earning capacity for all other permanent partial and 
permanent total disabilities is determined. 
Id. 
For these reasons, under section 85.34(2) and Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—2.4, 
the agency must engage in the following two-step process to determine the extent of 
permanent disability for purposes of an injured employee’s entitlement to permanent 
partial disability benefits: 
1) Determine permanent impairment solely by utilizing the Fifth Edition of the 
Guides and without consideration of lay testimony or agency expertise; and 
 
2) Determine permanent disability based on the entirety of the evidentiary record. 
Applying this framework to the current case allows for a determination on the question 
of permanent impairment caused by the work injuries Maljkovic sustained to his 
shoulders, which is ripe for determination, while bifurcating the disputed issue of the 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 36 
extent of permanent disability until it ripens after he reaches MMI for the injuries to his 
lumbar and cervical spine.  
a. 
Shoulders 
Dr. Mysnyk does not follow the Guides in assessing Maljkovic’s permanent impairment 
to his shoulders. Neither did Dr. Manshadi, who assigned 10 percent impairment to the 
right shoulder due to the distal clavicle excision Maljkovic underwent. As the 
commissioner has made clear, that is not how the Guides assess a distal clavicle 
excision. See Jay v. Archer Skid Loader Serv., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 
19003586.01, 2022 WL 17170776 (App., Aug. 23, 2022). Therefore, Dr. Manshadi’s 
opinion on permanent impairment to the right shoulder is rejected and Dr. Mooney’s is 
adopted because he used the appropriate range of motion measurements and correctly 
used the 25 percent multiplier under Table 16-18. The weight of the evidence 
establishes Maljkovic sustained a 17 percent permanent impairment resulting from his 
right shoulder injury. Dr. Mooney also appropriately applied the Guides to Maljkovic’s 
left shoulder, so his 18 percent impairment rating is adopted. 
Under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n), workers’ compensation for the shoulder is based 
on a 400-week schedule. Taking 17 percent multiplied by 400 weeks equals 68 weeks. 
And 18 percent multiplied by 400 weeks equals 72 weeks.  
b. 
Lumbar & Cervical Spine/Neck. 
There is an insufficient basis in the evidence from which to conclude Maljkovic is at MMI 
for cervical or lumbar spine. Therefore, the question of entitlement to permanency 
benefits is not ripe for determination. Such a determination will be appropriate when 
Maljkovic reaches MMI and permanent impairment can be properly assessed under the 
Guides. The question of entitlement to permanency benefits for Maljkovic’s whole 
person is therefore bifurcated for consideration at a future hearing after it is ripe for 
determination. 
C. 
Rate. 
In the hearing report, the parties identified Maljkovic’s weekly earnings, a component of 
rate, as in dispute. Maljkovic identified the correct figure as $917.80 and Tyson 
contended $911.34 was the right amount. Tyson showed the work that went into its rate 
calculation in its brief. Def. Brief, pp. 18–19. Maljkovic did not address the rate issue in 
his brief. See Cl. Brief. The undersigned is left to speculate with respect to Maljkovic’s 
position on how he believes weekly earnings should be calculated and why. As a result, 
Maljkovic has failed to meet his burden of proof on rate and Tyson’s calculation is 
adopted. 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 37 
Maljkovic’s gross earnings on the stipulated injury date were were $911.34 per week. 
The parties stipulated Maljkovic was married and entitled to two exemptions at the time. 
Therefore, Maljkovic’s workers’ compensation rate is $602.67 dollars per week. 
D. 
Medical. 
For all injuries compensable under Iowa Code chapter 85 or 85A, the employer must 
“furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, 
physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies therefor 
and shall allow reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for such 
services.” Iowa Code Ann. § 85.27(1). This responsibility is coupled with the right to 
choose care for the employee’s work injury. Id. at § 85.27(4). “[A]n employer who 
authorizes care is responsible for the cost of care up to the time when the employer 
notifies the employee it is no longer authorizing care.” Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, 
L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, 772 (Iowa 2016). 
The statute obligates the employer to monitor the care and determine if, and when, it no 
longer wishes to authorize care. Id. at 771. “An employer can easily reconsider whether 
it wishes to authorize further care when an authorized medical provider indicates an 
employee requires no further care for a workplace injury or when the employer 
authorizes a new provider to take over an employee’s care.” Id. at 772. “Section 
85.27(4) balances this minimal burden with a significant corresponding benefit—a 
means of extinguishing the employer's ongoing obligation to pay for medical expenses 
following its acknowledgment of compensability and exercise of the right to choose 
care.” Id. 
Here, Tyson makes the compelling argument that some of the care for which Maljkovic 
is seeking to be held harmless is related solely to his bilateral lower extremities or 
bilateral upper extremities. Because those injuries were not properly plead, this decision 
does not address whether Tyson is liable for them.  
However, the weight of the evidence shows that Maljkovic’s lumbar spine and cervical 
spine/neck complaints arise out of and in the course of his employment with Tyson. 
Therefore, Tyson has a duty under Iowa law to hold Maljkovic harmless for them. 
Maljkovic has met his burden of proof with respect to the care for which his lumbar 
spine or cervical spine/neck was a significant factor in him seeking care. 
E. 
IME. 
Iowa Code section 85.39 governs examinations of injured employees to determine the 
extent of permanent impairment or disability caused by a work injury. MidAmerican 
Const. LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838, 847–48 (Iowa 2024). Under subsection 1, the 
employee must attend an examination by a physician of the employer’s choice or be 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 38 
disqualified from benefits for the period of refusal. An opinion on causation or the extent 
of permanent impairment or disability by a doctor retained by the employer triggers the 
injured employee’s right to an IME under subsection 2. 
“In subsection 2, the legislature leveled the playing field between the employer and the 
employee.” Id. 2 N.W.3d at 848. “The statutory process balances the competing 
interests of the employer and employee and permits the employee to obtain an 
independent medical examination at the employer's expense.” Des Moines Area Reg'l 
Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 844 (Iowa 2015).  
Subsection 2 entitles the employee to receive an examination if the employee believes 
the evaluation made by the employer's physician was too low. Iowa Code § 85.39(2); 
Young, 867 N.W.2d at 844. The employee's own examination “is known as an IME 
because the examination is independent of the examination done by the physician 
selected by the employer.” Young, 867 N.W.2d at 843–44. 
Subsection 2 further provides, “A determination of the reasonableness of a fee for an 
examination … shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider to 
perform an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is conducted.” 
Under the Iowa Supreme Court’s holding in Sandlin, “The reasonableness of the fees 
will be analyzed based on what physicians in that area typically charge to perform the 
impairment rating examination—which may include ‘the costs of reviewing medical 
records, conducting a physical examination, opining on causation, assessing permanent 
impairment, assigning restrictions, and addressing further treatment recommendations.’” 
2 N.W.3d at 851–52 (quoting Turner v. NCI Bldg. Sys., Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. 
Comm'r No. 1652235.01, 2022 WL 1787301, at *26 (Feb. 24, 2022)). This analysis 
under the statute “effectively necessitates fact-finding by the commissioner on the fees 
typically charged in the local area where the examination is performed. Parties may 
offer evidence of the fees typically charged in that locality to support or challenge the 
fee charged in a particular case.” Id. at 849. The court concluded “‘many IMEs come 
before the agency, which allows the [commissioner] to use agency experience and 
expertise to conclude that [the physician's] charges are in line with those of an 
occupational medicine doctor with a practice in the ... [local] area performing an 
evaluation of permanent impairment in accordance with the [AMA] Guides.’” Id. (quoting 
Nguyen v. Hy-Vee, Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm'r, No. 21003118.03, 2023 WL 
7128682, at *32 (Arb. Oct. 20, 2023)). 
Here, the parties’ dispute with respect to Maljkovic’s entitlement to reimbursement for 
the cost of Dr. Manshadi’s IME is centered on the fact that the examination and report 
involved consideration of the alleged work injuries to Maljkovic’s bilateral upper and 
lower extremities. As found above, Maljkovic did not identify these alleged injuries in his 
petition, so this decision contains no determination on whether either of them arise out 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 39 
of and in the course of his employment with Tyson. Put otherwise, there is no 
determination that they are compensable, which is a requirement to IME reimbursement 
under the statute.  
Tyson is therefore correct. Maljkovic is not entitled to reimbursement for that portion of 
Dr. Mandshadi’s IME that addresses those body parts. Dr. Manshadi’s invoice is not 
itemized by body part, but that is not required to reduce an IME reimbursement amount. 
The description of the work that went into the IME, the examination, and the contents of 
the report form a sufficient basis for determining what portion of an IME is reimbursable 
under the law. Here, some of Maljkovic’s medical records relate to care solely for his 
upper extremities or lower extremities but some of them also relate to care for those 
conditions as well as other alleged work injuries—which means Dr. Manshadi would 
have reviewed them regardless. Based on the content of the IME report and description 
of Dr. Manshadi’s examination, Maljkovic is entitled to reimbursement for $3,000.00 of 
the $4,500.00 in costs relating to the IME. 
F. 
Costs. 
“All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be taxed in the 
discretion of the commissioner.” Iowa Code § 86.40. “Fee-shifting statutes using ‘all 
costs’ language have been construed ‘to limit reimbursement for litigation expenses to 
those allowed as taxable court costs.’” Des Moines Area Reg'l Transit Auth. v. Young, 
867 N.W.2d 839, 846 (Iowa 2015) (quoting Riverdale v. Diercks, 806 N.W.2d 643, 660 
(Iowa 2011)). Statutes and administrative rules providing for recovery of costs are 
strictly construed. Id. (quoting Hughes v. Burlington N. R.R., 545 N.W.2d 318, 321 (Iowa 
1996)).  
Because Maljkovic prevailed on multiple disputed issues, the following costs are taxed 
against the defendants under Iowa Code section 86.40 and Iowa Administrative Code 
rule 876—4.33: 
 $16.26 for the costs of service of the original notice; and 
 $103.00 for the filing fee, including convenience fees incurred by using the 
payment gateway on the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES). 
VII. 
ORDER. 
Based on the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) Tyson shall pay to Maljkovic at the rate of six hundred two and 67/100 dollars 
($602.67): 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 40 
a) For the right shoulder, 68 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits. 
b) For the left shoulder, 72 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits. 
2) The question of entitlement to permanency benefits for impairment or 
disability to the whole body is hereby bifurcated for determination after 
Maljkovic reaches maximum medical improvement and the issue becomes 
ripe. 
3) Tyson shall pay to Maljkovic at the rate of six hundred two and 67/100 dollars 
($602.67) temporary total disability or healing period benefits from March 8, 
2023, through November 22, 2023, minus any temporary total disability or 
healing period benefits previously paid to Maljkovic for dates within this time 
period due to a temporary disability or healing period caused by an accepted 
work injury to the shoulder. 
4) Tyson shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
5) Tyson shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
6) Tyson shall be given the credit for 20.43 weeks of compensation at the rate of 
six hundred two and 67/100 ($602.67) per week. 
7) Tyson shall pay all medical costs for which a significant causative factor were 
Maljkovic’s lumbar spine or cervical spine/neck symptoms. 
8) Tyson shall pay to Maljkovic three thousand and 00/100 ($3,000.00) for the 
reasonable costs of Dr. Manshadi’s IME relating to the injury found 
compensable in this decision. 
9) Tyson shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by Iowa 
Administrative Code rule 876—3.1(2). 
10) The defendants shall pay to Maljkovic the following amounts for the following 
costs: 
a) One hundred three and 00/100 dollars ($103.00) for the filing fee; and 
b) Sixteen and 26/100 dollars ($16.26) for the cost of service of the 
original notice. 
 
 
 

MALJKOVIC V. TYSON FOODS, INC. 
Page 41 
Signed and filed this 20th day of February, 2025. 
 
 
 
BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
Served via the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES): 
John S. Pieters, Jr., Attorney for Claimant 
Jason P. Wiltfang, Attorney for Defendants 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
