Case Number: 5064796
Case Title:  REDING, CHRYSANNE V. NORDSTROM
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Reding Chrysanne-5064796d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
CHRYSANNE REDING, 
  : 
 
 
  :              File Nos. 5064796, 5068121 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
NORDSTROM DISTRIBUTION 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
CENTER, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  :      Head Note Nos.:  1400, 1402, 1402.40, 
 
Self-Insured, 
  :  
 
           1800, 1803, 2500, 2700 
 
Defendant. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
The claimant, Chrysanne Reding, filed two petitions for arbitration seeking 
workers’ compensation benefits from Nordstrom Distribution Center, as the self-insured 
employer.  Eric Loney appeared on behalf of the claimant.  James Peters appeared on 
behalf of the defendants.   
 
The matter came on for hearing on August 21, 2020, before deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner Andrew M. Phillips in Des Moines, Iowa.  An order issued 
on March 13, 2020, and updated June 1, 2020, and August 14, 2020, by the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, In the Matter of Coronavirus/COVID-19 Impact 
on Hearings (Available online at: https://www.iowaworkcomp.gov/order-coronavirus-
covid-19 (last viewed August 14, 2020)) amended the hearing assignment order in each 
case before the Commissioner scheduled for an in-person regular proceeding hearing 
between March 18, 2020, and November 20, 2020.  The amendment makes it so that 
such hearings will be held by Internet-based video, using CourtCall.  The parties 
appeared electronically, and the hearing proceeded without significant difficulties.  The 
matter was fully submitted on September 30, 2020, after briefing by the parties.     
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-8, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-8, and 
Defendants’ Exhibits A-B.  Testimony under oath was also taken from the claimant, 
Chrysanne Reding, and Rachel Frith.  Marla Happel was appointed the official reporter 
and custodian of the notes of the proceeding.  All exhibits were received into evidence.     
STIPULATIONS 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Nov-10  10:42:23     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 2 
 
 
File Number 5064796: 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged injury. 
  
2. The claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the scope of 
employment, on October 17, 2017.   
 
3. The alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of recovery. 
 
4. The commencement date of permanent disability benefits, if any are awarded, is 
September 13, 2018. 
 
5. The claimant had gross earnings of $677.87 per week, was married, and entitled 
to two exemptions. 
 
6. The weekly rate is $450.63.   
 
7. The costs listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 7 have been paid. 
Additionally, there is no dispute as to the entitlement for temporary disability and/or 
healing period benefits.  The defendants waived their affirmative defenses. 
File Number 5068121: 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged injury. 
  
2. The claimant had gross earnings of $714.53 per week, was married, and entitled 
to two exemptions. 
 
3. The weekly rate is $477.66.   
 
4. Although medical expenses are disputed, the medical providers would testify as 
to the reasonableness of their fees and/or treatment set forth in the listed 
expenses and defendants are not offering contrary evidence. 
 
5. Although causal connection of the medical expenses to a work injury cannot be 
stipulated, the listed expenses are at least causally connected to the medical 
condition(s) upon which the claim of injury is based.   
 
6. The costs listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 7 have been paid. 
Additionally, there is no dispute as to the entitlement for temporary disability and/or 
healing period benefits.  There is no dispute as to the entitlement to credits against any 
award.  The defendants waived their affirmative defenses. 
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 3 
 
 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
File Number 5064796: 
1. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability.   
  
2. The extent of permanent disability, if any is awarded.   
 
3. Whether the disability is an industrial disability. 
 
4. Whether the claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
examination (IME) pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
 
5. Whether the claimant is entitled to alternate care pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.27. 
 
6. Whether the claimant is entitled to an assessment of costs. 
File Number 5068121: 
1. Whether the claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of, and in the 
course of, employment, on March 8, 2019.   
  
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery. 
 
3. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability.   
 
4. The extent of permanent disability, if any is awarded. 
 
5. Whether the disability is an industrial disability. 
 
6. Whether the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any are awarded, is May 9, 2019.   
 
7. Whether the claimant is entitled to reimbursement of medical expenses as 
listed in Joint Exhibit 8. 
 
a. Whether the fees or prices charged by the providers are fair and 
reasonable. 
b. Whether the treatment was reasonable and necessary. 
c. Whether the listed expenses are causally related to the work injury. 
d. Whether the requested expenses were authorized by the defendants.   
 

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 4 
 
 
8. Whether the claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an IME pursuant to 
Iowa Code 85.39. 
 
9. Whether the claimant is entitled to alternate care pursuant to Iowa Code 
85.27. 
 
10. Whether the claimant is entitled to an assessment of costs.   
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Chrysanne Reding, the claimant, was 57 years old at the time of the hearing.  
She is currently a resident of Dubuque, Iowa.  (Testimony).  She is married.  
(Testimony).  She graduated from Hempstead High School with average grades.  
(Testimony; Claimant’s Exhibit 3:1).  She attended cosmetology school, and graduated 
with honors in 1983.  (Testimony).  After graduating cosmetology school, she worked as 
a cosmetologist for three years.  (Testimony).  She has not worked in cosmetology 
since 1987.  (Testimony).  From 1987 through 1998, Ms. Reding worked various service 
industry jobs, including as a bartender/waitress and a cashier/stocker.  (CE 3:3).  She 
also worked in data entry, as a printer, and for a bank.  (CE 3:3).   
Ms. Reding began employment with Nordstrom Distribution Center (hereinafter 
“Nordstrom”) in 1998 through an employment agency.  (CE 3:3; Testimony).  She 
became an employee of Nordstrom in 2000.  (CE 3:3; Testimony).  She is still employed 
by Nordstrom.  (Testimony).  Her job description includes continuous walking and 
standing.  (CE  4:2).  She also was required to reach at or below shoulder height.  (CE 
4:2).  The job description also listed the ability to frequently lift/lower below her waist up 
to 10 pounds, lift/lower between her waist and chest up to 25 pounds, push/pull up to 10 
pounds of force, and lift/lower above her shoulder height up to 25 pounds.  (CE 4:2).  
The job description also noted occasional carrying of 10 to 25 pounds, pushing/pulling 
from 11 to 25 pounds, lifting waist to shoulder height 25 to 40 pounds, and 
lifting/lowering above the shoulder 25 to 50 pounds.  (CE 4:2).  She held several 
positions at Nordstrom including processing boxes, processing returns, processing shoe 
orders, and processing hanging items.  (Testimony).  She also worked as a trainer for at 
least 10 years.  (Testimony).  While not acting as a trainer, she earned $17.75 per hour.  
(Testimony).  While training, she earned an extra $1.05 per hour to make her hourly 
earnings $18.80 per hour.  (Testimony).  One week before the first date of injury at 
issue in this case, Nordstrom took Ms. Reding off training duties.  (Testimony).  In 2007, 
Ms. Reding suffered a previous workers’ compensation injury to her shoulder due to 
working above her shoulder.  (Testimony).  She visited Finley Hospital in Dubuque, 
Iowa, for this injury.  (JE 1:1-1:5).  She complained of bilateral shoulder pain that was 
worse on the left than the right.  (JE 1:1).  She also complained of neck pain.  (JE 2:1-
2).  She was assessed with no permanent injury from this work incident.  (JE 1:4).   

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 5 
 
 
In June of 2013, Ms. Reding reported to Stephen Dalsing, D.C., with complaints 
of moderate neck pain, moderate mid back pain, and moderate low back pain.  (JE 3:1).  
She followed up with Dr. Dalsing in August of 2014 with the same complaints.  (JE 3:2).  
In May of 2015, Ms. Reding returned to Dr. Dalsing’s office with complaints of 
moderately severe pain in both hips, moderately severe mid back pain, and moderate 
neck pain on both sides.  (JE 3:3-6).  Dr. Dalsing provided repeat care to Ms. Reding for 
the same body parts in August of 2015.  (JE 3:6).  Ms. Reding again followed-up with 
Dr. Dalsing in December of 2015 through January of 2016 with continued complaints of 
mid back pain, upper back pain, moderate neck pain on both sides, and mild pain in 
both hips.  (JE 3:7-10).  Ms. Reding continued with sporadic chiropractic care through 
September of 2017.  (JE 3:11-13).   
On October 17, 2017, while working at Nordstrom, Ms. Reding was processing 
boxes.  (Testimony).  Lifting freight caused a strain on her shoulders.  (Testimony).  She 
had a problem in the right shoulder area.  (Testimony).  She felt a tearing into the 
shoulder blade and neck.  (Testimony).  She was put on light duty for about a year, 
which included clerical work.  (Testimony).  After a time, Nordstrom returned her to a 
processor role on the full line where she could work without lifting or pulling.  
(Testimony). 
Ms. Reding reported to Medical Associates Clinic on October 23, 2017, where 
Emily Armstrong, PA-C, examined her for complaints of a new injury to the right 
shoulder while working.  (JE 4:1-3).  Ms. Reding reported injuring her shoulder 10 years 
prior due to repetitive use, and the pain returned.  (JE 4:1).  Ms. Reding indicated that 
she held a tape gun with her upper right extremity, and that pulling the tape gun towards 
her caused her pain.  (JE 4:1).  She complained of pain being 3/10 and 7-8/10 when 
she is using it.  (JE 4:1).  Someone at Nordstrom gave her a band to do stretching 
exercises, which caused the front of her shoulder to hurt.  (JE 4:1).  She had no swelling 
or deformity to her right shoulder, but did have tenderness with palpation of her AC joint, 
supraspinatus fossa, infraspinatus, and teres minor regions.  (JE 4:1).  Her left shoulder 
had mild tenderness to the coracoid process, but otherwise had no tenderness.  (JE 
4:1).  Physician Assistant Armstrong opined that Ms. Reding’s right shoulder pain 
seems to be coming from her supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and teres minor, based upon 
her examination.  (JE 4:2).  Physician Assistant Armstrong further opined that this 
appeared to be a strain rather than a partial tear, and may have represented an acute 
exacerbation of underlying chronic shoulder problems.  (JE 4:2).  Physician Assistant 
Armstrong prescribed Ibuprofen, and provided restrictions including: no more than 10 
pounds lifting/pushing/pulling while keeping her right elbow at her side, and no moving 
her right elbow away from her body while working.  (JE 4:2).  An x-ray was also done on 
October 23, 2017, which showed no acute findings, and minimal osteoarthritis involving 
the acromioclavicular joint.  (JE 4:4).   
On November 27, 2017, Ms. Reding returned to Medical Associates Clinic for a 
recheck of her right shoulder pain with Physician Assistant Armstrong.  (JE 4:5).  Ms. 
Reding rated her pain 4/10, which increased with activity.  (JE 4:5).  Ms. Reding further 
noted that therapy was not helping and in fact hurt her shoulder.  (JE 4:5).  Ms. Reding 

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 6 
 
 
felt she worsened since her last evaluation.  (JE 4:5).  Her pain also increased with any 
resistance movement of her right arm away from her body.  (JE 4:5).  Ms. Reding also 
reported that her left shoulder was a little sore, but she blamed this on overuse due to 
her right shoulder issues.  (JE 4:5).  She continued to have mild tenderness with 
palpation of her AC joint, moderate tenderness with palpation of the supraspinatus 
fossa, infraspinatus, and teres minor.  (JE 4:5).  Ms. Reding also had slight right lower 
cervical paraspinous musculature tenderness, but no midline or left-sided neck 
tenderness.  (JE 4:5).  Physician Assistant Armstrong administered a steroid injection 
into the right shoulder and recommended continued physical therapy.  (JE 4:5).  
Physician Assistant Armstrong released Ms. Reding to work with restrictions of no use 
of her right arm for that day.  (JE 4:5).  Starting on November 28, 2017, her restrictions 
included: maximum 10 pound lift/push/pull with her right arm while keeping her elbow at 
her side, and no overhead work with her right arm.  (JE 4:5).  Physician Assistant 
Armstrong wanted to see her back in three weeks for a recheck.  (JE 4:5).   
On December 22, 2017, Ms. Reding had an MRI with contrast of her right 
shoulder.  (JE 4:6).  Thomas J. Knudtson, M.D., interpreted the MRI.  (JE 4:6).  Dr. 
Knudtson’s impressions were mild tendinopathy involving the supraspinatus and 
infraspinatus tendons without rotator cuff tearing, mild osteoarthritis involving the 
acromioclavicular joint, and benign enchondroma versus cystic enthesopathic changes 
within the medial humeral head.  (JE 4:6-7).   
Following the right shoulder MRI, Ms. Reding reported to Medical Associates 
Clinic on December 26, 2017, where Physician Assistant Armstrong performed an 
additional examination.  (JE 4:8).  Ms. Reding indicated that she felt about the same as 
her previous visit, and that her pain varied depending on her activity.  (JE 4:8).  She 
reported intermittent radiating pain to her back and down her right arm.  (JE 4:8).  The 
previous injection provided no improvement.  (JE 4:8).  Ms. Reding noted that she 
followed and tolerated the previously imposed restrictions.  (JE 4:8).  Physician 
Assistant Armstrong’s diagnoses included: arthritis of the right acromioclavicular joint, 
pain in the right shoulder, and tendinopathy of the right rotator cuff.  (JE 4:8).  Physician 
Assistant Armstrong noted, “[b]ased on patient’s current clinical examination I feel the 
majority of her pain is coming from her infraspinatus and supraspinatus; her AC joint is 
mildly tender.”  (JE 4:8).  Ms. Reding was referred to orthopedics for further evaluation, 
and was released to work within her previous restrictions.  (JE 4:8).   
Ms. Reding returned to Medical Associates Clinic on March 7, 2018, where Scott 
Schemmel, M.D., examined her for right shoulder complaints.  (JE 4:9).  Dr. Schemmel 
noted that Ms. Reding returned to full and unrestricted work at Nordstrom as of 
February 5, 2018.  (JE 4:9).  Ms. Reding complained of bilateral shoulder pain in the 
area of the “upper trap” and periscapular pain.  (JE 4:9).  She also had anterior shoulder 
pain.  (JE 4:9).  Dr. Schemmel noted that Ms. Reding responded positively to an AC 
injection in the past, but was now complaining of bilateral shoulder pain with the left 
being worse than the right.  (JE 4:9).  Dr. Schemmel opined that surgical intervention 
was not called for, and that Ms. Reding’s injuries were repetitive in nature.  (JE 4:9).  Dr. 
Schemmel concluded that Ms. Reding needed additional physical therapy, postural 

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 7 
 
 
retraining, and/or workplace modifications to accommodate her shoulders.  (JE 4:9).  Dr. 
Schemmel provided a full, unrestricted work release effective March 7, 2018.  (JE 4:10).   
On March 19, 2018, Ms. Reding followed-up with Physician Assistant Armstrong 
at Medical Associates Clinic.  (JE 4:11).  Ms. Reding noted that her pain was “on/off 
depending on use.”  (JE 4:11).  The record notes a right shoulder AC joint steroid 
injection on January 10, 2018, which provided complete resolution of her right shoulder 
pain for three to four weeks.  (JE 4:11).  After that time, her pain gradually returned, to 
the point that it felt the same during this visit as it did in December of 2017.  (JE 4:11).  
Her left shoulder worsened since her previous visit, which Ms. Reding blamed on “trying 
to baby her right shoulder.”  (JE 4:11).  Ms. Reding noted an ability to complete her 
workday and “tolerate it,” but that she would not be able to work overtime.  (JE 4:11).  
Physician Assistant Armstrong assessed her with bilateral shoulder pain, and 
periscapular pain.  (JE 4:11).  The provider ordered additional physical therapy, and 
indicated that Ms. Reding’s treatment options were nearing their end.  (JE 4:11).  
Physician Assistant Armstrong told Ms. Reding that a functional capacity exam (FCE) 
needed to be considered for a determination of permanent restrictions.  (JE 4:12).   
Ms. Reding returned to Medical Associates Clinic on May 10, 2018, for a repeat 
consultation with Dr. Schemmel.  (JE 4:13).  Ms. Reding noted the relief that she 
received from the AC joint injection in January of 2018; however, she further noted that 
the relief was fleeting and faded after three weeks.  (JE 4:13).  Dr. Schemmel disagreed 
with Ms. Reding, and noted that the symptoms she alleged during her March 7, 2018, 
visit were not the same as their initial visit.  (JE 4:13).  The symptoms complained of 
were not consistent with an isolated AC joint problem, and were “more myofascial 
muscular” and possibly centrally mediated.  (JE 4:13).  Based upon the previous 
presentation, Dr. Schemmel did not feel as though Ms. Reding was a candidate for a 
distal clavicle excision.  (JE 4:13).  Her pain continued to be “more global than isolated 
to the AC joint” although she had pain in the area of the AC joint.  (JE 4:13).  Dr. 
Schemmel explained to Ms. Reding that there was no definitive evidence of her 
symptoms relating to her right shoulder.  (JE 4:13).  Dr. Schemmel agreed to perform 
another AC joint injection, and make a treatment decision based on the results of that 
injection.  (JE 4:13).  Dr. Schemmel completed the injection, and increased Ms. 
Reding’s work restrictions to lifting/carrying/pushing/pulling up to 5 pounds to waist 
height.  (JE 4:13-14).     
On June 1, 2018, Ms. Reding again visited Dr. Schemmel for a recheck of her 
previous right shoulder complaints.  (JE 4:15).  She had no response to the AC joint 
injection received three weeks prior.  (JE 4:15).  She complained primarily of pain at the 
base of her neck into the upper trapezius and periscapular region.  (JE 4:15).  Dr. 
Schemmel noted, “I think that at this point we have effectively ruled out her AC joint as 
any significant source of her discomfort.”  (JE 4:15).  Dr. Schemmel recommended no 
surgical intervention and opined that Ms. Reding’s pain was not coming from her AC 
joint or rotator cuff.  (JE 4:15).  He referred her back to Tri-State Occupational Medicine.  
(JE 4:15).  Dr. Schemmel continued the previous restrictions as laid out in his May 10, 
2018 note.  (JE 4:16).   

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 8 
 
 
Erin J. Kennedy, M.D., examined Ms. Reding on June 12, 2018, for a recheck of 
her bilateral shoulder pain.  (JE 4:17).  Ms. Reding stated that her shoulders hurt very 
much, and that any time her right arm abducted, it was painful.  (JE 4:17).  Ms. Reding 
reported pain at the top of the shoulder and pointed from the AC area to the cervical 
spine.  (JE 4:17).  She claimed to Dr. Kennedy that if she attempted to use the arm 
away from her body, it resulted in sharp posterior neck and upper back pain.  (JE 4:17).  
Ms. Reding reported to Dr. Kennedy that her right shoulder was “far worse” than the left.  
(JE 4:17).  Her left shoulder felt the same as it had since her 2007 workers’ 
compensation injury.  (JE 4:17).  She also reported that her neck pain felt muscular, and 
had no radiation.  (JE 4:17).  Her left shoulder had normal range of motion, and pain 
could not be reproduced.  (JE 4:18).  Dr. Kennedy diagnosed Ms. Reding with persistent 
nonfocal right shoulder pain.  (JE 4:18).  Dr. Kennedy opined that the only possible 
consideration “might be a bursa about the suprascapular region deeper in shoulder,” but 
noted that this was not demonstrated on a previous MRI of the area.  (JE 4:18).  Dr. 
Kennedy recommended an FCE to set permanent restrictions, but allowed the 
possibility of a second opinion.  (JE 4:18).  Dr. Kennedy allowed her to work with a 10 
pound restriction.  (JE 4:18).   
Ms. Reding attended an FCE on August 27, 2018, conducted by Aaron Timm, 
DPT, at E3 Work Therapy Services.  (JE 5:1-13).  Mr. Timm concluded that Ms. 
Reding’s effort was inconsistent during a repeated measures protocol.  (JE 5:1).  Ms. 
Reding failed to give maximum voluntary effort during the FCE, which did not allow the 
examiner to determine her maximum lifting capabilities and/or functional capabilities.  
(JE 5:1).  Specifically, Ms. Reding failed five of seven validity criteria during the XRTS 
hand strength assessment.  (JE 5:1).  She also had an absence of correlation between 
lifts of unmarked steel bars and the corresponding lifts on the XRTS lever arm.  (JE 
5:1).  Finally, Ms. Reding lifted and carried more weight than documented as a lift 
described by Ms. Reding as a “maximum lifting capacity” when lifting capacities were 
assessed.  (JE 5:1).  Due to these issues, the administrator of the FCE deemed it 
invalid.  (JE 5:1).  Ms. Reding’s functional abilities for lifting included: bilateral lifting from 
10” to the waist of 33.76 pounds; bilateral lift from 20” to the waist of 33.76 pounds; 
bilateral carrying of 31.86 pounds; and, bilateral lifting above shoulder level of 13.51 
pounds.  (JE 5:3).  Ms. Reding testified that she gave maximum effort, and that she was 
told that she could not ask questions during the FCE.  (Testimony).   
On September 12, 2018, Ms. Reding returned to Dr. Kennedy’s office to discuss 
the results of her FCE.  (JE 4:19).  Ms. Reding indicated no changes since her last visit.  
(JE 4:19).  The FCE results were invalid.  (JE 4:19).  Ms. Reding demonstrated an 
ability to lift a minimum of 33 pounds, and due to submaximal effort, Dr. Kennedy 
opined that Ms. Reding can actually lift more than this.  (JE 4:19).  Dr. Kennedy’s 
assessment or plan indicated that Ms. Reding had nonfocal right shoulder pain with 
questionable validity of pain report and function that persisted despite a “thorough 
course of eval (sic) and treatment.”  (JE 4:19).  Dr. Kennedy declared that Ms. Reding 
reached maximum medical improvement, and returned her to full duty.  (JE 4:19).  
Additionally, Dr. Kennedy noted that she could not rate any permanent impairment for 
Ms. Reding due to reliance on range of motion for the shoulder as Dr. Kennedy felt that 

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 9 
 
 
Ms. Reding would not put forth maximum effort.  (JE 4:19).  Therefore, Dr. Kennedy 
opined that Ms. Reding sustained a zero percent permanent partial impairment to her 
bilateral shoulders from this work incident.  (JE 4:19).   
After this time, Nordstrom moved Ms. Reding to a processor or “full line” position 
so that she could work without having to lift or pull.  (Testimony).   
Ms. Reding attended another FCE on February 5, 2019, with Daryl Short, DPT.  
(CE 2:1-6).  The FCE history noted that Ms. Reding injured her neck, back and bilateral 
shoulders due to repetitive work in the course of her employment at Nordstrom.  (CE 
2:1).  She limited her activities requiring her to reach away from her body due to 
ongoing pain.  (CE 2:1).  Mr. Short measured decreased range of motion in Ms. 
Reding’s neck, especially upon flexion and rotation.  (CE 2:2).  Ms. Reding’s shoulder 
range of motion was within normal limits on the right and left sides, but did have some 
minor loss of strength.  (CE 2:3).  Mr. Short found that Ms. Reding engaged in a 
consistent effort and performance with all test items.  (CE 2:4).  Ms. Reding reported her 
pain at the outset to be 0/10, which increased to 3/10 in her right shoulder and neck as 
she progressed with the FCE.  (CE 2:5).  Mr. Short found slight or no limitations in the 
following areas: forward bent standing, sitting, standing work, walking, stairs, lifting 
waist to/from floor up to 20 pounds, and front carry up to 25 pounds up to 50 feet.  (CE 
2:5).  Mr. Short found some limitations in the following areas: elevated work, 
kneeling/half-kneeling, reaching, lifting waist to/from floor up to 25 pounds, lifting waist 
to/from crown up to 10 pounds, front carry up to 30 pounds up to 50 feet, right arm 
overhead lift up to 4 pounds, and left arm overhead lift up to 5 pounds.  (CE 2:5).  Mr. 
Short found significant limitations with the following areas: lifting waist to/from floor up to 
35 pounds, lifting waist to/from crown up to 15 pounds, front carry up to 40 pounds up to 
50 feet, right arm overhead lift up to 6 pounds, and left arm overhead lift up to 7 pounds.  
(CE 2:5).  Based upon the WorkWell protocol, and the reduced strength and endurance 
to Ms. Reding’s right shoulder and neck, Mr. Short, placed her capabilities in the lower 
medium category of physical demand.  (CE 2:6).  This means lifting up to 25 to 30 
pounds on an occasional basis at waist level.  (CE 2:6).  Mr. Short recommended that 
she limit material and non-material handling activities at or above chest level to only an 
occasional basis.  (CE 2:6).  Mr. Short spent just under three hours completing the 
examination.  (CE 2:6).   
Ms. Reding reported for an independent medical evaluation (IME) with Sunil 
Bansal, M.D., M.P.H., on February 15, 2019.  (CE 1:1-23).  Dr. Bansal is board certified 
in occupational medicine.  (CE 1:1; CE 1:47-48).  Dr. Bansal reviewed Ms. Reding’s 
lengthy treatment history, back to 2006.  (CE 1:1-17).  Ms. Reding indicated to Dr. 
Bansal that her left shoulder still caught and clicked even though it did not feel weak.  
(CE 1:18).  Dr. Bansal found tenderness to palpation over Ms. Reding’s cervical 
paraspinal musculature, that was greater on the right side.   (CE 1:18).  Ms. Reding’s 
right shoulder had tenderness on palpation with the greatest at the acromioclavicular 
joint into the subacromial bursa.  (CE 1:18).  Her left shoulder had no tenderness on 
palpation, and a full range of motion.  (CE 1:19).  Dr. Bansal opined that Ms. Reding’s 
diagnoses included: cervical myofascial pain syndrome, and right and left shoulder 

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 10 
 
 
rotator cuff tendinopathy.  (CE 1:20).  Ms. Reding continued to complain of pain in her 
posterior right shoulder.  (CE 1:20).  She reported using her left arm to lift most of the 
weight.  (CE 1:20).  Dr. Bansal noted that Ms. Reding incurred cumulative overuse 
injuries to her bilateral shoulders; however, her right shoulder injury was greater than 
her left.  (CE 1:21).  Dr. Bansal further noted that Ms. Reding’s job duties required her to 
work in a position that stressed the acromioclavicular joint, leading to inflammation of 
the subacromial space.  (CE 1:21).  Dr. Bansal also related cervical myofascial pain 
syndrome to Ms. Reding’s shoulder complaints.  (CE 1:21).  Dr. Bansal opined that Ms. 
Reding had not received adequate treatment, so the impairment rating was permanent 
absent further treatment.  (CE 1:22).  Based upon Dr. Bansal’s examination, he 
provided Ms. Reding with an 8 percent upper extremity impairment rating, and 
translated that to a 5 percent impairment to the body as a whole.  (CE 1:22).  Dr. Bansal 
also provided a 5 percent whole person impairment rating due to Ms. Reding’s neck 
issues.  (CE 1:22).  Dr. Bansal endorsed the permanent restrictions assigned by Short 
Physical Therapy on February 5, 2019.  (CE 1:23).  Dr. Bansal opined that Ms. Reding 
reached MMI on September 12, 2018.  (CE 1:23).  Finally, Dr. Bansal recommended a 
subacromial decompression with distal clavicle excision if Ms. Reding’s shoulder 
worsened.  (CE 1:23).  For routine maintenance of the right shoulder, Dr. Bansal 
recommended intermittent steroid injections.  (CE 1:23).  He also recommended 
intermittent trigger point injections to her neck.  (CE 1:23).   
On March 8, 2019, Ms. Reding worked on the full line position.  (Testimony).  
She reported pulling shoe boxes out of larger boxes.  (Testimony).  Due to her previous 
injuries, she had to tip the boxes in order to remove the smaller shoe boxes.  
(Testimony).  Ms. Reding reported feeling a pop in her left shoulder, and then 
immediately stopped working.  (Testimony).  Ms. Reding claims that she reported the 
injury to Nordstrom.  (Testimony).  Initially, her primary care physician would not 
examine her due to it being a work related incident.  (Testimony).   
Cynthia Konz, M.D., issued a restriction for Ms. Reding on March 15, 2019.  Dr. 
Konz wrote that Ms. Reding was to avoid continuous and repeated movements with her 
left arm.  (JE 6:1).  Dr. Konz also provided a 10 pound weight restriction.  (JE 6:1).  Dr. 
Konz wrote that the restrictions were to be in place until a treatment plan was outlined.  
(JE 6:1).   
On March 22, 2019, Ms. Reding had an MRI of her left shoulder at Finley 
Hospital.  (JE 1:7-8).  Pranav Patel, M.D., interpreted the MRI.  (JE 1:8).  Ms. Reding 
noted a history of left shoulder pain over the previous two weeks, along with repetitive 
motion.  (JE 1:7).  Dr. Patel’s impressions based upon his review of the MRI included 
chronic insertional tendinopathy of the distal supraspinatus tendon with mild 
undersurface partial tearing measuring less than 20 percent of the distal tendon 
thickness, and mild left acromioclavicular joint degenerative joint disease.  (JE 1:8).  
Dr. Konz issued another letter, dated March 26, 2019, which indicated that Ms. 
Reding was to remain off work at a time to be decided based upon a pending orthopedic 
evaluation.  (JE 6:2).   

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 11 
 
 
Ms. Reding returned to Dr. Kennedy’s office on April 1, 2019, with complaints of 
a new injury to her left shoulder.  (JE 4:21).  Ms. Reding outlined her previous history, 
including that after returning to Nordstrom, she worked on the “full line” where she was 
able to keep her elbows close to her body.  (JE 4:21).  In January and February of 2019, 
Ms. Reding reported that she was placed in other departments, and was lifting a great 
deal more.  (JE 4:21).  She reported working in the shoe department on March 8, 2019, 
when she felt a “tearing” pain in her left shoulder.  (JE 4:21).  Reaching, pushing or 
pulling increased the pain, which Ms. Reding indicated to Dr. Kennedy stems from the 
posterior cuff.  (JE 4:21).  Dr. Kennedy recounted the results of the March 22, 2019, 
MRI, and further recounted that Ms. Reding felt a relief in pain after keeping her elbows 
close to her body.  (JE 4:21).  On physical examination, Dr. Kennedy found Ms. Reding 
to be nontender over the AC joint, shoulder girdle, and upper back musculature.  (JE 
4:21).  She did note a focal area of tenderness over the posterior cuff.  (JE 4:21).  Dr. 
Kennedy assessed Ms. Reding with left shoulder pain, and noted that the MRI of March 
22, 2019, showed chronic findings without any acute issues.  (JE 4:22).  While Ms. 
Reding reported feeling worse, Dr. Kennedy opined that she may have provoked her 
chronic condition with activities outside of her shoulder tolerance.  (JE 4:22).  Dr. 
Kennedy noted several courses of action including a referral to an orthopedic doctor, or 
attempting an injection to restore Ms. Reding to her previous levels of symptoms.  (JE 
4:22).  Ms. Reding elected to have an injection.  (JE 4:22).  Dr. Kennedy noted that if 
Ms. Reding’s symptoms returned to baseline, it would be nearly impossible for there to 
be a worsening of her chronic pathology.  (JE 4:22).  Dr. Kennedy performed the 
injection procedure.  (JE 4:22).  Dr. Kennedy gave restrictions of no use of the left arm 
from April 1, 2019, through April 3, 2019, and from April 4, 2019, through her next visit, 
Ms. Reding was to keep her left elbow at her side.  (JE 4:23).   
On April 11, 2019, Ms. Reding returned to Dr. Kennedy’s office noting that the 
injection worked, and that she experienced minimal pain in the front of her shoulder.  
(JE 4:24).  Ms. Reding described her pain as her “usual discomfort.”  (JE 4:24).  Dr. 
Kennedy explained to Ms. Reding that it was unlikely that a new tear would respond 
well to an injection.  (JE 4:24).  Dr. Kennedy opined that Ms. Reding had a worsening of 
symptoms, but not pathology of chronic tearing.  (JE 4:24).  Ms. Reding demonstrated a 
full and fluid range of motion of her left shoulder in all directions without grimace, and 
cross body testing showed negative impingement at the AC joint.  (JE 4:24).  Dr. 
Kennedy placed Ms. Reding at MMI without any permanent partial impairment for any 
work-related contribution, as it was limited to a worsening of chronic symptoms.  (JE 
4:24-25).  Dr. Kennedy gave Ms. Reding permanent personal restrictions to work with 
both arms below shoulder level with a 25 pound maximum.  (JE 4:25-26).  Dr. Kennedy 
discharged her to her personal care provider.  (JE 4:25).   
Ms. Reding visited Stephen Pierotti, M.D., on May 7, 2019, with complaints of 
bilateral shoulder pain.  (JE 7:1-3).  Dr. Pierotti noted Ms. Reding’s long history of 
shoulder pain starting two to three years prior.  Dr. Pierotti also noted that Ms. Reding 
was doing well with her right shoulder, and that while she had intermittent pain, it did not 
radiate down her arm. (JE 7:1).  Ms. Reding specifically told Dr. Pierotti that her 
shoulder pain was positional and usually only occurred at shoulder height or above.  (JE 

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 12 
 
 
7:1).  Over the last two to three months, Ms. Reding indicated that pain developed in her 
left shoulder, despite no injury to that shoulder.  (JE 7:1).  Ms. Reding received no 
injections or treatment to her left shoulder.  (JE 7:1).  On physical examination, Dr. 
Pierotti found no AC joint tenderness in either shoulder.  (JE 7:1).  Dr. Pierotti found full 
active motion in Ms. Reding’s shoulders.  (JE 7:1).  Based upon Dr. Pierotti’s 
examination, he opined that Ms. Reding’s symptoms were due to bilateral impingement, 
tendinopathy, and a partial tear.  (JE 7:2).  Dr. Pierotti did not think surgery was called 
for.  (JE 7:2).  Dr. Pierotti recommended continuing a home exercise program, and 
offered a cortisone injection if Ms. Reding’s pain increased.  (JE 7:2).   
Ms. Reding called Dr. Pierotti’s office on May 9, 2019, and requested a work 
release indicating no lifting above shoulder height.  (JE 7:4).  Dr. Pierotti approved this.  
(JE 7:4).  Someone at Dr. Pierotti’s office drafted a release in effect “until further notice” 
and left it for Ms. Reding at the front desk.  (JE 7:4-5).     
On May 10, 2019, Dr. Kennedy responded to a letter from counsel for defendants 
and outlined her opinions concerning Ms. Reding’s alleged injuries.  (Defendants’ 
Exhibit A:3-5).  Dr. Kennedy noted never diagnosing Ms. Reding with a cervical spine 
injury or concern.  (DE A:3).  While Ms. Reding reported neck pain to Dr. Kennedy, Dr. 
Kennedy opined that the pain was myofascial and reflected the trapezius muscle.  (DE 
A:3).  Dr. Kennedy noted that a dysfunctional shoulder can cause a scapula to become 
“overused” and sore due to bearing a greater proportion of the weight of the arm than is 
typical.  (DE A:3).  Dr. Kennedy reinforced her opinion that the residual symptoms and 
dysfunction of the bilateral shoulders are personal, and not work related.  (DE A:4).  Dr. 
Kennedy noted that a short exposure to a different department than her primary 
department would not result in a work related injury.  (DE A:4).  Dr. Kennedy reported 
that Ms. Reding described the typical job tasks in her regular department at the time of 
the injury as being “highly variable,” not above shoulder level, not repetitive and not 
forceful.  (DE A:4).  Dr. Kennedy also noted “even if work in the department where she 
alleges injury had resulted in a temporary worsening of her bilateral shoulder conditions, 
it is expected that the worsening would resolve and her condition would return to 
baseline with removal from those tasks.”  (DE A:4).  Dr. Kennedy further opined that Ms. 
Reding has had persistent bilateral shoulder pain that does not correlate with her job 
assignment, which suggests a personal shoulder condition that was symptomatic and 
unrelated to shoulder activity.  (DE A:4).  Dr. Kennedy, who is board certified in 
occupational medicine, certified as an independent medical examiner, and certified as a 
medical review officer, noted that she has toured the Nordstrom facility on several 
occasions.  (DE A:3-6).  Dr. Kennedy concluded that Ms. Reding required no work 
restrictions due to her cervical spine.  (DE A:4).  Since the cervical spine condition was 
not work related, Dr. Kennedy assigned no functional impairment rating.  (DE A:4).   
Ms. Reding reported to DBF Westmark PT on May 14, 2019, with complaints of 
pain 2/10 occurring after she extended her arms.  (JE 1:9).  She noted that the pain 
came and went, and was worse when her arms were extended.  (JE 1:9).  Her pain 
affected her sleep.  (JE 1:9).   

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 13 
 
 
On October 1, 2019, Ms. Reding visited Grand River Medical Group and Dr. 
Konz.  (JE 6:3-5).  Ms. Reding described herself as “OK” and that her shoulder pain 
finally improved after physical therapy.  (JE 6:3).  Dr. Konz noted improved range of 
motion in Ms. Reding’s shoulders.  (JE 6:4).  Ms. Reding also reported doing exercises 
for her shoulders.  (JE 6:4).  Ms. Reding took Naprosyn and Aleve for her left shoulder 
pain.  (JE 6:4).   
Dr. Bansal performed another IME on Ms. Reding on June 12, 2020.  (CE 1:24-
46).  On examination, Dr. Bansal again noted tenderness to palpation over the cervical 
paraspinal muscles.  (CE 1:42).  He also noted tenderness to palpation, especially at 
the acromioclavicular joint into the subacromial bursa.  (CE 1:42).  Dr. Bansal also 
found tenderness to palpation in Ms. Reding’s left shoulder.  (CE 1:42).  Dr. Bansal 
continued to diagnose Ms. Reding with cervical myofascial pain syndrome, and right 
and left shoulder rotator cuff tendinopathy.  (CE 1:43).  This diagnoses was unchanged 
from Ms. Reding’s previous IME.  Ms. Reding reported to Dr. Bansal that both of her 
shoulders caused pain.  (CE 1:44).  She could raise her arms to about shoulder level, 
but had difficulty raising them over shoulder level.  (CE 1:44).  Ms. Reding reported 
feeling tight in her shoulders.  (CE 1:44).  Her neck pain radiated into her shoulder 
blades.  (CE 1:44).  She could lift five pounds once with either arm.  (CE 1:44).  Dr. 
Bansal noted, “I stand by the opinions as stated in my prior IME report regarding her 
right shoulder and neck.”  (CE 1:44).  Dr. Bansal opined that Ms. Reding aggravated her 
left shoulder pathology as overuse and overcompensation from her right shoulder.  (CE 
1:44).  Dr. Bansal reinforced this opinion by noting that Ms. Reding relied on her left arm 
more for completing her job tasks.  (CE 1:44).  Dr. Bansal left his impairment ratings to 
Ms. Reding’s right shoulder and neck unchanged.  (CE 1:44).  Dr. Bansal rated Ms. 
Reding’s left upper extremity with a 3 percent impairment, which he translated to a 2 
percent impairment of the body as a whole.  (CE 1:45).  Dr. Bansal adopted the 
restrictions as assigned by the February 5, 2019, FCE, and placed Ms. Reding at MMI 
effective June 12, 2020.  (CE 1:45).  Dr. Bansal opined that Ms. Reding would benefit 
from intermittent steroid injections to her bilateral shoulders.  (CE 1:45).  If her pain 
worsened, Dr. Bansal suggested a surgical decompression.  (CE 1:45).   
Since the alleged injuries to her shoulders, Ms. Reding experienced difficulties 
around the house.  She described needing to rethink how to do certain activities which 
require lifting.  (Testimony).  For example, she has difficulty lifting groceries or laundry 
detergent, gardening has become increasingly difficult, mopping and sweeping are 
difficult, vacuuming causes increased pain, and she has experienced great difficulty with 
sleeping.  (Testimony).  Ms. Reding expressed a desire to continue to work for 
Nordstrom.  (Testimony).  Ms. Reding now makes $19.70 per hour at Nordstrom, an 
increase over her wage at the time of the injury.  (Testimony).  She noted that she has 
not been back to training since prior to the 2017 work injury.  (Testimony).  She claims 
that this causes her to miss out on $1.05 per hour in wages.  (Testimony).  She would 
like to retire at age 65.  (Testimony).   
Rachel Frith testified on behalf of Nordstrom.  (Testimony).  She is a Health & 
Safety Technician, and has worked in the position since June of 2018.  (Testimony).  

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 14 
 
 
She started at Nordstrom in 2016 as a processor on the full line.  (Testimony).  Ms. Frith 
testified that Ms. Reding is no longer a trainer, or asked to be a trainer due to the 
approach that she took with other employees.  (Testimony).  Ms. Frith conceded that 
Ms. Reding’s restrictions would also preclude her from being a trainer.  (Testimony).  
She also testified that, for a time, Ms. Reding was laid off due to the ongoing COVID-19 
pandemic; however, Ms. Frith noted that this was a voluntary layoff.  (Testimony).   
Ms. Reding requested no specific referral for additional medical care or physical 
therapy by way of alternate care, she simply requested alternate care.   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of 
Appellate Procedure 6.14(6)(e).  
To receive workers’ compensation benefits, an injured employee must prove, by 
a preponderance of the evidence that the employee’s injuries arose out of, and in the 
course of the employee’s employment with the employer.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 
528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 1995).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place and 
circumstances of the injury.  Id.  An injury arises out of employment when a causal 
relationship exists between the employment and the injury.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 
552 N.W.2d 143, 151 (Iowa 1996).  The injury must be a rational consequence of a 
hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to the employment.  
Koehler Elec. v. Willis, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000).  The Iowa Supreme Court has 
held that an injury occurs “in the course of employment” when: 
[i]t is within the period of employment at a place where the employee 
reasonably may be in performing his duties, and while he is fulfilling those 
duties or engaged in doing something incidental thereto.  An injury in the 
course of employment embraces all injuries received while employed in 
furthering the employer’s business and injuries received on the employer’s 
premises, provided that the employee’s presence must ordinarily be 
required at the place of the injury, or, if not so required, employee’s 
departure from the usual place of employment must not amount to an 
abandonment of employment or be an act wholly foreign to his usual work.  
An employee does not cease to be in the course of his employment merely 
because he is not actually engaged in doing some specifically prescribed 
task, if, in the course of his employment, he does some act which he deems 
necessary for the benefit or interest of his employer.   
Farmers Elevator Co. v. Manning, 286 N.W.2d 174, 177 (Iowa 1979).   

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 15 
 
 
 
Whether a claimant’s injury arises out of the claimant’s employment is a “mixed 
question of law and fact.”  Lakeside Casino v. Blue, 743 N.W.2d 169, 173 (Iowa 2007).  
The Iowa Supreme Court has held: 
[t]he factual aspect of this decision requires the [trier of fact] to determine 
the “operative events that [gave] rise to the injury.”  Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 
N.W.2d 213, 218 (Iowa 2006).  Once the facts are determined, a legal 
question remains: “[W]hether the facts, as determined, support a conclusion 
that the injury ‘arose out of … [the] employment,’ under our workers’ 
compensation statute.” 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is 
probable, rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 
148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); 
Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).   
 
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Community School Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 
(Iowa 2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and 
measure the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert 
testimony, even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156.  When 
considering the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the 
examination occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation 
arrangement, the nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, 
experience, training, and practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and 
value” of the opinion.  Rockwell Graphic Systems, Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 
(Iowa 1985).  Unrebutted expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  
Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994).  Supportive 
lay testimony may be used to buttress expert testimony, and therefore is also relevant 
and material to the causation question.   
File No. 5064796: 
 
On October 17, 2017, Ms. Reding was pulling freight from the line when she 
injured her right shoulder.  She alleges a neck injury, as well.  She reported immediate 
right shoulder pain, and development at a later time of neck pain.  During her initial 
treatment with Medical Associates in late October of 2017, Physician Assistant 
Armstrong opined that Ms. Reding’s right shoulder pain appeared to come from her 
supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and teres minor regions.  Ms. Reding had several 
injections into her right shoulder, which provided minimal relief.  In December of 2017, 
Ms. Reding had an MRI of her right shoulder, which showed mild tendinopathy involving 
the supraspinatus and infraspinatus tendons without rotator cuff tearing, along with mild 
osteoarthritis involving the acromioclavicular joint.  After several visits and injections by 

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 16 
 
 
Dr. Schemmel, he concluded that the source of her discomfort was neither her AC joint 
or her rotator cuff.  Dr. Schemmel rejected the idea of surgical intervention and returned 
her care to Dr. Kennedy.  Dr. Kennedy reported by June of 2018, that Ms. Reding had 
normal range of motion in her right shoulder, and diagnosed her with persistent nonfocal 
right shoulder pain, as the alleged pain could not be reproduced upon examination.  Ms. 
Reding had competing FCEs, one of which was declared invalid due to inconsistent 
effort, and another arranged by her counsel.  Of note, the claimant’s arranged FCE with 
Mr. Short showed that Ms. Reding’s range of motion in both shoulders was within 
normal limits.  Finally, Ms. Reding underwent an IME with Dr. Bansal, who found 
tenderness to Ms. Reding’s neck, and diagnosed her with right and left shoulder rotator 
cuff tendinopathy.   
During the course of her treatment, there was minimal discussion of any neck 
pain, and no active diagnoses of a neck injury.  It would be anticipated that an 
examination, imaging, or treatment would be provided should a provider find a credible 
complaint of a neck injury.  Dr. Bansal is the first doctor, during an IME arranged by 
claimant’s counsel, to make any diagnosis related to Ms. Reding’s neck. 
Based upon my review of the evidence and record, I find the opinions of Dr. 
Kennedy and Dr. Schemmel to be more persuasive than that of Dr. Bansal.  I find the 
opinions of Dr. Kennedy and Dr. Schemmel to be more persuasive due mostly to the 
fact that they were treating physicians, who saw Ms. Reding on a routine basis and 
were most aware of her medical history.  I find that Ms. Reding is not entitled to any 
permanency benefits for her right shoulder injury.  I also find that Ms. Reding did not 
carry her burden of proof to show entitlement to any permanency benefits for her 
alleged neck injury.   
Since there is no entitlement found for permanent disability benefits, there is no 
need to discuss the extent of permanent disability, or the type of permanent disability 
benefits owed to the claimant.   
File No. 5068121: 
The claimant contends that the March 8, 2019, injury arose out of, and in the 
course of, Ms. Reding’s employment with Nordstrom.  The defendants contend that Ms. 
Reding had a prior left shoulder injury, and that any pain was connected to that personal 
condition.  Ms. Reding testified that she was pulling shoe boxes out of a larger box on 
March 8, 2019.  Due to her right shoulder injury and previous restrictions to her left 
shoulder, she modified the way that she performed this task.  Ms. Frith testified that 
other Nordstrom employees also modified their performance of this task due to their 
own restrictions or preferences.  Ms. Reding testified that, while she was working, she 
felt a pop in her left shoulder.  She sought additional care from her personal physician, 
and eventually followed up with Dr. Kennedy.  Based upon the evidence in the record, it 
appears that Ms. Reding aggravated a prior shoulder condition while working.  I 
conclude that her alleged injury arose out of, and in the course of, her employment with 
Nordstrom on March 8, 2019.   

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 17 
 
 
In late March of 2019, the claimant had an MRI, which showed chronic insertional 
tendinopathy of the distal supraspinatus tendon with mild undersurface tearing 
measuring less than 20 percent of the distal tendon thickness and mild left 
acromioclavicular joint degenerative joint disease.  Ms. Reding returned to Dr. Kennedy 
on April 1, 2019.  Dr. Kennedy noted that Ms. Reding may have provoked her chronic 
left shoulder condition by undertaking activities outside of her tolerance.  Dr. Kennedy 
offered an injection to the left shoulder, and noted that if Ms. Reding’s pain levels 
returned to their baseline, it would be “nearly impossible” to be a worsening of her 
chronic left shoulder pathology.  Ms. Reding returned to Dr. Kennedy’s office on April 
11, 2019, and indicated that the injection worked.  She further indicated that she 
suffered minimal pain and discomfort to the shoulder beyond her “usual discomfort.”  Dr. 
Kennedy thus concluded that Ms. Reding suffered a worsening of her symptoms, but 
not chronic tearing in the shoulder.  Dr. Kennedy also noted full and fluid range of 
motion with negative impingement in the shoulder during this exam.  Dr. Bansal opined 
in his IME report that Ms. Reding aggravated her prior left shoulder pathology by 
overuse and overcompensation due to the right shoulder injury.   
I find the opinion of Dr. Kennedy, as the treating physician, to be more 
persuasive than the opinion of Dr. Bansal.  The most persuasive findings in this case, 
based on my review, were Dr. Kennedy’s note that if a proposed injection improved Ms. 
Reding’s pain levels, it would be “nearly impossible” that Ms. Reding suffered a 
worsening of her chronic left shoulder pathology.  The injection improved Ms. Reding’s 
subjective pain.   
Therefore, I find that Ms. Reding failed to carry her burden of proof that the injury 
suffered in the course and scope of her employment with Nordstrom is a cause of 
temporary or permanent disability as it relates to her left shoulder.  The claimant is thus 
not entitled to temporary or permanent disability benefits.  Since I found that the 
claimant failed to carry her burden of proof, there is no need to discuss the extent of any 
claimed disability, whether the claimant sustained an industrial disability, or the 
commencement date of any permanent disability benefits.   
Alternate Care  
Iowa Code 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish reasonable 
services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the right to 
choose the care….  The treatment must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction 
to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the employer and 
the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited to treat the 
injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such alternate care, 

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 18 
 
 
the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care.   
 
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the 
employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend 
Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 
(Review-Reopening, October 16, 1975).  An employer’s right to select the provider of 
medical treatment to an injured worker does not include the right to determine how an 
injured worker should be diagnosed, evaluated, treated, or other matters of professional 
medical judgment.  Assmann v. Blue Star Foods, File No. 866389 (Declaratory Ruling, 
May 19, 1988).  Reasonable care includes care necessary to diagnose the condition 
and defendants are not entitled to interfere with the medical judgment of its own treating 
physician.  Pote v. Mickow Corp., File No. 694639 (Review-Reopening, June 17, 1986).   
 
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment - and seeking alternate care – 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable.  See e.g. 
Iowa R. App. P. 14(f)(5); Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 
193, 209 (Iowa 2010); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995).  
Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.  Long v. 
Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). 
 
An application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because 
claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving.  Mere dissatisfaction with 
the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical 
care.  Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not 
reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that care was unduly inconvenient for the 
claimant.  Id.  Because “the employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the 
question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” and injured employee’s 
dissatisfaction with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough to find such 
care unreasonable.  Id.  Reasonable care includes care necessary to diagnose the 
condition, and defendants are not entitled to interfere with the medical judgement of its 
own treating physician.  Pote v. Mickow Corp., File No. 694639 (Review-Reopening, 
June 17, 1986). 
 
In this case, the claimant simply requests continued treatment for her bilateral 
shoulders.  While the parties stipulated, and I found that both shoulder injuries occurred 
in the course and scope of Ms. Reding’s employment, Ms. Reding needed to show that 
the previously authorized care was unreasonable.  I find nothing in the record indicating 
that Ms. Reding is entitled to alternate medical care, or that the care provided was 
unreasonable.  Furthermore, during the arbitration hearing in this matter, Ms. Reding 
could not articulate what, if any, additional care she requested.  In her post-hearing 
brief, Ms. Reding alleges that Dr. Bansal provides a recommendation of care.  I have 
not adopted any of Dr. Bansal’s findings, nor do I find them especially credible in this 
matter.  Additionally, any subsequent care is unrelated to these work incidents.  
Therefore, I decline to order any alternate care for the complained injuries.   

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 19 
 
 
Reimbursement of Medical Expenses 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers’ compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening, October 1975).   
 
Pursuant to Iowa Code 85.27, claimant is entitled to payment of reasonable 
medical expenses incurred for treatment of a work injury.  Claimant is entitled to an 
order of reimbursement if he/she has paid those expenses.  Otherwise, claimant is 
entitled only to an order directing the responsible defendants to make such payments 
directly to the provider.  See Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988).   
 
In cases where the employer’s medical plan covers the medical expenses, 
claimant is entitled to an order of reimbursement only if he has paid treatment costs; 
otherwise, the defendants are ordered to make payments directly to the provider.  See 
Krohn, 420 N.W.2d at 463.  Where medical payments are made from a plan to which 
the employer did not contribute, the claimant is entitled to a direct payment.  Midwest 
Ambulance Service v. Ruud, 754 N.W.2d 860, 867-68 (Iowa 2008) (“We therefore hold 
that the commissioner did not err in ordering direct payment to the claimant for past 
medical expenses paid through insurance coverage obtained by the claimant 
independent of any employer contribution.”).  See also Carl A. Nelson & Co. v. Sloan, 
873 N.W.2d 552 (Iowa App. 2015)(Table) 2015 WL 7574232 15-0323.   
 
In this case, the claimant seeks reimbursement for medical expenses as listed in 
Joint Exhibit 8.  The billing requested is as follows: 
Provider 
Date(s) of Service 
Amount Billed 
Amount Paid by 
Claimant 
UnityPoint Health 
Finley Hospital 
5/14/2019 – 
5/31/2019 
$1,725.00 
$129.75 
Finley Hospital 
3/22/2019 
$513.77 
$513.77 
UnityPoint 
Dubuque 
4/16/2019 
$241.60 
$27.60 
Dubuque 
Orthopedic 
Surgeons 
5/7/2019 
$450.00 
 
$55.80 

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 20 
 
 
No evidence was presented as to whether or not Ms. Reding’s bills for the above dates 
of service were paid by employer provided insurance.  The records indicate that Blue 
Cross Blue Shield or another insurer paid those amounts.  Since I found that the 
claimant was injured in the course and scope of her employment on March 8, 2019, and 
the above dates of service appear to pertain to treatment stemming from the March 8, 
2019, injury, I award the claimant medical expenses.  If there are any outstanding 
amounts to the above noted bills, I order the defendants to reimburse the provider as 
appropriate.  I award the claimant $726.92 for the amounts paid by the claimant as 
noted above.   
IME Reimbursement Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39: 
Iowa Code 85.39(2) states: 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be too 
low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and upon delivery 
of a copy of the application to the employer and its insurance carrier, be 
reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a subsequent examination by 
a physician of the employee’s own choice, and reasonably necessary 
transportation expenses incurred for the examination.   
 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant’s 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify for 
reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008).   
 
Iowa Code 85.39 was amended in 2017.  Iowa Code 85.39(2) added: 
An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined to be compensable under this chapter 
or chapter 85A or 85B.  An employer is not liable for the cost of such an 
examination if the injury for which the employee is being examined is determined 
not to be a compensable injury.  A determination of the reasonableness of a fee 
for an examination made pursuant to this subsection shall be based on the 
typical fee charged by a medical provider to perform an impairment rating in the 
local area where the examination is conducted.   
 
 
 
 

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 21 
 
 
The claimant seeks reimbursement for two IMEs by Dr. Bansal, on February 15, 
2019, and June 12, 2020.  The first IME came after Dr. Kennedy, a treating physician, 
opined that Ms. Reding sustained a zero percent impairment rating.  The first IME 
contained charges for examination of Ms. Reding’s back, and neck.  The back was not 
an issue in this case.  The defendants denied the neck condition, and no impairment 
rating was provided by Dr. Kennedy with regard to the neck.  Therefore, I award the 
claimant $3,088.33 for the first IME.  Dr. Kennedy never provided a work related 
impairment rating from the second injury, therefore, the claimant is not entitled to 
reimbursement for the second IME by Dr. Bansal. 
Costs 
Claimant seeks the award of costs as outlined in Claimant’s Exhibit 7.  Costs are 
to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner hearing the case.  See 876 
Iowa Administrative Code 4.33; Iowa Code 86.40.  876 Iowa Administrative Code 
4.33(6) provides:  
Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes.   
Based upon my discretion, I decline to award costs in this matter. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
That defendants shall reimburse claimant seven hundred twenty-six and 92/100 
dollars ($726.92) for previously paid medical bills. 
That defendants shall reimburse claimant three thousand eighty-eight and 33/100 
dollars ($3,088.33) for the first IME of Dr. Bansal.   
That the claimant shall take nothing further. 
 
 

REDING V. NORSTROM DISTRIBUTION CENTER 
Page 22 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
That defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7.   
Signed and filed this __10th _ day of November, 2020. 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Eric Loney (via WCES) 
James Peters (via WCES) 
   ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
