Case Number: 19006047.01
Case Title:  MOSLEY, MICHAEL V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Mosley Mike-19006047.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MIKE MOSLEY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                    File No. 19006047.01 
PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC, 
  : 
 
 
  :               ARBITRATION  DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SAFETY NATIONAL CASUALTY CORP., : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :           Head Note Nos.:  1402.30, 1402.40 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Michael Mosley, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration against the employer, 
Prestage Foods of Iowa, L.L.C., and the insurance carrier, Safety National Casualty 
Corporation.  This case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on 
September 25, 2020.  As a result of the ongoing pandemic in the state of Iowa and 
pursuant to an order of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, the hearing 
occurred via videoconferencing using the CourtCall platform.  Claimant appeared with 
his attorney at claimant attorney’s office.  Defense counsel, the employer’s 
representative, Pamela Webster, and the court reporter all appeared from separate 
remote locations. 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing.  On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 8, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 8, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through G.   
Claimant testified on his own behalf.  No other witnesses testified at trial.  The 
evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on September 25, 
2020.   
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Dec-18  16:04:57     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MOSLEY V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 2 
 
 
However, counsel for the parties requested an opportunity to file post-hearing 
briefs.  This request was granted, and both parties filed briefs simultaneously on 
October 23.  The case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on that date. 
ISSUES 
The parties completed a hearing report in which the parties submitted the 
following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. 
Whether claimant sustained an injury on April 4, 2019, which arose out of 
and in the course of his employment. 
2. 
Whether the alleged injury caused temporary disability and, if so, the extent 
of claimant’s entitlement to temporary total, healing period, or temporary 
partial disability benefits. 
3. 
Whether claimant refused an offer of suitable work such that he forfeited 
any entitlement to temporary partial, temporary total, or healing period 
benefits. 
4. 
Whether the alleged injury caused permanent disability. 
5. 
Whether the alleged injury should be compensated as a scheduled member 
injury or with industrial disability benefits, if claimant has proven a 
permanent disability. 
6. 
The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability, if any. 
7. 
The proper commencement date for permanent disability benefits, if any. 
8. 
Claimant’s average gross weekly earnings at the time of injury and 
corresponding weekly rate for workers’ compensation benefits. 
9. 
Whether claimant is entitled to an award of alternate medical care, including 
ordering a surgery recommended by claimant’s independent medical 
evaluator. 
10. Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 

MOSLEY V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 3 
 
 
Michael Mosley is a 45-year-old gentleman, who was hired as a rib puller and 
belly cutter by Prestage Foods of Iowa, L.L.C. on April 1, 2019.  (Transcript, page 31)  
Mr. Mosley provided a discovery response prior to trial indicating that he had not had 
prior work injuries or prior right shoulder or neck injuries.  (Defendants’ Exhibit F, p. 50)  
He also provided deposition testimony that denied prior injury to his right shoulder or 
neck.  (Defendants’ Ex. G, p. 77)  Mr. Mosley also failed to identify treatment at 
Cherokee Medical Center that occurred before this date of injury, which documented 
various prior ailments including a hand fracture, right knee ACL and meniscus repair, 
right biceps and pectoral pain, a right shoulder MRI, left chest and shoulder pain, lower 
back and hip pain, abdominal pain, right shoulder pain, right swollen lymph node in the 
right side of claimant’s neck, wrist surgery, left knee pain and depression.  (Joint Ex. 8)  
In fact, Mr. Mosley had received prior treatment for his right shoulder and neck. 
Although claimant damaged his credibility by not disclosing the prior treatment 
and injuries, none of the prior medical treatment for claimant’s neck or right shoulder 
appears to have resulted in permanent impairment or permanent disability.  Instead, 
claimant submitted to and passed a pre-employment physical before starting 
employment at Prestage.  (Joint Ex. 7) 
Mr. Mosley testified that he did not receive any significant training and began 
working on the meat cutting line at Prestage on April 1, 2019.  On April 4, 2019, Mr. 
Mosley was performing his rib puller duties when he pulled his knife through a pork belly 
and hit either a rib or a piece of ice.  He testified that he felt his right shoulder pop when 
this happened.  (Tr., p. 31)  He continued working until his lunch hour.  At that point, he 
testified the pain in his right shoulder was unbearable, like a knife stabbing him, and he 
reported the injury.  Claimant’s supervisor escorted him to the nurse’s station within the 
plant.  Claimant testified he was given four pills and told to return to work.  (Tr., p. 33)  
There is no corresponding nurse’s note from the plant’s clinic. 
Claimant testified that he was placed on light duty and instructed to watch other 
employees perform their job duties to learn various positions after the April 1, 2019 
incident.  Claimant further testified that he performed no physical duties and simply 
watched others for a period of approximately two weeks.  (Tr., pp. 34-35)  However, 
claimant’s testimony does not correspond or make sense with subsequent medical 
notes.  In fact, claimant returned to the employer’s clinic on April 10, 2019 (six days 
after the incident described).  In the April 10, 2019 note, the nurse practitioner indicates 
claimant was seen for a blister that had developed on his left pinky finger while pulling 
ribs.  (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 1)  Claimant would not have developed a blister on his left pinky 
from his gloves, as described in the April 10, 2019 office note, if he was simply watching 
others perform their jobs. 
It is possible that the nurse’s note of April 10, 2019 is erroneous.  However, 
claimant followed-up in the clinic on April 26, 2019.  In that note, the nurse notes 
claimant presented for follow-up on his blister.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 2)  There is no mention of 
claimant’s right shoulder injury in either the April 10, 2019 office note or the April 26, 

MOSLEY V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 4 
 
 
2019 office note.  Given the follow-up for the blister, I find that claimant actually 
continued working after the April 10, 2019 injury date and that his recollection of events, 
or at least the duration of his light duty watching assignment, is erroneous. 
The first medical record documenting any injury to claimant’s right shoulder or 
neck in April 2019 is dated April 23, 2019.  Mr. Mosley presented to his personal 
physician, Joseph D. Larson, D.O., on that date and requested a work release for the 
day to rest his right shoulder.  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 74)  Dr. Larson granted the work release 
but claimant had no other restrictions imposed on him during the visit of April 2019.  
(Defendants’ Ex. G, p. 69) 
The first evaluation with a medical provider directed by the employer occurred on 
July 9, 2019.  At that evaluation, the nurse practitioner notes a 14-week history of right 
shoulder pain cutting ribs and notes that the injury is work related.  However, the nurse 
also notes that claimant worked and remains at full duty.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 3) 
Mr. Mosley conceded during his testimony that he continued working without 
medical restrictions for his right shoulder (other than April 23, 2019 when his personal 
physician gave him a work release for a day) from April 10, 2019 through June 2019.  
(Tr., pp. 68-74)  Mr. Mosley also conceded that he did not seek or obtain medical 
treatment for his neck or right shoulder in May or June 2019 and that he continued to 
work his regular duties for the employer during these months.  (Tr., pp. 72-74; 
Defendants’ Ex. G, p. 70)  Claimant asserts claims for temporary partial disability 
benefits for the weeks ending April 11, 2019, May 2, 2019, May 9, 2019, May 16, 2019, 
May 23, 2019, May 30, 2019, June 6, 2019, June 13, 2019, and June 27, 2019.  
(Claimants’ Ex. 7)  However, Mr. Mosley produced no evidence that he was medically 
restricted from his work duties during this period of time, other than the April 23, 2019 
release from his personal physician.   
Mr. Mosley also asserts claims for temporary partial disability benefits for the 
weeks ending August 15, 2019, August 29, 2019, September 5, 2019, September 12, 
2019, September 26, 2019, October 10, 2019, and October 31, 2019.  (Claimant’s Ex. 
7)  Once again, claimant conceded at trial that he had no restrictions from August 2019 
throughout October 2019.  (Tr., pp. 81-84)  Accordingly, claimant cannot prove that he 
was medically restricted from performing his job duties during this period of time.  From 
a medical standpoint, Mr. Mosley remained capable of returning and performing his job 
duties for the employer throughout August, September, and October 2019. 
Mr. Mosley was given temporary medical restrictions on July 16, 2019, which 
included a 20-pound lifting limit and a restriction against overhead work.  (Tr., p. 80; 
Joint Ex. 1, pp. 6-7)  However, claimant conceded at the time of trial that the employer 
offered him light duty work consistent with those medical restrictions while the 
restrictions remained applicable.  (Tr., p. 80)  The nurse practitioner ordered a right 
shoulder MRI and recommended referral to an orthopaedic shoulder surgeon after the 
July 16, 2019 evaluation. 

MOSLEY V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 5 
 
 
Defendants scheduled claimant for an orthopaedic evaluation performed by Kary 
Schulte, M.D. on October 31, 2019.  Dr. Schulte noted decreased active range of 
motion in claimant’s right shoulder, but noted normal strength in the shoulder.  Dr. 
Schulte noted the MRI demonstrated partial tears of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus 
tendons in claimant’s right shoulder.  However, he opined that there was no need for 
surgical intervention and no need for medical restrictions moving forward.  Accordingly, 
claimant had no medical restrictions for his right shoulder again as of October 31, 2019.  
(Joint Ex. 2, pp. 18-20) 
The initial disputed issue is whether claimant sustained an injury that arose out of 
and in the course of his employment on April 4, 2019.  Mr. Mosley asserts that he 
sustained both a neck and a right shoulder injury on that date.  My initial analysis is 
whether Mr. Mosley sustained a neck injury on that date. 
Review of the medical evidence does not disclose any medical opinions causally 
connecting claimant’s asserted neck symptoms to the injury date of April 4, 2019.  I note 
that Mr. Mosley obtained an independent medical evaluation performed by orthopaedic 
surgeon, Mark Kirkland, D.O.  Claimant specifically told Dr. Kirkland about his neck 
symptoms.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 4)  Yet, Dr. Kirkland provided no diagnosis of an injury, 
offered no permanent impairment, and made no recommendations for further treatment 
of claimant’s neck.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1)  Given that no other physician opined that 
claimant sustained a neck injury as a result of his work activities on April 4, 2019, I find 
that Mr. Mosley failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that he sustained a 
neck injury on that date. 
With respect to his claim of a right shoulder injury on April 4, 2019, five medical 
professionals have offered medical causation opinions.  The first was claimant’s 
personal physician on April 23, 2019.  Dr. Larson indicated in his note that Mr. Mosley 
“reports injuring his right shoulder while at work last week.”  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 74)  Dr. 
Larson provides no further analysis or explanation of how or why the right shoulder was 
related to claimant’s work activities, other than to note that claimant has “to do repetitive 
motions with his arms at work, which seems to aggravate the pain.  Pain is also worse 
with overhead movement and lifting.”  (Joint Ex. 5, p. 74)  There is not a specific 
mention of claimant’s knife hitting a rib or ice in Dr. Larson’s note. 
On April 5, 2019, a nurse practitioner evaluated Mr. Mosley at the company’s 
clinic.  The nurse noted the incident cutting frozen rib meat and the development of 
sharp right shoulder pain after that incident.  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 3)  The nurse practitioner 
indicated, “this problem is related to work activities.”  (Joint Ex. 1, p. 4) 
Defendants directed claimant to Dr. Schulte for evaluation on October 31, 2019.  
Dr. Schulte noted the incident in April 2019 when claimant was cutting and experienced 
increased right shoulder symptoms.  Dr. Schulte also documented a subsequent event 
in July 2019 with an increase in right shoulder symptoms.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 18)  Dr. 
Schulte also had a right shoulder MRI available for review.  Ultimately, Dr. Schulte 

MOSLEY V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 6 
 
 
indicated that he “saw no evidence of any significant structural abnormality for which the 
patient requires further intervention.”  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 20)  Ultimately, Dr. Schulte 
seemed to accept claimant’s version of events but found no specific injury and offered 
no further analysis of whether claimant’s symptoms up to that date were related to his 
work activities.  (Joint Ex. 2)  Dr. Schulte did opine, however, that claimant required no 
permanent work restrictions and qualified for no permanent impairment pursuant to the 
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 
23) 
Claimant sought an independent medical evaluation, performed by orthopaedic 
surgeon, Dr. Kirkland on May 20, 2020 and May 21, 2020.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1)  Dr. 
Kirkland diagnosed claimant with posterior labral tearing and glenohumeral 
degenerative changes in the right shoulder.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 5)  Dr. Kirkland noted 
the claimant’s report of specific onset of symptoms.  He opined, “there was significant 
causation from the April 4, 2019 injury.  At the least, the April 4, 2019 injury substantially 
aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or ‘lit up’ Mike’s right upper extremity condition.”  
(Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 6)  Dr. Kirkland recommended an arthroscopy for the right 
shoulder, but opined that Mr. Mosley sustained a 15 percent permanent impairment of 
the right upper extremity as a result of the April 4, 2019 right shoulder injury.  Dr. 
Kirkland also recommended permanent work restrictions that preclude any work at or 
above shoulder level and limit claimant to lifting only 10 to 20 pounds at waist level.  
(Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 6) 
Finally, defendants sought an independent medical evaluation performed by 
orthopaedic surgeon, Kyle Galles, M.D., on July 29, 2020.  Dr. Galles concluded, “There 
is an injury.  The pain is aggravated by work.”  (Defendants’ Ex. A, p. 1)  However, Dr. 
Galles diagnosed claimant’s main right shoulder problem as degenerative arthritis of the 
right glenohumeral joint.  Dr. Galles opined, “this is a pre-existing condition that may 
have been temporarily aggravated by his activities at work.  He is now back to full duty.  
From my standpoint, I would not suggest any additional restrictions.”  (Defendants’ Ex. 
A, p. 2) 
None of these five medical providers opined that claimant did not sustain a right 
shoulder injury.  Each of these five medical providers specifically opined that a right 
shoulder injury occurred or appears to have accepted the claimant’s version of events 
that it occurred at work.  Although defendants deny that claimant sustained a right 
shoulder injury at work on April 4, 2019 and I acknowledge that claimant’s credibility is 
less than ideal, the medical evidence certainly suggests that claimant sustained some 
type of right shoulder injury or aggravation as a result of his work activities on April 4, 
2019.  I specifically find that claimant has proven he sustained a material aggravation of 
an underlying degenerative condition in his right shoulder as a result of his work 
activities on April 4, 2019. 
However, I also find the opinions of Dr. Galles to be most persuasive, credible 
and convincing in this evidentiary record.  Dr. Kirkland does not appear to have a 

MOSLEY V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 7 
 
 
complete medical history.  He references claimant’s injury as being similar to a football 
player’s injury, but does not appear to have been aware that claimant participated in 
semi-pro football.  Claimant sought minimal treatment for his right shoulder injury and 
sometimes went months without evaluation or treatment.  Ultimately, I find that Mr. 
Mosley proved he sustained an injury, or aggravation, of his right shoulder on April 4, 
2019.  However, I find that Mr. Mosley did not prove he sustained a permanent injury or 
permanent disability as a result of that injury.  Instead, relying upon the medical opinion 
of Dr. Galles, I find that claimant proved only a temporary aggravation of his underlying 
degenerative condition in his right glenohumeral joint.  To be explicit, I accept Dr. 
Galles’ opinions and find that claimant failed to prove he sustained permanent functional 
impairment, requires permanent work restrictions, or sustained any permanent disability 
as a result of the April 4, 2019 right shoulder injury at work. 
Dr. Galles did not specifically offer an opinion about maximum medical 
improvement (MMI).  (Defendants’ Ex. A)  However, Dr. Schulte released claimant to 
return to full duty work without further restrictions or treatment.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 20)  Dr. 
Kirkland opined that MMI occurred as of Dr. Schulte’s evaluation.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 
6)  I find that Mr. Mosley reached MMI as of October 31, 2019.  No treatment, 
symptoms, lost time, or alleged disability after that date is causally related to the April 4, 
2019 work injury.  Accordingly, I specifically find that the arthroscopy recommended by 
Dr. Kirkland is not causally related to the April 4, 2019 work injury and that claimant’s 
request for alternate medical care is not related to that injury. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 

MOSLEY V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 8 
 
 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Mr. Mosley asserts a claim for an injury to his neck and right shoulder.  With 
respect to his neck, I found no convincing or credible evidence to establish that claimant 
sustained a neck injury as a result of the events of April 4, 2019.  Mr. Mosley testified 
that he experienced some symptoms into his neck.  However, there is no medical 
opinion diagnosing a neck injury and no medical opinion in this evidentiary record 
causally connecting a neck injury to the work activities with this employer.  Claimant’s 
independent medical evaluator, Dr. Kirkland, noted symptoms involving the neck and 
still made no diagnosis of a neck injury nor any recommendations for treatment of a 
neck condition.  Therefore, I conclude that Mr. Mosley failed to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that he sustained an injury to his neck on April 4, 2019, 
which arose out of and in the course of his employment.  Mr. Mosley is not entitled to 
any weekly or medical benefits for his alleged neck injury. 
Mr. Mosley also asserted he sustained a right shoulder injury as a result of his 
work duties on April 4, 2019.  Having found that Mr. Mosley proved he sustained an 
injury to his right shoulder, which arose out of and in the course of his employment on 
April 4, 2019, I must consider his claims for temporary disability, permanent disability, 
and alternate medical care.  I begin with claimant’s claim for permanent disability 
benefits.  Ultimately, I accepted the opinions of Dr. Galles as the most credible and 
convincing in this record.  Accordingly, I found that Mr. Mosley proved he sustained a 
work related injury but that the injury was only a temporary aggravation of his underlying 
and pre-existing degenerative shoulder condition.   
Again, accepting Dr. Galles’ opinions, I found that Mr. Mosley failed to prove he 
sustained permanent functional impairment, required permanent work restrictions, or 
that he sustained permanent disability as a result of the April 4, 2019 right shoulder 
injury.  Accordingly, I conclude that Mr. Mosley failed to prove entitlement to any 

MOSLEY V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 9 
 
 
permanent disability benefits.  Therefore, I conclude that claimant failed to prove 
entitlement to an award of permanent partial disability benefits. 
Claimant seeks alternate medical care and specifically requests an order 
authorizing the right shoulder surgery recommended by Dr. Kirkland.  Iowa Code 
section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish reasonable 
services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the right to 
choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
Of course, to prove entitlement to ongoing or future medical care, Mr. Mosley 
must prove that the care is causally related to his work injury.  Having found claimant’s 
injury to be only a temporary aggravation of an underlying and pre-existing degenerative 
condition, I conclude that claimant failed to prove that a right shoulder surgery, or any 
future medical treatment, is causally related to the temporary shoulder injury he 
sustained on April 4, 2019.  As such, I deny claimant’s request for alternate medical 
care. 
Mr. Mosley also asserts a claim for temporary partial disability benefits prior to 
his date of maximum medical improvement.  An employee is entitled to appropriate 
temporary partial disability benefits during those periods in which the employee is 
temporarily, partially disabled.  An employee is temporarily, partially disabled when the 
employee is not capable medically of returning to employment substantially similar to 
the employment in which the employee was engaged at the time of the injury, but is 
able to perform other work consistent with the employee's disability.  Temporary partial 
benefits are not payable upon termination of temporary disability, healing period, or 
permanent partial disability simply because the employee is not able to secure work 
paying weekly earnings equal to the employee's weekly earnings at the time of the 
injury.  Section 85.33(2). 
With the exception of April 23, 2019, I found that Mr. Mosley was not under any 
medical restrictions from April 10, 2019 through June 2019 or from August 2019 through 
October 2019, I conclude that claimant cannot establish any entitlement to temporary 
partial disability benefits during this period of time.  Claimant did establish that he was 
under temporary medical restrictions beginning on July 16, 2019.  However, Mr. Mosley 
seeks no temporary partial disability benefits in July 2019 and he concedes that the 

MOSLEY V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 10 
 
 
employer offered appropriate light duty work that was consistent with his medical 
restrictions during this period of time. Therefore, I conclude that claimant did not prove 
entitlement to temporary partial disability benefits during July 2019 either. Iowa Code 
section 85.33(2)-(3). 
Having found that claimant achieved maximum medical improvement on July 31, 
2019; he cannot qualify for any temporary partial disability benefits after this date.  Iowa 
Code section 85.33(2).  Therefore, I conclude that Mr. Mosley cannot prove entitlement 
to temporary partial disability benefits after July 31, 2019. 
That leaves the date of April 23, 2019 as a date when Mr. Mosley received 
medical restrictions related to his work injury and missed work.  These restrictions were 
from an unauthorized medical provider, Mr. Mosley’s personal physician’s office.  
Regardless, even if considered, this leaves only one day for which Mr. Mosley may 
qualify for temporary disability benefits.  Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.32(1), there 
is a three-day “waiting period” before temporary disability benefits commence.  Since no 
permanent disability was proven in this case, claimant does not qualify for temporary 
disability benefits until more than three days of benefits are owed.  Even if claimant 
would otherwise qualify for temporary disability benefits on April 23, 2019, this date of 
missed work would not be compensable.  Iowa Code section 85.32(1).  Therefore, I 
conclude that Mr. Mosley has not proven entitlement to an award of temporary total or 
temporary partial disability benefits as a result of the April 4, 2019 work injury. 
Finally, Mr. Mosley requests assessment of his costs related to this contested 
case proceeding.  Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency.  Iowa Code 
section 86.40.  In this instance, claimant has not proven entitlement to additional weekly 
or medical benefits.  Exercising the agency’s discretion, I conclude that claimant’s 
request for assessment of costs should be denied. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant takes nothing further. 
Signed and filed this       18th       day of December, 2020. 
 
 
   WILLIAM H. GRELL 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

MOSLEY V. PRESTAGE FOODS OF IOWA, LLC 
Page 11 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Robert C. Gainer (via WCES) 
Jennifer Clendenin (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
