Case Number: 5064388
Case Title:  BROWN, WILLIAM V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Brown William-5064388d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
WILLIAM BROWN, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          File No. 5064388 
MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY, 
  : 
 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ACCIDENT FUND, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :                  Head Note Nos.:  1108, 1703, 
 
Defendants. 
  :                                  1803, 1803.1, 2502 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
This is a petition is arbitration.  The contested case was initiated when claimant, 
William Brown, filed his original notice and petition with the Iowa Division of Workers’ 
Compensation.  The petition was filed on July 5, 2018.  Claimant alleged he sustained a 
work-related injury on January 29, 2018.  Claimant alleged the wok injury affected his 
left leg.  Later, claimant alleged he also injured his left hip and left tarsal tunnel.  
(Original notice and petition) 
For purposes of workers’ compensation, Mount Mercy University, is insured by 
Accident Fund.  The University is affiliated with the Sisters of Mercy.  Defendants 
accepted the claim for the left leg injury.  They filed their answer on July 23, 2018.  
Defendants denied liability for the left hip and left tarsal tunnel.  A first report of injury 
was filed on February 14, 2018. 
The hearing administrator scheduled the case for hearing on September 24, 
2019.  The hearing took place at Iowa Workforce Development in Des Moines, Iowa at 
150 Des Moines Street.  The undersigned appointed Ms. Janice Doud as the certified 
shorthand reporter.  She is the official custodian of the records and notes.   
Claimant testified at hearing.  Ms. Linda Brown, spouse, testified on behalf of 
claimant.  Claimant also called Ms. Connie Albaugh, Assistant Human Resources 
Director at Mount Mercy University.  Defendants called Mr. Tom Doermann, Assistant 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Feb-19  15:51:01     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 2 
 
 
Vice President of Human Resources and Operations at Mount Mercy University, as well 
as Ms. Deborah O’Hara, Facilities Operations Supervisor at Mount Mercy University.  
The parties offered joint exhibits 1 through 6.  Claimant offered exhibits 1 through 
8.  Defendants offered exhibits A through F.  The exhibits were admitted as evidence in 
the case. 
Post-hearing briefs were filed on November 12, 2019.  The case was deemed 
fully submitted on that date.  Finally, a transcript of the proceedings was filed on 
January 29, 2020. 
STIPULATIONS 
The parties completed the designated hearing report.  The various stipulations 
are: 
1. There was the existence of an employer-employee relationship at the time 
of the injury; 
2. Claimant sustained an injury on January 29, 2018 which arose out of and 
in the course of his employment; 
3. The parties agree the injury resulted in a temporary disability to the left 
leg; 
4. Temporary or healing period benefits are no longer in dispute; 
5. The parties agree the weekly benefit rate is $429.29 per week; 
6. Defendants have waived any affirmative defenses; 
7. Claimant has paid certain costs and defendants do not dispute those costs 
have been paid. 
ISSUES 
The issues presented are: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury to his left hip, his left tarsal tunnel and 
to his body as a whole as a result of a work injury on January 29, 2018; 
2. Whether the alleged injuries are causally related to any permanent disability; 
3. If there is a permanent disability as a result of the work injury on January 29, 
2018 what is the extent of the permanent disability? 
4. Whether the alleged injuries resulted in any industrial disability;  

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 3 
 
 
5. Whether the commencement date for the payment of any permanent partial 
disability benefits is May 21, 2018 or whether claimant is entitled to a running 
award; and 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.27. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
This deputy, after listening to the testimony of claimant and the four other 
witnesses who testified at hearing, after judging the credibility of the people who 
testified, and after reading the evidence, and the post-hearing briefs, makes the 
following findings of fact and conclusions of law: 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving the issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.14(6). 
Claimant is 64 years old.  He will become 65 in February of 2020.  He is married.  
Claimant resides in Cedar Rapids, Iowa with his spouse of 22 years.  He has an eighth 
grade education.  Claimant does not have a general equivalency diploma (GED). 
Claimant is functionally illiterate.  He is incapable of completing his own applications for 
employment.  His spouse must assist him in filling out simple forms.   
Personnel at Mount Mercy University hired claimant to work as a custodian at the 
University.  Claimant commenced his employment on March 16, 2015.  A job 
description was submitted as claimant’s exhibit 2.  It is adopted by reference as though 
fully set out herein.  The parties agreed claimant was regularly required to bend, kneel, 
and crouch as part of his regular job duties.  He was frequently required to stand, walk, 
and reach with his hands and arms.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 2) Claimant remained 
employed by Mount Mercy University through May 31, 2018.  (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 17) 
At his arbitration hearing, claimant testified during direct examination how his 
injury to his left leg occurred.  He stated under oath: 
Q.  (By Mr. Steadman) Describe to me what happened on January 29th, 2018, at 
Mount Mercy. 
A.  I went into the custodian room, got my shower kit for scrubbing the showers, 
brought it in, hooked it all up, went and sprayed down the walls, the floor, 
stepped out, grabbed my mop, mop handle that I scrub my walls and floor with, 
went back, stepped off my right foot on like a little concrete step, went in with my 
left foot, stepped inside the shower.  That’s when my knee went out sideways on 
me. 
Q.  What knee is that? 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 4 
 
 
A.  My left knee. 
Q.  What happened when it went out sideways on you? 
A.  It made a loud pop. 
Q.  And did you just hear the pop? 
A.  I heard it and I felt it.  
Q.  What did it feel like? 
A.  Like something popped out of joint. 
Q.  Did you have any kind of pain? 
A.  Yes, I did. 
Q.  What was the pain like? 
A.  Very sharp pain. 
Q.  And where was that pain located? 
A.  Inside of my left knee. 
(Transcript, pages 26-27)  
Claimant testified he uses a cane since the onset of his work injury.  He stated he 
relies on the cane unless he is sleeping.  No medical provider prescribed a cane to 
assist claimant in ambulating. 
Claimant was directed to see Nicholas O. Bingham, M.D. for medical care.  Dr. 
Bingham examined claimant on February 7, 2018.  (Joint Exhibit 1, page 1) The 
physician noted the following with respect to claimant’s left knee: 
Musculoskeletal: 
Left knee:  He exhibits effusion, bony tenderness and abnormal 
meniscus.  Tenderness found.  Medial joint line tenderness noted. 
Legs: 
McMurry and Thessaly sign’s positive for meniscus tear.  Drawer 
sign is negative.  Does not appear to be any lateral instability 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 2) 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 5 
 
 
Dr. Bingham diagnosed claimant with a sprain of the left knee, and an 
unspecified ligament.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p.2) Dr. Bingham referred claimant for magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI).  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 3) Temporary restrictions were imposed too.  
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 3) 
On February 16, 2018, claimant had MRI testing.  Gerald Decker, M.D. 
interpreted the MRI test results.  The results showed: 
1.  No acute fractures. 
2. Curvilinear signal touching the articular surface on a single slice in the 
posterior or horn of the medial meniscus has a 40% statistical 
probability of representing a meniscal tear. 
3. Possible partial tear or sprain of the conjoined tendon insertion of the 
lateral collateral ligament and biceps femoris tendon as above. 
4. Mild quadriceps and patellar tendinosis. 
5. Chondromalacia and degenerative changes as above. 
6. No other acute major ligamentous injury. 
7. Possible small radial tear at the free edge of the body of the lateral 
meniscus. 
8. Complex soft tissue and intraosseous ganglion cyst at the margin of 
the proximal tibia and fibula extending into the fibular head. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 8) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Bingham on February 19, 2018.  The physician noted: 
Musculoskeletal: 
Left Knee:  He exhibits decreased range of motion, swelling and 
abnormal meniscus.  Gait is grossly antalgic knee range of motion is 
severely limited by pain  
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 5) 
Dr. Bingham developed an assessment and a plan.  He opined: 
[P]atient’s MRI showsadvanced [sic] degeneration but a very likely medial 
meniscus tear and a lateral collateral/distal quadriceps tear [t]hey could be 
considered acute.  Patient can return to work under tightened restrictions.  
Medications as before.  We will refer to orthopedics for evaluation.  
William was seen today for knee pain. 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 6 
 
 
Diagnoses and all orders for this visit: 
Derangement of meniscus of left knee 
(Jt. Ex. 1, p. 5) 
Defendants authorized Matthew J. Bollier, M.D., an orthopedic surgeon at the 
University of Iowa, Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, to treat claimant.  
Dr. Bollier initially examined claimant on February 26, 2018.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 9)  
Left knee x-rays were taken on February 26, 2018.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 11) Dr. Bollier 
noted there was no acute fracture or dislocation.  There were early degenerative 
changes, but the joint space was preserved.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 11) 
Dr. Bollier personally reviewed and interpreted the results of the MRI.  He opined: 
2/16/18 Left knee MRI:  partial tear of the lateral collateral ligament, mild 
quad and patellar tendonitis, mild degenerative changes and 
chondromalacia noted; no other major ligamentous tears noted, ganglion 
cyst at margin of the proximal tibia and fibula. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 11)  
The orthopedist did not acknowledge there was a finding of a meniscal tear.  Dr. 
Bollier assessed claimant’s condition as: 
ASSESSMENT 
William M. Brown is a 63 y.o. male with left knee pain.  Imaging reveals a 
partial tear of the lateral collateral ligament, tendonitis of the quad and 
patellar tendons as well as early arthritis changes.  On physical exam 
there is no notable laxity of the LCL with testing.  To the nearest degree of 
medical certainty the reported work incident was a significant factor and 
caused/worsened current knee findings.  We did discuss that degenerative 
changes develop gradually over time and were present prior to the work 
incident.  We discussed treatment options at length.  There is a good 
chance that his symptoms will improve with non-operative treatment and 
we will start with bracing, physical therapy and anti-inflammatory 
medication.  He should return to clinic for reevaluation in 6 weeks. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 11) 
Dr. Bollier changed claimant’s prescriptions.  Claimant was provided with a brace 
to protect his lateral collateral ligament.  The physician ordered physical therapy three 
times per week for six weeks.  Temporary work restrictions were imposed.  Claimant 
was to perform seated office type work only.  He was to wear his brace while working 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 7 
 
 
and he was required to get up and walk for five minutes once every hour.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 
12) Dr. Bollier wanted to evaluate claimant’s progress after six weeks.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 12) 
Claimant commenced physical therapy on February 28, 2018 at Select Physical 
Therapy in Cedar Rapids.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 29) The initial history for the physical therapy 
notes indicated: 
…Today he presented with moderate pain with knee movement, moderate 
tenderness and pain to the distal hamstrings and adductors, tenderness at 
the distal insertion of the LCL, decrease knee range of motion, and 
swelling around the joint.  Due to the pain, strength testing was not tested.  
Because of the physical demands of his work and the above impairments 
and limitations he is unable to work full duty at this time. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 29) Claimant did not complain of left hip pain at the time of his initial 
physical therapy session. 
Claimant proceeded with his physical therapy sessions.  He encountered pain 
and swelling on the inside of his left leg.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 34) Kayla K. Uhlenhake, PT, 
noted claimant’s gait pattern improved when he wore his brace.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 34) The 
physical therapist noted on March 28, 2018: 
…His muscular tightness has not improved despite that being a focus with 
soft tissue mobilization.  At this time I am a little concerned about his 
symptoms on the medial side of the knee.  When is he [sic] having his 
high pain levels, that is the area where he is having the most pain.  I do 
not believe that he is ready to return to work at this time. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 37) 
On April 2, 2018, Ms. Uhlenhake noted claimant had “swelling on the medial side 
of the knee around the distal medial quadriceps.”  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 41)  
On April 6, 2018, claimant voiced the following complaints to the physical 
therapist: 
…Today he presented with moderate pain with knee movement, moderate 
tenderness and pain to the distal hamstrings and adductors, tenderness at 
the distal insertion of the LCL, decrease knee range of motion, and 
swelling around the joint.  Due to the pain, strength testing was not tested.  
Because of the physical demands of his work and the above impairments 
and limitations he is unable to work full duty at this time. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 43) The therapist noted at the conclusion of her report for the same date: 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 8 
 
 
…I am concerned because his flare ups have not been consistent with his 
activities or previous treatment.  His main complaint of pain is isolated to 
the medial side of the knee, at the distal hamstrings and adductors.   
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 44) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Bollier on April 9, 2018.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 14) Claimant 
reported to the orthopedist: 
…He states that while the lateral knee pain has subsided, he has been 
experiencing medial sided knee pain for the past month with no known 
injury.  He complains of constant pain that sometimes migrates into his 
calf.  He has been wearing his brace except when sleeping.  He states 
that his knee gave out on him a couple weeks while at the store.  He does 
not complain of locking.  He states that he has not been improving with 
PT. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 14) 
Dr. Bollier conducted a physical examination of claimant’s musculoskeletal 
system.  Claimant had a normal left hip exam without pain.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 16) With 
respect to the left knee, the physician found passive range of motion from 0 to 135°.  
Claimant had a normal appearing gait.  He had tenderness at the medial joint line, but 
no swelling at the knee.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 16) Dr. Bollier assessed claimant’s condition as 
follows: 
Assessment: 
63 y/o male with left knee partial LCL tear, quadriceps tendinopathy, 
patellar tendinopathy, mild OA. 
His lateral sided knee pain has subsided but he has complained of medial 
sided knee pain over the past month.  This is most likely consistent with a 
flare up of his OA.   
Surgically, there is nothing we have to offer him.  He will likely benefit from 
a corticosteroid injection to help relieve symptoms. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 17)  
Dr. Bollier injected claimant’s left knee with a corticosteroid because of medial 
knee pain.  Claimant tolerated the procedure well.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 17) Claimant was 
allowed to return to work.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 18) Work restrictions remained imposed for six 
additional weeks.  (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 17-18) 
Claimant testified at his arbitration hearing that he reported left hip pain during 
his appointment on April 9, 2018.  (Tr., p. 33) Claimant testified Dr. Bollier just replied, 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 9 
 
 
“Okay.”  (Tr., p. 33) There is nothing in the records for April 9, 2018 to reflect a 
complaint about a left hip problem. 
As of April 23, 2018, the physical therapist opined claimant would have a difficult 
time returning to work because of squatting and crouching.  Ms. Uhlenhake did not 
believe claimant was able to clean toilets and bathrooms at that point in time.  (Jt. Ex. 4, 
p. 46) The therapist recommended four weeks of rehabilitative therapy.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 46) 
Work conditioning was recommended on April 24, 2018.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 48) Ms. 
Uhlenhake noted swelling on the medial side of the knee around the distal medial 
quadriceps.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 49) The physical therapist opined claimant needed work 
hardening in order to focus on such activities as mopping, sweeping, pushing, and 
vacuuming for long periods of time.  (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 52) 
Claimant’s final visit with Dr. Bollier occurred on May 21, 2018.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 19) 
The physician conducted an examination of claimant’s left knee.  Dr. Bollier found: 
Left knee examination:  Slightly antalgic gait, normal station.  Skin intact 
with no signs of ecchymosis, erythema, atrophy, asymmetry.  No 
significant swelling/effusion.  Capillary refill brisk; pulses strong.  
Sensation intact to light touch in all dermatomal distributions.  TTP at 
medial joint line.  Non-tender at lateral joint line, quad and patellar tendon 
insertions.  Active and passive ROM  0-125 degrees, positive pain with 
deep flexion.  Positive crepitus/grind.  5/5 strength of quad and 
hamstrings.  Distal motor strength 5/5 and symmetrical.  No laxity with 
varus and valgus stress at 0 and 30 degrees.  Negative Anterior/Posterior 
drawer and Lachman’s tests. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 20) 
Dr. Bollier assessed claimant’s left knee condition as: 
ASSESSMENT 
William M. Brown is a 63 y.o. male with left knee pain.  He sustained a 
partial LCL tear, quadriceps and patellar tendinopathy after a work 
incident on 1/29/18.  His knee is stable on exam.  His lateral knee pain 
and tendinopathy symptoms have improved and he has reached MMI for 
these findings.  He has permanent restrictions of no kneeling/squatting.  
We discussed that he has early arthritis changes which are likely the 
source of his medial knee pain.  This would not be related to his work 
injury as degenerative changes take many years to develop.  Mr. Brown 
will likely require arthroplasty in the future. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 20) 
Dr. Bollier opined claimant reached maximum medical improvement.  (Jt. Ex. 3, 
p. 20) The treating orthopedist imposed permanent work restrictions.  Claimant was 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 10 
 
 
prohibited from kneeling or squatting.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 20) Dr. Bollier rated claimant as 
having no permanent impairment.  He determined the zero percent rating as follows: 
Permanent Partial Impairment Rating 
To the nearest degree of medical certainty he has a permanent partial 
impairment rating of 0% of the lower extremity according to the Guides to 
the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment of the AMA, 5th Edition.  [sic] Mr. 
Brown has full and normal knee range of motion, no neurologic 
dysfunction, no instability, and no other diagnosis-based reason to assign 
impairment according to Chapter 17 (The Lower Extremities) of the 
Guides.  He was released to work with restrictions. 
(Jt. Ex. 3, p. 20) 
Claimant also testified during his arbitration hearing that he discussed left hip 
pain with Dr. Bollier during the May 21, 2018 medical appointment.  Claimant testified: 
Q.   (By Mr. Steadman) Okay.  What were your symptoms like at the time you 
finished treatment with Dr. Bollier? 
A.  Still hurting in the same spot, and it moved up into my hip a little bit when I do 
a lot of walking. 
Q.  Now, you would have seen - - the last time you saw Dr. Bollier was at the end 
of May? 
A.  Yes. 
Q.  And when you say it moved up into your hip, are you saying it moved up to 
your hip the last time you saw him or would that have been after you finished 
seeing him? 
A.  After I - - The next-to-the-last time I told him about that I had - - it was coming 
up into my hip a lot, and he said, “Okay.”  That’s about all he - - 
Q.  Did you have any other symptoms other - - So you’re saying you have some 
pain in your knee going up. 
A.  Yes. 
Q.  Was there anything other than pain? 
A.  It was - - I was getting really - - I don’t know how to say it.  It would have like a 
tingle to it coming up to my hip. 
THE COURT:  A tingle? 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 11 
 
 
 
THE WITNESS:  A tingle. 
 
THE COURT:  Up to your hip? 
 
THE WITNESS:  Coming up to my hip. 
Q.  What do you mean by “a tingle”? 
 A.  If I would sit too long or stand too long or walk too far, I’d have really - - it 
would just get that much worse. 
Q.  How do you mean “worse”? 
A.  It would really start hurting bad. 
(Tr. pp. 32-34) 
Again, there was no reference to any discussion about left hip pain or left hip 
tingling in the medical report for May 21, 2018.  Only the left knee was mentioned in the 
clinical notes.  The May 21st medical notes did not corroborate claimant’s testimony on 
direct examination.   
On May 21, 2018, the physical therapist recommended claimant be discharged 
from work hardening and returned to his job as a custodian.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 58) The 
therapist based her opinion on: 
Pt has shown a lot of improvements within this last week with activity 
tolerance.  Throughout the course of work conditioning he has 
experiences [sic] flare ups that cause a big decrease in activity.  He has 
reported improvements with strength, range of motion, and symptoms.  
Within therapy he has demonstrated the ability to perform vacuuming and 
dusting like activities without difficulty.  He has met most of his lifting, and 
occupational goals.  Because of the change in his job description I believe 
that he can return to working at this time.  Pt also stated that he can get 
back to work.  He is capable of vacuuming and dusting to the demands of 
his jobs.  At this time the pt is being discharged from therapy and will be 
returning to work. 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 58)   
Dr. Bollier removed all activity restrictions on August 1, 2018.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 23) 
Dr. Bollier did not examine claimant before the treating physician lifted the restrictions.  
Dr. Bollier did not explain why he lifted the work restrictions.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 23) 
Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39, claimant exercised his right to an 
independent medical examination.  On August 16, 2018, claimant presented to Farid 
Manshadi, M.D., a physiatrist.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 68) The examining physician also reviewed 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 12 
 
 
various medical records regarding claimant’s work injury.  Dr. Manshadi indicated 
claimant reported the following medical conditions to him: 
Currently Mr. Brown reports constant left-sided knee pain of 7 to 9 out of 
10 all the time.  The longer he stays on his feet, the worse the pain 
becomes.  He is unable to sleep straight at nighttime due to pain.  He also 
continues to wear a hinged brace.  He also reports left-sided hip pain 
which started by March of 2018, especially with walking.  Also his left foot 
falls asleep on him, mostly the plantar aspect of it.  He is only able to sit 
about 20 minutes and then he needs to get up and walk.  He is only able 
to walk about 10 minutes and then needs to sit down, and he is currently 
not working. 
Mr. Brown also denies having any issues with his left knee or his left hip or 
numbness in his left foot prior to his work injury.  He never sought care for 
any issues with his left leg previously. 
On examination of the left knee, there is evidence of significant 
tenderness to palpation over the medial aspect of the left knee over the 
lateral collateral ligament, and that also shows evidence of mild laxity on 
examination.  Left knee active range of motion actively was from 0 to 125 
degrees.  He also had reduced sensation along the lateral plantar 
cutaneous nerve in comparison to the right side.  Also Tinel’s sign was 
positive over the left medial ankle over the tarsal tunnel. 
Also M. Brown had significant tenderness to palpation over the left lateral 
hip area over the trochanteric area and gluteus medius and minimus.  Left 
hip abductors were 4+/5, on the right side they were 5/5.  Gait was 
severely antalgic with a short step length and reduced stance phase on 
the left.  The left foot was rotated externally. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 71) 
Dr. Manshadi opined claimant sustained injuries to three body parts as a result of 
his work injury on January 29, 2018.  The three injuries were to the left knee, the left 
hip, and claimant suffered from left tarsal tunnel syndrome.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 71) Dr. 
Manshadi diagnosed claimant with laxity of the lateral collateral ligament with reduced 
range of motion.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 71) Because claimant had an antalgic gait, in Dr. 
Manshadi’s opinion, claimant had trochanteric bursitis of the left hip.  Finally, Dr. 
Manshadi opined claimant had tarsal tunnel syndrome on the left side resulting in 
numbness involving the left lateral plantar cutaneous nerve.  The tarsal tunnel 
syndrome was also attributed to an antalgic gait.  (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 71-72) 
Dr. Manshadi opined claimant had a permanent partial impairment rating.  (Jt. 
Ex. 6, p. 72) The independent medical evaluator based his opinion on the AMA Guides 
to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 5thEd.  The following paragraphs detail how 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 13 
 
 
Dr. Manshadi arrived at his permanent impairment rating of 18 percent to the left lower 
extremity or 7 percent to the body as a whole.   
I used the American Medical Association’s Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment, 5th Edition, specifically Chapter 17, Table 17-33, 
page 546, and he does have laxity of the lateral collateral ligament, and as 
such I assign seven (7) percent impairment of the left lower extremity. 
In regard to his left trochanteric bursitis with abnormal gait, I assign 
another seven (7) percent impairment of the left lower extremity. 
In regard to the lateral plantar cutaneous nerve, I assign another five (5) 
percent impairment of the left lower extremity. 
Then using the Combined Values Chart, the total impairment would be 
eighteen (18) percent impairment of the left lower extremity using Table 
17-37. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 72) 
Dr. Manshadi imposed permanent work restrictions.  The restrictions are listed 
as: 
In regard to any permanent restriction, my recommendation would be to 
avoid any activity which requires squatting or kneeling.  He is to avoid any 
activity which requires prolonged walking.  He may negotiate stairs on an 
occasional basis.  Also no sitting of more than 20 minutes at a time.  In 
general, he needs to be allowed to sit, stand and walk on an as needed 
basis. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, p. 72) 
Dr. Manshadi recommended additional treatment for the left hip trochanteric 
bursitis in the form of cortisone injections.  (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 73) The evaluating physician 
also recommended injections for the left tarsal tunnel syndrome and possibly a surgical 
release of the nerve.  (Jt. Ex.6, p. 73) 
In May of 2019, Dr. Manshadi answered nine “yes’ or “no” questions posed to 
him by claimant’s counsel.  (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 74-75) Dr. Manshadi answered those 
questions to a reasonable degree of medical certainty in the affirmative.  The nine 
questions Dr. Manshadi answered are duplicated below: 
1. William had arthritis in the left knee predating his January 29, 2018, 
work injury at Mount Mercy University.  You base this opinion on the 
February 26, 2018, left knee x-ray showing grade 2 osteoarthritis. 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 14 
 
 
2. Prior to William’s January 29, 2018, work injury, his left knee arthritis 
was asymptomatic. 
3. In addition to the other diagnoses set forth in your September 17, 
2018, report, William has ongoing medial left knee pain, which by 
history began following the January 29, 2018, work injury. 
4. Medial left knee pain following the January 29, 2018, work injury is 
well-documented in the records of Dr. Bingham at Mercy Occupational 
Health. 
5. Based on the February 16, 2018, MRI, there is a possibility of a medial 
meniscal tear in the left leg.  If it exists, this could account for William’s 
ongoing medial knee pain. 
6. The mechanism of injury that William described to you could have 
resulted in a medial meniscal tear in the left leg. 
7. To conclusively rule in or rule out a medial meniscal tear, arthroscopic 
surgery would need to be performed.  The x-ray and MRI are not 
definitive. 
8. If there is no medial meniscal tear, you would attribute the medial left 
knee pain to arthritis exacerbated by trauma on January 29, 2018. 
9. Your diagnosis at present of the medial left knee pain would be internal 
derangement of the knee with possibility of meniscal tear. 
(Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 74-75) 
Nearly one year after Dr. Manshadi issued his independent medical report, 
defendants desired an independent medical examination with a physician of their own 
choosing.  Charles D. Mooney, M.D., MPH, of Iowa Occupational Medicine Consulting 
Services, PLC, examined claimant on July 18, 2019.  (Defendants’ Exhibit F) Dr. 
Mooney issued a report on the same date.  (Def. Ex. F) Dr. Mooney also reviewed a 
number of medical records including the independent medical report authored by Dr. 
Manshadi.  Dr. Mooney did not comment about Dr. Manshadi’s opinions.  According to 
Dr. Mooney, claimant reported the following complaints: 
Current Complaints: 
Current complaints are reviewed.  As it relates to his left knee he reports 
pain is predominantly in the medial aspect of the knee.  He reports that it 
is constant.  He rates his pain at a 9 most of the time and up to a 10 with 
walking and standing for any length of time greater than five minutes and 
walking half a block.  He states that he is dependent on the use of a cane, 
which was not prescribed.  He reports that he does not have swelling of 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 15 
 
 
his knee.  He does not feel like his knee is going to break away and give 
out on him, only it is extremely painful with weightbearing.  He does not 
report any specific locking, clicking or pivot shift pain, only generalized 
severe aching pain in the medial aspect.  He does note that he has some 
stiffness if he is sitting for a prolonged period of time.  He does not note 
any specific symptoms nor does he report recurrent swelling. 
He also complains of pain in his left hip.  He states that the pain feels like 
it is radiating from his left knee.  He states that the pain in his hip started 
sometime in June of 2018 after his discharge from therapy.  He denies 
any history of prior hip pain or prior injury.  He reports that he has not had 
any specific evaluation, x-rays or therapy as it relates to his symptoms.  
He describes the pain as aching and actually points to the posterior hip 
closer to the buttocks, rather than giving a classic “C sign” in 
demonstrating where his pain is coming from.  He reports pain is at 7 or 8 
most of the time and again it is increased by walking and standing.  He 
does not get any relief by any specific intervention.  He states that he 
takes Advil no more than three times per week on the advice of his 
physician. 
(Def. Ex. F, p. 4) 
Dr. Mooney conducted his own physical examination of claimant.  The physiatrist 
reported: 
Physical Examination: 
Short statured, overweight male presents with significant pain behavior.  
He uses a cane in his left hand for weightbearing and has a very cane 
dependent antalgic gait. 
Examination of his bilateral lower extremities reveals his hip range of 
motion to be actually fairly well maintained and symmetric.  He 
demonstrates 95 degrees of flexion fairly symmetrically, 30 degrees of 
extension, 40 degrees of abduction, 20 degrees of adduction, 25 degrees 
of internal rotation and 35 degrees of external rotation. 
He does not complain of pain with internal rotation on either hip.  He does 
note some mild tenderness directly over the greater trochanter on the left 
compared to the right.  He also complains of pain into the left buttock 
compared to the right.  No sacroiliac tenderness is elicited by palpation or 
with Patrick’s testing. 
He does not demonstrate any specific hip height abnormality nor does he 
demonstrate any leg length discrepancy.  He has negative log roll testing 
bilaterally, and resists Scour testing on the left. 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 16 
 
 
He has normal deep tendon reflexes in his knee and ankle.  He has 5/5 
motor strength in extension and flexion of the ankle and eversion and 
inversion as well as toe dorsiflexion.  He does not demonstrate any loss of 
sensation to light touch or pinprick. 
He demonstrates range of motion of the right knee to be 0 degrees of 
extension and 130 degrees of flexion.  Left knee demonstrates 0 degrees 
of extension and 120 degrees of flexion complaining of pain at the flexion 
endpoint. 
He does not demonstrate any valgas varus deformity or laxity.  He does 
complain of joint line tenderness on the left compared to right, 
predominantly medially rather than laterally.  He does not demonstrate a 
distinctly positive McMurray’s, but does complain of pain with all testing.  
He does not demonstrate a positive drawer test bilaterally. 
He demonstrates symmetrical quadriceps at 54 cm both right and left.  He 
will provide very little effort in manual muscle testing in full extension of the 
knee complaining of pain and will provide only 2/5 strength on the left in 
flexion of the knee against resistance compared to 5/5 on the right. 
Assessment: 
1. Medical record evidence of right knee strain with underlying minor 
meniscal abnormalities and degenerative arthropathy. 
2. Complaints of left hip pain without objective findings, degenerative 
arthropathy is suspected. 
3. Multiple medical comorbidities. 
(Def. Ex. F, pp. 5-6) 
Dr. Mooney answered a series of questions posed to him by defense counsel 
with regard to claimant’s claim for benefits.  (Def. Ex. F, pp. 6-7) Dr. Mooney opined as 
a result of the work injury on January 29, 2018, there was only a temporary aggravation 
of claimant’s underlying pre-existing conditions including his meniscal disease and 
arthropathy.  (Def. Ex. F, p. 6) Dr. Mooney did not relate claimant’s left hip complaints to 
the work injury on January 29, 2018.  The evaluating physician suspicioned claimant 
had an underlying degenerative condition related to claimant’s age.  (Def. Ex. F, p. 6) 
Dr. Mooney agreed with Dr. Bollier’s opinion.  If future knee surgery was necessary, it 
would not be related to claimant’s work injury.  (Def. Ex. F, p. 7) Dr. Mooney concurred 
with Dr. Bollier.  Claimant reached maximum medical improvement on May 21, 2018.  
(Def. Ex. F, p. 7) Dr. Mooney opined claimant had no permanent impairment to his right 
knee or to his left hip.  (Def. Ex. F, p. 7) Finally, Dr. Mooney concluded claimant needed 
no permanent restrictions and he was capable of returning to his normal activities.  (Def. 
Ex. F, p. 7) 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 17 
 
 
The facts established claimant returned to work for one day.  (Tr., p. 34) He 
worked an eight-hour day.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 12) In his deposition, claimant testified he 
worked in the UC Building, and in the dormitories.  Claimant testified he cleaned and 
mopped floors, as well as dusted.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 12) He testified he informed Deborah 
O’Hara that he was in pain while he was performing his job duties.  (Def. Ex. A, p. 2) 
According to claimant, Ms. O’Hara told him to go home and to ice his leg.  (Jt. Ex. A, p. 
12) During his arbitration hearing, claimant testified, he experienced pain on the inside 
of his left knee.  (Tr., p. 36)  
There were various witnesses who testified about claimant’s separation of 
employment.  They differed as to the events leading up to claimant’s termination from 
Mount Mercy University.  It is clear; claimant resigned his position.  Members of 
management decided not to contest his unemployment insurance benefits, even though 
claimant voluntarily terminated his employment.  He received the maximum weekly 
unemployment benefits allowable.   
Claimant also applied for and received Social Security disability benefits 
commencing from July 2018.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 67) The monthly award totaled $1,464.00 
when it was initiated.  Claimant alleged arthritis stemming from a work injury to his left 
knee.  He had an antalgic gait according to Tracey Larrison, D.O., the physician who 
examined claimant for Social Security disability benefits.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 62) Claimant did 
not mention any ongoing hip symptoms when he applied for his Social Security disability 
benefits.  There was a decrease in range of motion of the left knee.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 62) 
The evaluating physician noted: 
…We discussed that he has early arthritic changes which are likely the 
source of his medial knee pain.  TS releases him to RTW with those 
limitations noted. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 62) 
In advance of litigation, defendants conducted surveillance of claimant at his 
home in Cedar Rapids.  The surveillance depicted claimant mowing his lawn with a 
riding mower on July 8, 2019.  (Def. Exs. B and C) On two separate occasions, the 
undersigned reviewed the surveillance taken.  Claimant did not have his cane with him 
while he was mowing.  He occasionally left the riding mower.  Claimant was seen 
bending to pick up drain spouts.  When he was walking on the lawn, he ambulated 
without any visible problems.  He did not use his cane.  Under cross-examination, 
claimant testified his left knee was very painful.  However, he did not seek medical 
attention for his knee.  (Tr., p. 56)  
 
 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 18 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND RATIONALE 
PERMANENT PARTIAL DISABILITY BENEFITS 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
An employee is entitled to appropriate temporary partial disability benefits during 
those periods in which the employee is temporarily, partially disabled.  An employee is 
temporarily, partially disabled when the employee is not capable medically of returning 
to employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of the injury, but is able to perform other work consistent with the 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 19 
 
 
employee's disability.  Temporary partial benefits are not payable upon termination of 
temporary disability, healing period, or permanent partial disability simply because the 
employee is not able to secure work paying weekly earnings equal to the employee's 
weekly earnings at the time of the injury.  Section 85.33(2). 
Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an injured 
worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has returned to 
work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or intermittent.  
Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
The first issue for determination is whether claimant sustained a temporary injury 
or a permanent injury on January 29, 2018.  Prior to the date of his work injury, claimant 
had not sought treatment for any left knee, left lower extremity, or left hip problems, or 
any arthritic conditions.  It was only after the work injury at Mount Mercy University that 
claimant began to experience difficulties with his left knee and left lower extremity.  In 
other words, claimant’s preexisting arthritis and degenerative knee conditions were 
materially aggravated, accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that the two conditions 
resulted in disability.   
Defendants admit claimant sustained a temporary disability to his left knee.  The 
parties have stipulated no additional temporary benefits are due to claimant.   
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense.  
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956).  If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover.  Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961). 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(t) or for loss of earning capacity under section 85.34(2)(u).  The 
extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is 
determined by using the functional method.  Functional disability is "limited to the loss of 
the physiological capacity of the body or body part.”  Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 
502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998).  
The fact finder must consider both medical and lay evidence relating to the extent of the 
functional loss in determining permanent disability resulting from an injury to a 
scheduled member.  Terwilliger v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 529 N.W.2d 267, 272-273 
(Iowa 1995); Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 420 (Iowa 1994).  

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 20 
 
 
An injury to a scheduled member may, because of after effects or compensatory 
change, result in permanent impairment of the body as a whole.  Such impairment may 
in turn be the basis for a rating of industrial disability.  It is the anatomical situs of the 
permanent injury or impairment which determines whether the schedules in section 
85.34(2)(a) - (t) are applied.  Lauhoff Grain v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834 (Iowa 1986); 
Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Dailey v. Pooley Lumber 
Co., 233 Iowa 758, 10 N.W.2d 569 (1943).  Soukup v. Shores Co., 222 Iowa 272, 268 
N.W. 598 (1936). 
Defendants deny there are any permanent disability benefits due under a 
scheduled member theory or under an industrial disability theory.  This deputy 
determines claimant has a scheduled member disability to his left leg pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(p).  Claimant does not have a permanent injury to his left hip or 
to his body as a whole.  He does not have a work related tarsal tunnel syndrome. 
In his deposition, claimant acknowledged he had not reported left hip problems to 
his medical providers prior to his independent medical examination with Dr. Manshadi 
on September 17, 2018.  The medical records do not show a history of left hip 
problems.  Claimant testified about the left hip during his deposition on April 25, 2019: 
Q.  (By Chris Scheldrup) And I’ve reviewed all those records, and there is 
no reference in any of these records to you having any complaints 
involving your hip; would you agree with me that you did not make any 
statements to these doctors until you saw Dr. Manshadi on September 
17th, 2018? 
A.  No, I didn’t have no problem. 
Q.  So you had no problems with your hips at all until you saw Dr. 
Manshadi on September 17th, 2018. 
A.  Yes. 
Q. So when Dr. Manshadi puts in his report that you told him that you 
started having hip pain in March of 2018, that’s a false statement; that’s 
not correct. 
A.  I did have a little bit of a pain because the way I was walking. 
Q.  You just told me under oath that you didn’t have any problems with 
your hip, correct? 
A.  No, not up till then. 
Q.  Okay.  And so in September when you see Dr. Manshadi, when he 
puts down in his report that you said you had hip pain beginning March of 
2018, that’s not a correct statement, true? 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 21 
 
 
A.  No. 
Q.  I am correct, aren’t I? 
A.  Yes. 
Q.  Do you know how Dr. Manshadi then came up with this idea that you 
had pain starting back in March of 2018 if you did not have that at that 
time? 
A.  ‘Cause the way I was walking.  The way I was walking. 
Q.  Well, you never told him that you had - - 
A.  No. 
Q.  - - hip pain beginning March of 2018; he just put that together on his 
own. 
A.  Yes. 
Q.  So it’s your testimony that it wasn’t till you saw Dr. Manshadi on 
September 17th, 2018, that you first recognized that you may have had 
some hip pain, correct? 
A.  Yes. 
Q.  What was it, do you think, that started the onset of a claim of hip pain 
in terms of it being on the same day you saw Dr. Manshadi on September 
17th, 2018; did you do something while going into his office that caused 
the hip pain? 
A.  No. 
Q.  So you had no hip pain until you went into Dr. Manshadi’s office, and 
then you recall having hip pain when you talked to him, is that correct? 
A.  I said I had a little bit of hip pain. 
Q.  But you will agree with me that you never mentioned anything about 
hip pain or symptoms to any of your treating physical therapists or doctors 
until you first saw Dr. Manshadi on September 17th, 2018? 
A.  (The witness nodded his head.) 
Q.  Correct? 
 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 22 
 
 
A.  I didn’t say nothing to nobody.  [sic] 
(Def. Ex. A, pp. 14-15)   
Additionally, claimant testified during cross examination at his arbitration hearing: 
Q.  (By Chris Scheldrup) Now, I want to talk about a claimed hip issue.  
Your injury occurred on January 29th, 2018; correct? 
A.  Yes. 
Q.  The truth of the matter is, you never had any complaint of any 
problems with your hips until you met with Dr. Manshadi and he suggested 
that you had hip pain; isn’t that correct? 
A.  No, I’ve always had hip pain.  It just goes in and out. 
Q.  Do you recall – I’m going to go through and describe and go through 
your prior testimony. 
 
Well, let me just confirm with you, you’d agree with me that you 
never mentioned anything about the hip pain to any of your treating 
doctors until you first met with Dr. Manshadi as part of the IME.  Would 
you agree with me on that? 
A.  Yes.   
Q.  You never sought any medical care for any claims of anything dealing 
with your hip until after you met with Dr. Manshadi as part of this litigation; 
correct? 
A.  Correct. 
Q.  In fact, it was Dr. Manshadi that first raised the issue that there may be 
some hip component, and you never had any problems with that until that 
medical appointment with Dr. Manshadi.  Isn’t that also true? 
A.  Fair. 
Q.  And when Dr. Manshadi put in his report that the hip pain began in 
March of 2018, that was an incorrect statement in terms of the onset of hip 
pain; correct? 
A.  Correct. 
Q.  In fact, I asked you, “So it’s your testimony that it wasn’t until you saw 
Dr. Manshadi on September 17th, 2018, that you first recognized that you 
may have some hip pain; correct?”  And you answered, “Yes.” 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 23 
 
 
A.  Yeah. 
(Tr., pp. 58-60) 
The surveillance video did not depict claimant walking with any apparent hip 
problems.  Claimant did not have an antalgic gait pattern.  He did not use a cane when 
he was walking on uneven grass.  Claimant did not display outward signs of pain during 
the course of the surveillance.  He seemed to operate his riding lawn mower without 
apparent difficulty.  The undersigned determines claimant has failed to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence he has a permanent injury to his left hip.  Claimant does 
not have an injury to the body as a whole.  Likewise, there is no medical evidence to 
support a claim for tarsal tunnel syndrome. 
With respect to any permanency to the left leg, it is the determination of this 
deputy workers’ compensation commissioner, claimant has a permanent partial 
disability to the left leg.  The determination is based on the opinions expressed by Dr. 
Manshadi after the independent medical examination on August 16, 2018 and after the 
physician prepared answers to questions posed in May of 2019.  The independent 
medical examiner performed an exhaustive review of claimant’s medical records 
concerning the work injury.  Dr. Manshadi opined claimant had a seven (7) percent 
permanent impairment to the left lower extremity as a result of his work injury on 
January 29, 2018.  The impairment rating was based on the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 5th Ed.  It is true; claimant had some arthritis or 
degeneration around the area of the left knee prior to January 29, 2018.  Nevertheless, 
his arthritis/degenerative conditions were asymptomatic before the work injury.  Only 
after his work injury did claimant develop problems with his left knee.  In other words, 
his preexisting condition or disability was permanently and materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened, or lighted up.  Dr. Manshadi imposed some reasonable 
restrictions for the left leg.  Those restrictions were detailed in earlier paragraphs and 
are hereby incorporated by reference.  (See:  Jt. Ex. 6, p. 72) 
The undersigned did not find Dr. Mooney’s opinions to be persuasive.  Dr. 
Mooney discussed a right knee on Exhibit F, page 7.  He returned claimant to full duty 
work and with no restrictions.  Not even members of management at Mount Mercy 
University believed claimant was capable of performing all of his duties as a janitor in 
May of 2018.  Management team members believed claimant needed some 
accommodations and restricted duties.   
Then there were the opinions of Dr. Bollier.  He returned claimant to work with a 
zero percent permanent impairment rating but with restrictions of no kneeling or 
squatting.  (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 22) Without ever examining claimant again, Dr. Bollier removed 
the restrictions on August 1, 2018.  The orthopedist provided no explanation for the 
removal of the restrictions.  This deputy had no understanding why there was a change 
when the physician had not seen the patient after May 21, 2018.  The undersigned did 
not find Dr. Bollier’s actions to be consistent with normal treatment protocols.  

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 24 
 
 
Therefore, it is the determination of this deputy, claimant has a permanent partial 
disability to the left leg due to his left knee injury on January 29, 2018.  Claimant has 
sustained a permanent partial disability in the amount of seven (7) percent. 
Claimant’s permanent partial disability shall be calculated according to Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(p).  The subsection states: 
p.  The loss of two-thirds of that part of a leg between the hip joint and the 
knee joint shall equal the loss of a leg, and the compensation therefor 
shall be weekly compensation during two hundred twenty weeks. 
The calculation is:  220 weeks x 7 percent equals15.4 weeks of total permanent 
partial disability benefits owed.  Prior to the date of the hearing, claimant was paid zero 
weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  The parties stipulated the weekly benefit 
rate is $429.29 per week.  Therefore, claimant is entitled to:  15.4 weeks x $429.29 
equaling $6,611.07. 
Accrued benefits shall be paid in a lump sum, together with interest, as allowed 
by law.  All interest on past due weekly compensation benefits accruing on or after July 
1, 2017, shall be payable at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant 
maturity published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the 
date of injury, plus two percent.  See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 
5054686 (App. April 24, 2018). 
Claimant is requesting alternate medical care benefits pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 5.27.  Claimant has not had any medical treatment for his left knee since May 
21, 2018. That was the last appointment he had with Dr. Bollier.   
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
Under Iowa law, the employer is required to provide care to an injured employee 
and is permitted to choose the care.  Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 
562 N.W.2d 433 (Iowa 1997). 
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment – and seeking alternate care – 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable.  See Iowa 
R. App. P. 14(f)(5); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995).  
Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.  Id.  The 
employer’s obligation turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability.  Id.; 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 25 
 
 
Harned v. Farmland Foods, Inc., 331 N.W.2d 98 (Iowa 1983).  In Pirelli-Armstrong Tire 
Co., 562 N.W.2d at 433, the court approvingly quoted Bowles v. Los Lunas Schools, 
109 N.M. 100, 781 P.2d 1178 (App. 1989): 
[T]he words “reasonable” and “adequate” appear to describe the same 
standard. 
[The New Mexico rule] requires the employer to provide a certain 
standard of care and excuses the employer from any obligation to provide 
other services only if that standard is met.  We construe the terms 
"reasonable” and “adequate” as describing care that is both appropriate to 
the injury and sufficient to bring the worker to maximum recovery. 
In the present case, Dr. Bollier released claimant from medical treatment.  The 
orthopedist did not causally connect claimant’s medial knee condition to the January 29, 
2018 work injury.  Consequently, Dr. Bollier did not relate a future left knee arthroplasty 
to the work injury either.  Dr. Manshadi opined otherwise.  For the same reasons as 
stated previously, the undersigned accepts the opinions of Dr. Manshadi with respect to 
the need for future medical treatment of the left knee over the opinions of Dr. Mooney 
and Dr. Bollier.  Defendants shall provide reasonable and necessary medical treatment 
for the left knee.  The left knee condition is causally related to the January 29, 2018 
work injury.  Defendants shall have the right to choose the medical care provider.   
Defendants shall schedule an appointment with the medical care provider within ten 
(10) days of the filing of this decision. 
Iowa Code section 86.40 states: 
Costs.  All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be 
taxed in the discretion of the commissioner. 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original notice 
and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa Code 
sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition 
testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more 
than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) 
costs of persons reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of notice and 
subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or agency by the party 
utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, doctors or 
practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called or by whom the 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 26 
 
 
report is requested. Witness fees shall be paid in accordance with Iowa Code 
section 622.74. Proof of payment of any cost shall be filed with the workers’ 
compensation commissioner before it is taxed. The party initially paying the 
expense shall be reimbursed by the party taxed with the cost. If the expense is 
unpaid, it shall be paid by the party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed 
at the discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation 
commissioner hearing the case unless otherwise required by the rules of civil 
procedure governing discovery.  This rule is intended to implement Iowa Code 
section 86.40. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.17 includes as a practitioner, “persons 
engaged in physical or vocational rehabilitation or evaluation for rehabilitation.”  A report 
or evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert constitutes a practitioner report 
under our administrative rules.  Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. 
November 23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. 
December 8, 2010).  The entire reasonable costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ reports 
may be taxed as costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.  Caven v. John Deere Dubuque 
Works, File Nos. 5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009).         
Defendants are liable for the following costs in the amount of: 
1. Certified Shorthand Reporter 
 
 
$70.00 
2. Deposition Transcriptions  
 
 
$236.25 
3. Service Charges 
 
 
 
 
$6.67 
4. Doctor Reports 
 
 
 
 
$136.21 
5. Filing Fees 
 
 
 
 
 
$100.00 
TOTAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
$549.13 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay unto claimant fifteen point four (15.4) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits commencing from May 21, 2018 and payable at the rate of four 
hundred-twenty-nine and 29/100 dollars ($429.29). 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. 
Defendants shall take credit for all benefits paid prior to the date of the hearing.      
Defendants shall pay the costs to litigate as detailed in the body of the decision. 

BROWN V. MOUNT MERCY UNIVERSITY 
Page 27 
 
 
The attorneys of record, if they have not already done so, shall register within 
seven (7) days of this order in the Workers’ Compensation e-Filing System (WCES) and 
as a participant in this case to receive future filings from this agency. 
Defendants shall file all reports as required by law 
Signed and filed this 19th day of February, 2020. 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Nate Willems (via WCES) 
Casey Steadman (via WCES) 
Chris Scheldrup (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has 
been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, 
Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of 
appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  
The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal 
holiday. 
MICHELLE A. MCGOVERN 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
