Case Number: 5068822.02
Case Title:  STOVER, BOON V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Stover Boon-5068822.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
BOON STOVER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
File No. 5068822.02 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
SCHOOL BUS SALES CO., 
  : 
      ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY HOMESTATE : 
INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos:  1402.40, 1402.60,  
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :                1802, 1803, 2600, 2700, 3000 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Boon Stover, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from employer School Bus Sales Company and its insurer 
Berkshire Hathaway Homestate Insurance Company. This case came before the 
undersigned for an arbitration hearing on May 24, 2023. The case proceeded to a live 
video hearing via Zoom.   
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing. On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations were 
accepted, and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 12, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 12, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through V. All exhibits were received without 
objection. 
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf.  No other witnesses testified at hearing.  
The evidentiary record closed following receipt of Defendants’ Exhibit V on June 14, 
2023.  All parties served their post-hearing briefs on July 7, 2023, at which time this 
case was deemed fully submitted to the undersigned. 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Jan-30  07:18:25     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
 
1. Whether the alleged February 8, 2018, injury is a cause of temporary 
disability during a period of recovery; 
 
2. The nature and extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial 
disability benefits, if any;  
 
3. The proper commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits; 
 
4. Claimant’s gross weekly earnings and the applicable weekly workers’  
compensation rate at which benefits should be paid;  
 
5. Benefit forfeiture pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39;  
 
6. Medical expenses; 
 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
examination under Iowa Code section 85.39; and 
 
8. Costs. 
 
Claimant identified penalty as a disputed issue on the hearing report; however, 
he failed to state his basis for such a claim at hearing or in his post-hearing brief.  As 
such, the issue of penalty will not be addressed in this arbitration decision. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
The instant case revolves around a stipulated injury occurring on February 8, 
2018.  The claimant at the center of this case is Boon Stover.  At the time of the 
evidentiary hearing that brought forth this claim, Stover was a 48-year-old individual.  
He graduated from high school in 1995.  Nearly a decade later, he completed a two-
year program focused on repairing Harley-Davidson motorcycles at the Motorcycle 
Mechanics Institute in Phoenix, Arizona. (See Defendants’ Exhibit R, p. 128)  He then 
acquired a commercial driver’s license around 2014. (Hearing Transcript, p. 15) 
Stover was hired by the defendant-employer in August 2017 to work as a 
fabricator and painter in the repair of school buses. (Hr. Tr., p. 21)  Stover was injured 
on February 8, 2018, when the tool he was using to bend out the rain edge of a school 
bus slipped, causing him to fall from the top of the ladder he was standing on. (Hr. Tr., 
pp. 23-25) Stover hit the wall of the paint booth and fell to the ground, landing on his 
right side “on a bunch of other stuff that was laying” around. (Hr. Tr., pp. 24-25) Stover 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 3 
 
testified that he lost consciousness “for a few seconds” when his head struck the ground 
and that his thought processes were “a little bit off” following the injury. (Hr. Tr., pp. 25-
26)   
Stover’s statements regarding the specifics of the alleged traumatic injury have 
not always been consistent with the contemporaneous medical records.  For example, 
the height of the ladder and the distance of claimant’s fall has increased over time.  
Stover described falling between 8 and 10 feet on the date of injury and at his initial 
orthopedic evaluation. (Joint Exhibit 2, p. 120; JE4, p. 163)  He would later report falling 
10 to 15 feet to a number of providers. (JE8, p. 189; JE9, p. 191; Ex. C, p. 18; 
Claimant’s Exhibit 1, pp. 40, 44)  According to the defendant employer, the ladder that 
Stover was using on February 8, 2018, was a six-foot A-frame ladder. (Ex. L, p. 94)  I 
find a fall of 8 to 10 feet is consistent with the contemporaneous medical records and 
the information provided by the defendant employer. 
After the incident, Stover drove himself to Allen Occupational Health where he 
was evaluated by Kenneth McMains, M.D. (JE 2, p. 120)  Stover reported that he struck 
his head, right elbow, right shoulder, and right hip on the ground when he fell.  Contrary 
to his hearing testimony, Stover reported that he did not lose consciousness as a result 
of the fall. (Id.)  He complained of right elbow, right shoulder, and right hand pain, as 
well as tingling in the right hand. (Id.)  X-rays and a CT scan of the right elbow revealed 
comminuted fractures of the head of the radius and fractures of the coronoid process 
and lateral humeral condyle. (JE3, pp. 149, 151)  X-rays of the right shoulder and hand 
were negative. (JE3, pp. 147-148)  Stover was placed in a splint and referred to the 
University of Iowa Hospitals & Clinics (“UIHC”) for an orthopedic evaluation. (JE2, pp. 
122-123)   
As mentioned, claimant’s reporting on whether he lost consciousness after he fell 
has been inconsistent.  Claimant testified at the evidentiary hearing that he lost 
consciousness for a few seconds as a result of the February 8, 2018, fall. (Hr. Tr., p. 95)  
He further testified that his co-workers told him that he had lost consciousness and he 
reported the same to all of his physicians. (Hr. Tr., pp. 95-96)  However, on the date of 
injury, claimant reported to Dr. McMains that he did not lose consciousness. (JE2, p. 
120)  Claimant similarly told his expert physician that he did not lose consciousness. 
(Ex. 1, p. 40)  He later reported that he was “unable to account for a few moments” and 
he “may have suffered a loss of consciousness for up to a few seconds.” (JE1, p. 59; 
JE12, p. 216)  Similar to his statements regarding the height of the ladder, I find the 
medical records from the date of injury are likely the most accurate. 
On February 12, 2018, Stover returned to Occupational Health and reported 
increased pain in his neck, back, and right ankle. (JE2, p. 124)  He also reported a 
headache that began the day after his injury. (Id.)  Allison Good, ARNP, assessed 
Stover with headache, neck strain/contusion, thoracic and lumbar strain/contusion, and 
right ankle/heel/foot sprain and contusion. (JE2, p. 125)   
A CT scan of claimant’s head revealed a calcified lesion, asymmetrical 
prominence of the left temporal horn along with calcifications along the subependymal 
surface of the left temporal horn, and no acute infarct or intracranial hemorrhage. (JE3, 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 4 
 
p. 155)  Diagnostic imaging of the cervical spine showed no acute osseous abnormality. 
(JE3, p. 153)    
Timothy Fowler, M.D., an upper extremity specialist at UIHC, conducted an 
orthopedic evaluation of Stover’s right shoulder and elbow on February 16, 2018. (JE4, 
p. 163)  Stover reported falling approximately 8-10 feet off a ladder at work, with 
immediate onset of elbow and shoulder pain. (Id.)  Dr. Fowler and Stover discussed the 
complex nature of the right elbow injury and the treatment options available. (JE4, p. 
164)  While Dr. Fowler believed the elbow fracture was problematic, he did not believe 
surgery was necessary given the lack of evidence for dislocation or subluxation. (Id.)  
Instead, Dr. Fowler recommended a long-arm splint for the elbow and range of motion 
exercises for the right shoulder. (Id.)  In any event, Dr. Fowler told Stover he could not 
guarantee his elbow would return to “normal” regardless of the treatment 
recommendation. (Id.)  Dr. Fowler also told Stover that some loss of motion could be 
possible even with an excellent outcome. (Id.)   
At a February 27, 2018, follow-up appointment with Dr. Fowler, x-rays of the right 
elbow revealed excellent alignment with interval progression of healing of the fracture 
and interval partial absorption of the avulsed fragment from the coronoid. (JE4, p. 166)  
Dr. Fowler explained to Stover that there was still no evidence of subluxation and, as 
such, the injury would not benefit from surgery. (Id.)   
During the February 27, 2018, examination, Stover reported significant pain in his 
right shoulder. (JE4, p. 166)  As a result, Dr. Fowler ordered an MRI and recommended 
physical therapy for both the elbow and shoulder conditions. (Id.) 
The right shoulder MRI demonstrated no fracture or contusion, no rotator cuff 
tear, and mild subacromial-subdeltoid bursitis. (JE3, p. 156)  After reviewing the 
imaging, Dr. Fowler opined he was “quite confident” the MRI results ruled out a rotator 
cuff problem, while noting MRI scans can be less dependable with biceps labral 
pathology. (JE4, p. 169)   
Stover called Dr. Fowler’s office on February 28, 2018, and inquired about 
receiving a physical therapy script for his whole body as opposed to just his right elbow 
and shoulder. (JE4, p. 168)  Stover participated in physical therapy at Athletico from 
March 2, 2018, through May 16, 2018. (CE2, pp. 153-155)  Claimant did not progress 
as expected with his elbow range of motion, strength, and pain complaints. (JE7, p. 
187)   
When Stover returned to Dr. Fowler on March 23, 2018, he continued to describe 
significant headaches, neck pain, and back pain. (JE4, p. 169)  Stover told Dr. Fowler 
that he reported these symptoms to the defendant insurer; however, he did not feel like 
they provided him any guidance. (Id.)  Dr. Fowler encouraged Stover to discuss his 
symptoms with the occupational health clinic. (JE4, p. 170) 
On May 16, 2018, Stover underwent a functional status test during a physical 
therapy session. (JE7, pp. 182-187)  His therapist commented that the assessment did 
not go well because Stover was in a “bad mood” and was “fairly uncooperative.” (JE7, p. 
187)  The therapist noted that Stover did not give a good effort during testing. (Id.) 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 5 
 
Two days later, Stover returned to Dr. Fowler and reported that his right shoulder 
pain was improving, but he was still having issues with his right elbow. (JE4, p. 171)  He 
also reported ongoing back pain and relayed that he had still not seen anyone for the 
same. (Id.) Stover did not believe that he could return to work due to his low back pain.  
Dr. Fowler was concerned with Stover’s poor elbow range of motion and ordered 
advanced imaging to evaluate the same. (Id.)  He also insisted that claimant see 
someone for his back if it continued to be a problem for him. (Id.) 
The updated CT scan of the right elbow demonstrated “[r]esidual chronic fracture 
deformities of the radial head and coronoid process” and a loose body at the anterior 
elbow joint. (JE5, p. 179) 
Stover presented to Dr. McMains on August 28, 2018, with complaints of daily 
headaches, as well as pain in his neck, low back, right shoulder, right leg, and right 
ankle. (JE2, p. 127)  Dr. McMains noted that Stover’s conditions were work related and 
recommended additional physical therapy. (JE2, p. 130)   
Stover participated in a course of physical therapy for his neck from September 
25, 2018, through October 19, 2018. (JE6, p. 181) 
Stover last presented to Dr. Fowler on August 31, 2018. (See JE4, p. 172)  He 
reported persistent pain with right elbow motion that interfered with all activities of daily 
living, as well as intermittent numbness and tingling distal to the elbow. (JE4, pp. 172, 
174)  Dr. Fowler reiterated that surgical intervention would not predictably improve 
Stover’s level of function. (Id.)  Stover was frustrated by this opinion, having believed 
surgery was a definite course of action. (See id.)  Dr. Fowler acknowledged that he 
previously discussed the possibility of surgery with Stover, but indicated the final 
determination would be based on the results of his CT scan. (Id.)  Dr. Fowler further 
acknowledged that capsular release could improve Stover’s condition, but he was not 
willing to perform the surgery. (JE4, pp. 174-175)  The report provides, “I am not willing 
to offer this intervention due to its unpredictability, the patient’s symptoms being 
markedly disproportionate to objective findings, the patient’s noncompliance with 
physical therapy, the patient’s noncompliance with recommended clinic follow-up 
timelines, and the patient’s continued desire for narcotic pain medication.” (Id.) 
At the conclusion of the August 31, 2018, appointment, Stover allegedly told Dr. 
Fowler that he did not have enough experience to be a physician and that he was a 
“quack.” (Id.)  Dr. Fowler’s notes provide that Stover was aggressive, confrontational, 
and belligerent during the appointment. (Id.)   
Dr. Fowler placed Stover at maximum medical improvement for his right elbow 
and assigned 5 percent right upper extremity impairment due to decreased right elbow 
flexion and extension. (JE4, p. 175)  He encouraged claimant to obtain a second 
opinion and recommended a functional capacity evaluation to determine any permanent 
restrictions. (Id.)   
Stover testified the injuries to his neck, low back, right shoulder, right leg and 
right ankle became more noticeable when he stopped taking narcotic pain medication 
following his release from Dr. Fowler. (Hr. Tr., p. 28) 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 6 
 
When Stover returned to occupational health on October 16, 2018, he reported 
pain and weakness in his low back, right shoulder, right elbow, right knee, and right 
ankle. (JE2, p. 132)  Ms. Good ordered MRIs of the right shoulder, right ankle, and 
lumbar spine. (JE2, p. 132)  It appears Ms. Good also recommended braces for 
claimant’s knee and ankle. (See id.) 
The updated right shoulder MRI revealed no evidence of a rotator cuff tear, no 
displaced labral tear, and no evidence of bursitis. (JE3, p. 159)  The MRI of the right 
lower extremity showed no acute abnormality and no internal derangement. (JE3, pp. 
161-162)  The lumbar spine MRI showed a right lateral disc protrusion at L2-3 and a 
disc bulge at L5-S1 with prominent osteophytes, facet hypertrophy, and mild right neural 
foraminal stenosis. (JE3, p. 158)  On October 29, 2018, Ms. Good reviewed the MRIs 
and opined there were no acute or surgical findings. (JE2, p. 137) 
Defendants scheduled claimant for a second opinion with orthopedic surgeon 
Gary Knudson, M.D.  The evaluation occurred on November 8, 2018. (Ex. A, p. 1)  
During the appointment, Stover described significant elbow pain and decreased range 
of motion. (Ex. A, p. 4)  He also reported significant difficulties with many of his normal 
daily activities. (Id.)  On examination, Dr. Knudson observed some resistance to free 
range of motion throughout the right elbow consistent with self-limiting behavior. (Ex. A, 
p. 5)  Dr. Knudson questioned whether the self-limiting behaving could be related to 
pain. (Id.)  Based on the crepitation to range of motion and the findings of his most 
recent CT scan, Dr. Knudson did not believe claimant’s right elbow condition was at 
maximum medical improvement. (Ex. A, p. 6)  He felt claimant could be a surgical 
candidate and recommended a referral to an upper extremity specialist. (Ex. A, p. 5)  
Dr. Knudson also recommended an FCE to assess overall effort and potentially objectify 
any self-limiting behavior. (Ex. A, p. 5) 
Stover participated in his first functional capacity evaluation on January 22, 2019. 
(JE9, p. 190)  The evaluator opined that Stover’s overall level of functionality fell within 
the sedentary range. (Id.)  The evaluator further opined that Stover would need to 
alternate between sitting and other tasks in order to successfully perform sedentary 
work. (Id.)  According to the report, claimant displayed self-limiting behavior in 11 
percent of the tasks he performed, which fell within the normal limits. (Id.)   
Steven Aviles, M.D., an upper extremity specialist, evaluated Stover on March 
11, 2019. (Ex. B, pp. 8-10)  On examination, claimant reported some “unusual 
symptoms” and pain in areas that Dr. Aviles did not expect. (Ex. B, p. 8)  Dr. Aviles 
documented limited range of motion, which he felt was to be expected with coronoid 
and radial head fractures. (Ex. B, p. 9)  Dr. Aviles said that if he would have seen 
claimant initially, he would have considered surgery to remove the loose body at the 
elbow; however, he would not have considered surgery to fix the radial head or the 
coronoid fracture. (Id.)  Dr. Aviles opined it was no longer necessary to perform surgery 
as the loose body did not appear to be causing claimant’s ongoing pain. (Id.)   
At the evaluation, claimant inquired about a total elbow replacement and an 
osteocapsular release. (Id.)  Dr. Aviles opined that a total elbow replacement would be 
“the wrong surgery” for several reasons. (Id.)  He similarly recommended against an 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 7 
 
osteocapsular release as claimant did not have severe arthritis or any bony deformity 
present. Dr. Aviles believed the problem was more of a soft tissue contracture, which 
does not respond as well to osteocapsular release. (Id.)  Dr. Aviles did not recommend 
any additional care for the right upper extremity. (Id.)  He opined that claimant had 
reached maximum medical improvement and likely did not require any permanent 
restrictions. (See Ex. B, pp. 9-10)  He agreed with Dr. Fowler’s impairment rating of 5 
percent to the upper extremity, noting Stover’s loss of range of motion was “minor” and 
would not prevent him from engaging in full activities. (Ex. B, p. 9) 
Next, defendants retained Dr. McMains to conduct an independent medical 
evaluation of Stover and offer an expert medical opinion. (Ex. C)  Dr. McMains authored 
a report dated May 7, 2019, which diagnosed claimant with right elbow fracture with 
flexion, extension contracture, tension headaches, situational agitated depression, 
hypertension, right shoulder pain with negative work up, diffuse cervicothoracolumbar 
pain with negative work up, and right knee pain. (Ex. C, pp. 18, 22)  Given the 
unremarkable diagnostic imaging of claimant’s low back, neck, head, right shoulder, 
heel, and hip, Dr. McMains opined he was unable to explain any of claimant’s 
symptoms outside of the right elbow. (Id.)  Dr. McMains placed all conditions at 
maximum medical improvement as of March 11, 2019, and assigned 5 percent right 
upper extremity impairment due to a loss in range of motion. (Id.)  Lastly, Dr. McMains 
opined that claimant could return to all activities other than climbing ladders and using 
vibratory tools with his right hand. (Ex. C, pp. 22-23) 
After receiving Dr. McMains’ report on or about May 24, 2019, the defendants 
denied liability for any additional medical treatment. (Ex. I, p. 88)   
Following defendants’ denial, Stover sought medical care through his primary 
care provider, Sara Douglas, ARNP. (JE1, p. 21)  When Stover presented to Ms. 
Douglas on June 11, 2019, he reported daily headaches as well as pain in the neck, 
right elbow, right leg, and low back. (Id.)  Stover described sound sensitivity, but not 
much light sensitivity, nausea, or dizziness with the headaches. (Id.)  Ms. Douglas 
assessed post-traumatic headache, balance problems, neck pain, and chronic right-
sided low back pain with right-sided sciatica. (JE1, pp. 25-26)  She prescribed 
gabapentin, Flexeril, and meloxicam, and entered referrals for pain management, 
neurology, and physical therapy. (JE1, pp. 26-27) 
At a follow-up appointment with Ms. Douglas on September 27, 2019, claimant 
reported issues with focus since his fall at work. (JE1, p. 28)  Claimant relayed that he 
had been diagnosed with Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD) as a child but felt he was 
doing “ok” with focus prior to the work injury.  (Id.) Claimant also reported that he was 
experiencing side effects from his medications, including feeling groggy and 
unmotivated. (Id.)  Ms. Douglas made some changes with claimant’s medications and 
referred him for pain management, neurology, and physical therapy. (JE1, p. 31)  She 
also referred claimant to psychiatry for anxiety and focus. (Id.)  She thought claimant 
might be having problems with ADD and could be causing some of his symptoms. (Id.) 
At this juncture, it is worth noting that claimant’s medical history is relevant for 
mental health treatment.  At hearing, claimant acknowledge that he was prescribed 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 8 
 
antianxiety medication prior to his work injury. (Hr. Tr., p. 18)  He asserts he only took it 
on an as needed basis. (Id.)  The medical records in evidence note that claimant 
requested a refill of medications for anxiety and depression on December 23, 2014. 
(JE1, p. 2)  He also received a refill of these medications approximately one year prior 
to the February 8, 2018, work injury. (JE1, p. 6) 
The cervical spine MRI, dated October 15, 2019, revealed multilevel cervical 
degeneration without evidence of significant spinal canal stenosis, as well as mild to 
moderate right and moderate to severe left neuroforaminal stenosis at C5-C6. (JE11, p. 
204) 
Pain specialist Mahesh Mohan, M.D. evaluated Stover’s neck on October 16, 
2019, and assessed cervical radiculopathy, neck pain, and chronic right-sided low back 
pain with right-sided sciatica. (JE1, pp. 33-34)  Based on the MRI results, Dr. Mohan felt 
there could be a component of radicular pain to the right upper extremity.  He offered to 
administer a cervical epidural steroid injection to help with the radiating pain; however, 
Stover declined the same noting the injection alone was not going to fix his troubles. 
(JE1, p. 34) 
EMGs of the right upper and right lower extremities were ordered on November 
25, 2019. (JE1, p. 44)  Sangeeta Shah, M.D. reviewed the studies and noted both 
reports returned normal. (JE1, pp. 45-46)   
Marietta Walsh, D.O., performed a neurosurgical evaluation of claimant’s neck on 
December 3, 2019. (JE1, p. 47)  Stover reported pain that ran from his neck into his 
right shoulder, down his arm, and into his right hand. (Id.)  On the date of the 
examination, Stover denied numbness and tingling. (Id.)  Dr. Walsh noted the MRI 
findings were most prominent on the left, while claimant’s symptoms were most 
prominent on the right. (JE1, p. 48)  She did not recommend any neurosurgical 
intervention on the cervical spine. (Id.)  Given claimant’s “odd sensory and pain 
symptoms,” Dr. Walsh ordered an MRI of the brain to rule out any underlying 
abnormality; however, claimant did not pursue the same. (JE1, pp. 48, 51)  Dr. Walsh 
released claimant to return on an as needed basis from a neurosurgical standpoint. 
(JE1, p. 48) 
David Segal, M.D. conducted his first of two independent medical evaluations of 
claimant on June 13, 2020. (Ex. 1, p. 1)  Dr. Segal is a board-certified neurosurgeon in 
Cedar Rapids, Iowa. (Ex. 2, p. 238)  He is also a licensed attorney in the states of 
Nevada and California. (See Ex. 2, p. 78)  His initial report is 70 pages long. (See Ex. 1, 
pp. 1-70)  Dr. Segal diagnosed 18 different conditions attributable to the February 8, 
2018, work injury. (Ex. 1, pp. 52-55)  
Despite the lack of objectively verifiable diagnoses from the diagnostic imaging, 
Dr. Stover opined there were “sufficient subjective symptoms and positive clinical 
findings of loss of function within the medical records to support impairment ratings for 
all the body systems included below in my IME report.” (Ex. 1, p. 44)  Dr. Segal 
diagnosed “arthropathy” for each of the conditions that could not be verified through the 
available diagnostic imaging.  For example, Dr. Segal opined that, “Because the MRIs 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 9 
 
showed only bursitis, yet the function is quite limited, the diagnosis of the shoulder will 
be right shoulder arthropathy.” (Ex. 1, p. 54)   
Notably, Dr. Segal is the first and only physician to diagnose Reflex Sympathetic 
Dystrophy (RSD)/Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS) of the right upper 
extremity and hand. (Ex. 1, p. 53)  However, he determined the trophic changes were 
not definitive and Stover did not have an imaging study to verify the condition for 
impairment purposes.  As such, Dr. Segal did not assign permanent impairment to the 
RSD/CRPS diagnosis. (Ex. 1, p. 63) 
Ultimately, Dr. Segal concluded that claimant sustained permanent injuries to his 
neck, back, right shoulder, right elbow, right hip, right knee, and right ankle.  He further 
concluded that claimant sustained permanent impairment secondary to post-concussive 
syndrome and an aggravation of his mental health. (Ex. 1, pp. 60-64)  Dr. Segal opined 
that as a result of Stover’s injuries, he sustained a total of 49 percent whole person 
impairment.  In reaching this conclusion, Dr. Segal assigned 15 percent whole person 
impairment for the traumatic brain injury, 8 percent whole person impairment for the 
cervical spine injury, 8 percent whole person impairment for the lumbar spine injury, 12 
percent whole person impairment for the right shoulder injury, 8 percent whole person 
impairment for the right elbow injury, 6 percent whole person impairment for the right hip 
injury, 4 percent whole person impairment for the right knee injury, and 3 percent whole 
person impairment for the right ankle injury. (Ex. 1, pp. 60-64)  It is worth noting that for 
the majority of claimant’s conditions, Dr. Segal added additional impairment for pain. 
(See Ex. 1, p. 61; Ex. 1, pp. 60-64) 
Dr. Segal recommended permanent restrictions considerably more restrictive 
than claimant’s valid FCE report. (Ex. 1, p. 65; see JE9, p. 190)  The restrictions include 
lifting 0 to 5 pounds, occasionally, and 6 to 8 pounds, rarely. (Id.)  The restrictions also 
provide claimant should limit sitting, standing, and walking to 10 consecutive minutes at 
a time. (Id.)  Dr. Segal did not believe claimant was capable of sustaining gainful full-
time employment in any job category. (Ex. 1, pp. 64-65)  Notably, claimant obtained 
subsequent employment with Auto Pro Touch-Up and Standard Nutrition.  He continued 
to work for Standard Nutrition on the date of hearing.  In this sense, Dr. Segal’s 
permanent restrictions are contradicted by claimant’s actual performance of job duties.   
Less than one month later, Stover presented to Jonathon Fields, M.D. for another 
independent medical evaluation. (Ex. D, p. 27)  Dr. Fields diagnosed claimant with a 
work-related right elbow fracture. (Ex. D, p. 32)  As for claimant’s other complaints, Dr. 
Fields diagnosed claimant with a chronic pain condition of unknown etiology affecting 
the entire right side of his body, for which he had no medical explanation. (Id.)  Like Dr. 
Fowler, Dr. Fields assessed 5 percent upper extremity impairment to the right elbow. 
(Id.)  He did not recommend any further medical treatment or assign any permanent 
work restrictions. (Ex. D, p. 33) 
Stover returned to Ms. Douglas on July 14, 2020, for a follow-up regarding his 
chronic headaches, chronic neck pain, chronic low back pain, right-sided weakness, 
and numbness and tingling in the right arm, hand, leg, and foot. (JE1, p. 50)  Claimant 
described daily headaches and neck pain since his fall in February 2018. (Id.)  He noted 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 10 
 
that the headaches were accompanied by dizziness that would last for a few seconds 
one or two times each week. (Id.)  He also noted issues with balance, nausea, and 
word-finding. (Id.)  On examination, Stover reported no pain on palpation of the thoracic 
and lumbar spine; however, he had pain on palpation of all areas of the right shoulder 
and very limited range of motion. (JE1, p. 52)  Stover demonstrated an inability to heel 
or toe walk, difficulty with tandem gait due to balance issues, weakness of the right arm 
and leg, and atrophy of the right cervical spine region, right shoulder, and right chest 
muscles. (JE1, pp. 52-53)  Ms. Douglas referred claimant to neurology and opined that 
Stover’s headaches were likely due to his fall at work.  She also ordered MRIs of the 
head and low back. (JE1, p. 54)    
Notably, Ms. Douglas prescribed hydrocodone at the conclusion of the July 14, 
2020, appointment.  Claimant reported that he could usually deal with the pain, but 
sometimes he got to the point where he could not deal with it and that is when he will 
take pain medication. (Id.)  Ms. Douglas continued claimant’s antianxiety medication as 
well, but noted, “in reality patient is only taking a couple times a week.” (Id.) 
The MRI of the brain, dated July 14, 2020, revealed a large cystic cavity at the 
inferior left temporal lobe. (JE11, p. 205)  The radiologist believed the cyst was likely 
congenital or related to a remote acquired injury.  There was no evidence for an acute 
infarction or acute process in the remaining brain. (Id.)  The MRI of the lumbar spine 
revealed a right subarticular to foraminal disc protrusion at L5-S1 with facet arthropathy 
and thickened ligamentum flavum resulting in mild compression of the descending right 
S1 nerve root. (JE11, p. 207) 
Following a conference call with claimant’s counsel, Ms. Douglas addressed 
several questions regarding causation.  Ms. Douglas agreed with the opinion that 
claimant’s work injury was a substantial contributing factor in causing his post-traumatic 
headaches, post-concussive syndrome, the neck condition, and right shoulder 
condition. (Ex. 4, pp. 260-261)  She further opined that claimant sustained permanent 
impairment to his cervical spine, right shoulder, and brain as a result of the February 8, 
2018, work injury. (Ex. 4, p. 261) 
Jason Stanford, D.O. examined claimant’s right shoulder as part of an orthopedic 
evaluation on July 30, 2020. (JE1, p. 57)  Claimant told Dr. Stanford that his right 
shoulder had been symptomatic since the work injury, but it had never been evaluated. 
(JE1, p. 55)  This, of course, is inaccurate.  Claimant further relayed that in terms of 
treatment, he had tried home therapy remedies and exercise without significant 
improvement. (Id.)  There is no evidence claimant told Dr. Stanford of his treatment with 
Dr. Fowler or the physical therapy he received for the right shoulder.  It appears likely 
Stover consciously omitted his past treatment during his initial evaluation with Dr. 
Stanford. 
Following his examination, Dr. Stanford suspected a rotator cuff tear and ordered 
an MRI to confirm the same. (JE1, p. 57)  This third MRI of the right shoulder showed a 
near full-thickness tear of the supraspinatus, a suspected tear of the labrum, mild AC 
degenerative joint disease, and a small amount of complex fluid within the 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 11 
 
subacromial/subdeltoid bursa. (JE11, pp. 208-209)  Given these results, Dr. Stanford 
recommended surgery. (JE1, p. 58) 
Repeat EMG testing of the right lower extremity was within normal limits. (JE1, p. 
73)  Dr. Shah interpreted the repeat EMG of the right lower extremity as normal, with no 
evidence of neuropathy, nerve entrapment, or radiculopathy. (See JE1, p. 73) 
Starting October 7, 2020, Stover began treating with neurologist Marc Hines, 
M.D., for his headaches. (See JE1, p. 59)  Claimant reported constant headaches with 
occasional nausea and the inability to stand up for more than 5 minutes or walk more 
than 25 feet without his headache and right-sided pain becoming incapacitating. (Id.)  
Claimant further reported that the entire right side of his body goes numb with sharp 
stabbing pains with either maneuver. (Id.)  Dr. Hines opined that Stover has “a large 
acquired thalamic injury on the L which correlates well with his R sided sensory loss.” 
(JE1, p. 60)  He recommended neuropsychological testing, hydrocodone, and Cymbalta 
for both depression and pain. (JE1, p. 63)  He further recommended claimant obtain a 
sleep study. (JE1, p. 60) 
During his deposition on June 9, 2020, claimant testified that his mental health 
condition did not change after his work injury and that his mental health condition did 
not keep him from working. (Ex. G, Depo. p. 61)  At hearing, claimant testified that he 
misunderstood his attorney and believed that he was asking whether his mental health 
prevented him from working prior to the February 8, 2018, work injury. (Hr. Tr., pp. 118-
119)  While possible, it seems unlikely claimant misunderstood the questions posed at 
his initial deposition.  In fact, claimant’s attorney at the time of the deposition clarified his 
question, asking “Has your mental health condition changed since the work injury?”  
Claimant, for the second time, answered, “No.” (Ex. G, Depo. p. 61)  
Stover reported improvement in his headaches with Cymbalta and a higher 
dosage of gabapentin, but the headaches were still constant and severe. (JE1, pp. 87-
89)  The medication Nurtec prevented his headaches from reaching the point where he 
needed to lie down in order to tolerate them.  (JE1, p. 110; Hr. Tr., pp. 33-34)   
Stover returned to Dr. Walsh for an evaluation of his low back and bilateral leg 
pain on October 15, 2020. (JE1, p. 64)  Dr. Walsh reviewed MRIs of claimant’s head 
and low back. (See JE1, p. 66)  The MRI of claimant’s head revealed a left temporal 
cyst with associated possible underlying calcification.  The MRI of the lumbar spine 
revealed multilevel degenerative changes, most prominent at the L5-S1 level. (See JE1, 
p. 66)  Dr. Walsh recommended repeat EMGs, a CT scan of the head, and an MRI of 
the brain with contrast. (JE1, pp. 66-67)  Dr. Walsh further recommended that claimant 
follow-up with Dr. Mohan for a right L5-S1 injection to determine whether he might 
benefit from surgery. (JE1, p. 67)   
Claimant ultimately declined Dr. Walsh’s recommendation regarding the CT scan 
and MRI of the head. (Id.)  The repeat EMG of the lower extremities returned normal. 
(JE1, p. 73) 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 12 
 
Dr. Shah administered trigger point injections to the lumbar spine on October 21, 
2020. (JE1, p. 72)  Claimant denied any major neck pain or headaches on the date of 
the appointment. (JE1, p. 68)   
One week later, Dr. Mohan reviewed Dr. Walsh’s notes and agreed with her 
treatment recommendations.  (JE1, p. 74)  He then administered transforaminal lumbar 
epidural injections on the right at L5 and S1. (JE1, pp. 74, 78)  Unfortunately, Stover did 
not receive long-term relief from the injections. (JE1, pp. 78, 81) 
On October 30, 2020, defendants directed Stover to present for an independent 
neurological evaluation with neurologist, David Friedgood, D.O. on December 7, 2020; 
however, claimant was a no-call/no-show. (Ex. N, pp. 97-100)  The notice provided Dr. 
Friedgood’s information, the manner, condition, and scope of the examination, and the 
time of the scheduled examination. (Ex. N, pp. 98-99)  The independent medical 
evaluation was rescheduled for December 21, 2020. (Ex. N, p. 100)  The claimant was 
a no-call/no-show to this appointment as well.  Defendants contend that claimant’s 
counsel never communicated a belief that the IME with Dr. Friedgood was 
unreasonable or duplicative.  Moreover, claimant’s counsel never indicated that his 
client refused to attend the IME. 
Due to claimant’s refusal to present for the evaluation, defendants requested that 
Dr. Friedgood perform a records review. (Ex. E, p. 57)  In his report, Dr. Friedgood 
interpreted the July 29, 2020, MRI as showing a left temporal cyst without evidence of a 
traumatic brain injury. (Ex. E, pp. 57-58)  Dr. Friedgood opined that claimant may have 
sustained a mild closed-head injury on February 8, 2018; however, he saw no evidence 
that documented a transient neurological deficit such that claimant would carry a 
diagnosis of a concussion or post-concussion syndrome. (Ex. E, p. 58)  He similarly 
opined that there was nothing in the medical records to support a finding of cervical 
radicular disease, CRPS diagnosis, or other neurological abnormality that would 
account for his reports of right shoulder pain, intermittent paresthesias in his feet, or a 
gait disorder. (Ex. E, pp. 58-59)  Dr. Friedgood placed claimant at maximum medical 
improvement within six months of the date of injury, saw nothing to warrant a permanent 
impairment rating, and did not recommend further neurological testing or treatment. (Ex. 
E, p. 59) 
Notably, Dr. Friedgood’s report provides, 
It would appear that he suffered a cervical strain injury superimposed on 
some mild chronic arthritic disease of the cervical spine. He has a chronic 
headache disorder which was likely aggravated by the cervical strain 
injury and by report has persisted for several years. He may have 
migraine, also aggravated by his fall and head injury. 
(Ex. E, p. 58) 
Dr. Walsh reviewed Stover’s EMG results with him on November 24, 2020. (JE1, 
p. 75)  Dr. Walsh’s medical notes are limited for this appointment; however, she did note 
that depending on his response to conservative care, Stover might benefit from a right 
L5-S1 decompression foraminotomy. (JE1, p. 77) 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 13 
 
Dr. Stanford performed a rotator cuff repair, subacromial decompression with 
acromioplasty, and labral debridement on December 18, 2020. (JE11, p. 212)  By April 
6, 2021, claimant had completed physical therapy and demonstrated excellent range of 
motion with extension, abduction, external rotation, and internal rotation. (JE1, p. 85)  
He had 4 out of 5 strength with resisted flexion and resisted abduction.  He had 5 out of 
5 strength with resisted external rotation. (Id.)  He reported no pain with shoulder range 
of motion, and noted he was very pleased with his progress. (Id.)  Dr. Stanford released 
claimant to full duty work without restrictions. (Id.) 
Dr. Stanford did not provide an opinion regarding a causal connection between 
the right shoulder and the February 8, 2018, work injury. 
At Dr. Hines’ request, Stover underwent a neuropsychological evaluation with 
Jane Springer, Ph.D. on May 18, 2021. (JE12, p. 214)  The purpose of the evaluation 
was to assess Stover’s cognitive and psychological functioning. (Id.)  Dr. Springer 
documented that claimant’s “Test results were of questionable validity and likely 
underestimate his actual current level of cognitive functioning due to obvious difficulties 
tolerating formal testing and fluctuating task engagement.” (JE12, p. 217)  The variable 
task engagement and questionable validity precluded interpretation of the test data for 
diagnostic purposes. (JE12, p. 218)  According to the report, Stover was “very irritable, 
defensive, and frustrated.” (JE12, p. 217)  He also made comments about the testing, 
such as “this is ridiculous.” (Id.)  Stover testified that this evaluation lasted several hours 
and that his pain caused significant difficulty in completing the testing. (Hr. Tr., p. 36)  
Stover’s responses to questionnaires indicated severe anxiety and depression. (JE12, 
p. 218)  Dr. Springer recommended psychiatric medication and psychotherapy with a 
cognitive behavioral approach and emphasis on pain and anger management 
techniques. (JE12, p. 219)   
Stover returned to Dr. Hines for a one-year follow-up appointment on October 11, 
2021. (JE1, p. 87)  He reported that he still experienced daily headaches; however, they 
were not as severe.  He rated his average headache 2-3 out of 10. (Id.)  He also 
reported intermittent dizziness and difficulty concentrating. (JE1, pp. 87, 89)  At the time 
of the October 11, 2021, appointment, claimant was working for Auto Pro Touch-Up. 
(See JE1, p. 88) 
Stover sought to establish pain management care with Melissa Groeneveld, 
ARNP, on December 13, 2021. (JE1, p. 92)  Stover reported chronic right-sided head, 
neck, shoulder, back, and leg pain. (Id.)  He considered his low back and right leg pain 
to be the worst. (Id.)  Interestingly, claimant told Ms. Groeneveld that his right shoulder 
and arm pain were not improved by the December 18, 2020, shoulder surgery. (Id.)  He 
further told Ms. Groeneveld that the neurology and neurosurgery departments told him 
he would have to live with his right-sided symptoms. (Id.)  During the appointment, 
claimant was adamant he was not interested in any further testing, interventions, 
therapy referrals, or consultations due to financial concerns. (Id.) 
 
Throughout 2022, claimant presented to Dr. Hines and Ms. Groeneveld for 
treatment. (See JE1, pp. 96-113)  During this time, claimant reported improvements in 
his headaches with the use of Nurtec.  Claimant told Dr. Hines that he experienced 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 14 
 
three to four headaches per week. (JE1, p. 96)  He also reported an average pain level 
of 4 out of 10. (JE1, pp. 98, 102)  Claimant reported improvements in his ability to sleep, 
noting that when he experienced difficulty sleeping it was just as often due to having 
things on his mind as it was due to pain. (JE1, p. 102) In August, Stover discussed 
starting a new job at Harley Davidson where he would be able to sit down as needed 
while working. (Id.)  Unfortunately, it does not appear as though claimant ended up 
taking this job. 
 
Dr. Segal conducted his second independent medical evaluation of Stover on 
January 19, 2023. (Ex. 2, p. 76)  Despite apparent improvements in claimant’s right 
shoulder condition and his headaches, Dr. Segal’s updated assessment increased 
claimant’s permanent impairment rating from 49 percent to 75 percent whole person 
impairment. (Ex. 2, p. 136)  With respect to claimant’s traumatic brain injury, Dr. Segal 
increased his impairment rating for Post-Concussive Syndrome, vestibular dysfunction, 
and headache pain. (Ex. 2, pp. 125-128)  As for the cervical spine injury, Dr. Segal felt 
that claimant’s condition warranted placement in DRE Category III as opposed to 
Category II. (Ex. 2, pp. 129-130)  As such, he increased his initial impairment rating 
from 7 to 18 percent whole person impairment. (Ex. 2, p. 130)  Dr. Segal similarly 
believed claimant’s lumbar spine condition warranted placement in DRE Category III as 
opposed to Category II. (Ex. 2, pp. 132-134)  As such, he increased his initial 
impairment rating from 7 to 12 percent whole person impairment. (Ex. 2, p. 134)  
Impairment attributable to the right shoulder, right elbow, right knee, and right ankle 
injuries was increased due to range of motion and strength deficits. (Ex. 2, pp. 130-132, 
134)  Lastly, Dr. Segal assigned new whole person impairment ratings for the left 
shoulder, right wrist, depression/anxiety, and sleep/fatigue. (Ex. 2, pp. 132, 134-136) 
 
Dr. Segal recommended permanent work restrictions which mirrored claimant’s 
self-reported limitations. (Ex. 2, pp. 85, 138)  The restrictions included lifting 25 pounds, 
occasionally, and sitting/standing 20 minutes at one time. (Ex. 2, p. 138)  It is worth 
noting that Dr. Segal’s updated restrictions are considerably less restrictive than the 
restrictions provided in his June 13, 2020, report. (See Ex. 1, p. 65) 
 
Stover next presented to Andrew Kikuta, M.D. on February 28, 2023, and 
reported a recent incident of impaired concentration. (JE1, p. 116)  During the 
appointment, Stover told Dr. Kikuta that he made the decision to reduce the amount of 
duloxetine and gabapentin he was taking daily. (JE1, p. 117)  Dr. Kikuta opined the 
incident of impaired concentration was most likely a result of insomnia and self-
adjustments in medication. (JE1, p. 118)  He further opined that Stover’s self-
adjustments had likely resulted in uncontrolled anxiety and depression, resulting in poor 
sleep and difficulty concentrating at his job. (Id.)  Dr. Kikuta concluded the appointment 
by talking with Stover about the risks of attempting to adjust his medications without 
professional help. (JE1, p. 119) 
On March 21, 2023, claimant attended a functional capacity evaluation with John 
Kruzich, OTR/L at defendants’ request. (Ex. F)  Mr. Kruzich noted that claimant was 
pleasant throughout the entirety of the March 21, 2023, evaluation, and he did not 
demonstrate any observable difficulties with his required paperwork or communicating 
throughout the entirety of the evaluation. (Ex. F, p. 78)  Stover was able to follow both 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 15 
 
simple and multi-step directions without issue. (Ex. F, pp. 78-79)  However, the results 
of the FCE were deemed invalid due to claimant’s inconsistent performance. (Ex. F, p. 
67)  According to the report, claimant’s range of motion was inconsistent during the 
course of the evaluation, his grip strength testing was not reproducible, and his material 
handling testing and postures throughout testing were inconsistent with physical 
examination and functional testing. (Id.) 
According to Mr. Kruzich, the IME completed by Dr. Segal involved no formal 
testing of cognitive abilities aside from “a simple screening tool which takes roughly five 
minutes to administer and is typically utilized by practitioners as a way to detect the 
possibility of dementia.” (Ex. F, p. 79)  In his supplemental report, Dr. Segal did not 
dispute the simplicity of the test he administered; however, he asserts it was 
inappropriate for defendants to ask an occupational therapist for a medical opinion 
regarding traumatic brain injuries. (Ex. 2, p. 218)  Importantly, defendants only asked 
Mr. Kruzich whether he observed any signs that Stover was suffering from any residuals 
from a concussion/traumatic brain injury during the functional capacity evaluation.  
Based on Mr. Kruzich’s training, qualifications, and experience in providing treatment for 
patients with concussions/traumatic brain injuries, I do not find defendants’ question to 
be inappropriate.  That being said, Mr. Kruzich’s limited observations of Stover hold little 
substantive value. 
Shortly thereafter, Daryl Short, DPT, performed a functional capacity evaluation 
of claimant. (Ex. 3, p. 241)  Unlike Mr. Kruzich, Mr. Short overserved consistent effort 
with range of motion testing, strength testing, and the changes in claimant’s 
kinesiophysical movement patterns during the assessment. (Id.)  Mr. Short placed 
claimant’s functional abilities in the sedentary to light category of work and provided 
claimant could work 40 hours per week, lifting 10-15 pounds on an occasional basis. 
(Ex. 3, p. 242)  The report also recommended claimant limit standing and/or walking to 
35 percent of his day, and provided claimant should be able to change positions 
between sitting, standing, and walking as needed. (Id.) 
Dr. Fields evaluated claimant for a supplemental IME on March 29, 2023, and 
issued his report on April 18, 2023. (Ex. D, p. 36)  On exam, claimant was able to 
provide timely responses to all questions and did not appear to have any deficits in 
cognition or speech. (Ex. D, p. 41)  Dr. Fields documented that claimant walked into the 
exam room without an assistive device. (Ex. D, pp. 41-42)  He had no measurable 
atrophy in his upper extremities. (Ex. D, p. 42)  Dr. Fields continued to believe that 
claimant had an undiagnosed chronic pain condition affecting his entire body that was 
non-physiologic in nature and unrelated to the work injury. (Ex. D, p. 44) 
Dr. Fields addressed several of Dr. Segal’s opinions in his supplemental IME 
report. (Ex. D, pp. 47-50)  First, Dr. Fields addressed Dr. Segal’s opinion that claimant 
had “no realistic ability to sustain gainful full-time employment” at the time of his June 
13, 2020, examination.  Dr. Fields accurately notes that claimant was able to return to 
full-time employment with two different employers following Dr. Segal’s IME. (Ex. D, p. 
47)  Second, Dr. Fields disagreed with Dr. Segal’s opinions regarding claimant’s alleged 
overuse of the left shoulder.  Dr. Fields notes that there is an entire chapter in the AMA 
Guides to the Evaluation of Disease and Injury Causation, 2nd Edition, dedicated to 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 16 
 
evaluating causation of favoring for the opposite limb. (Id.)  Dr. Fields opined there is no 
medical basis to support an injury to claimant’s left upper extremity, overuse or 
otherwise. (Id.)   Third, Dr. Fields pointed out inconsistencies in claimant’s range of 
motion testing and opined that such inconsistencies render the impairment ratings 
invalid under the AMA Guides, 5th Edition. (Ex. D, p. 48)  Fourth, Dr. Fields took issue 
with Dr. Segal’s use of both motor strength and range of motion to determine 
impairment. (Id.)  Dr. Fields opined that there is no basis to perform a separate 
impairment rating on claimant with regard to loss of strength and the same would not be 
valid according to the AMA Guides, 5th Edition, in which impairment ratings based on 
objective anatomic findings take precedence. (Ex. D, p. 49)  Dr. Fields also questioned 
Dr. Segal’s notation that claimant was “able to give maximal force on my exam, and that 
was not limited by pain or range of motion, but purely motor weakness.  During my 
motor exam, Mr. Stover was not in substantial pain…” (Ex. D, p. 48)  In comparison, 
Stover reported constant and severe pain to the level of 100 out of 100 over the week 
prior to his March 29, 2023, examination, with Dr. Fields. (Ex. D, p. 40) 
Dr. Fields also raised concerns as to how Dr. Segal assessed impairment to 
various body parts.  In his report, Dr. Segal provides that several joints were rated 
“based on loss of range of motion and weakness due to no MRI or CT studies having 
been done.”  Dr. Segal then assigned 7 percent whole person impairment for claimant’s 
“right ankle arthropathy.”  Dr. Fields correctly points out that there was an MRI of 
claimant’s right ankle taken on October 26, 2018, which returned unremarkable.  
Additionally, Dr. Fields observed no swelling or weakness in claimant’s right ankle 
during his March 29, 2023, examination, and claimant demonstrated full active and 
passive range of motion and normal strength in the right ankle. (Ex. D, p. 49)  He 
concluded there is no medical evidence of any injury to claimant’s right ankle. (Ex. D, p. 
50)   
After claimant dismissed and re-filed his petition, defendants scheduled claimant 
to present for an IME with Dr. Friedgood on March 27, 2023. (Ex. N, p. 104)  Claimant’s 
current counsel objected to the IME, asserting the IME was too far away from claimant’s 
residence and because claimant had already submitted to multiple IMEs. (Ex. N, pp. 
104-105) 
Stover eventually agreed to present for an in-person IME with Dr. Friedgood on 
April 24, 2023. (Ex. E, p. 60)  Although he reported problems with word-finding, Dr. 
Friedgood observed that Stover communicated well and seemed to have no issues 
communicating throughout the evaluation. (Ex. E, pp. 60, 62)  Dr. Friedgood considered 
claimant’s neurological exam as “normal” aside from mild motor and sensory changes in 
the right small finger. (Ex. E, p. 62)  Dr. Friedgood opined that Stover likely sustained a 
mild concussion from his fall, but the direct effects of the concussion would have 
resolved after several months and were no longer contributing to his complaints. (Ex. E, 
p. 63)  He did not have a neurological explanation for Stover’s diffuse, right-sided 
symptoms. He found no evidence of cervical radiculopathy, lumbar radiculopathy, 
CRPS, or post-concussion syndrome. (Ex. E, p. 63)  He did not believe claimant’s work 
injury was a cause of his headaches.  In conclusion, he agreed that claimant was at 
maximum medical improvement with no evidence of permanent impairment. (Id.) 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 17 
 
Dr. Segal reviewed additional medical records and produced a supplemental 
report on May 5, 2023. (Ex. 2, p. 207)  The majority of the medical records he reviewed 
were IME reports and expert opinions. (See id.)  The additional medical records did not 
cause Dr. Segal to question the conclusions provided in his March 22, 2023, report. (Ex. 
2, p. 219)  In the report, Dr. Segal addressed several of the comments made by 
defendants’ experts.   
Dr. Hines authored a report, at the request of claimant’s attorney, on May 15, 
2023. (Ex. 5, p. 263)  Dr. Hines opined that the July 29, 2020, MRI showed a definitive 
injury to the thalamus and diagnosed claimant with thalamic pain syndrome. (Id.)  He 
also diagnosed claimant with a mild closed head injury with thalamic pain syndrome 
with an acquired thalamic injury on the left as well as a post-traumatic migraine 
syndrome and chronic migraine and chronic pain syndrome exacerbating his depression 
and anxiety. (Ex. 5, p. 265)  Dr. Hines felt claimant was capable of full-time employment 
as long as he was able to take unscheduled breaks and miss days from work as 
needed. (Id.) 
In a rebuttal report, Dr. Friedgood disagreed with Dr. Hines and opined the CT 
scan and MRI of claimant’s brain revealed no evidence of an acute injury to the 
thalamus. (Ex. V, p. 149)  Dr. Friedgood explained that thalamic pain syndrome is a rare 
condition that is brought on by a stroke that affects the thalamus. (Ex. V, p. 150)  He 
opined there was no evidence that claimant suffered a stroke, damaged his thalamus, 
or had any other symptoms commonly associated with thalamic pain syndrome. (Id.)  
Dr. Friedgood believed claimant suffered a mild concussion on the date of injury, but 
opined the current, worsening symptoms, would not be related to his initial head injury. 
(Id.)   Instead, Dr. Friedgood proposed a multifaceted explanation, implicating 
interactions between prescription medications, potential Obstructive Sleep Apnea, and a 
dependence on narcotic analgesics as potential contributors to the claimant's persistent 
headaches. (Ex. V, pp. 150-151) 
Stover did not return to work at School Bus Sales after his injury and his 
employment was eventually terminated. (Ex. 8, p. 276)  He asserts he engaged in an 
extensive work search beginning in July 2019 and continuing thereafter; however, he 
only received two offers of employment. (Hr. Tr., pp. 65, 66, 73-74)  One of the offers 
came from Auto Pro Touch-Up.  Stover accepted a position running the body shop in 
September 2021. (Hr. Tr., pp. 66-67)  The position originally had no physical 
requirements and entailed only supervising the shop, training employees, and building 
relationships with auto dealers. (Hr. Tr., pp. 67-68)  Unfortunately, Stover asserts he 
was terminated in late February 2022 because the company was short-handed and the 
owners wanted him to perform physical labor. (Hr. Tr., pp. 70-71) 
Defendants introduced claimant’s personnel record from Auto Pro Touch-Up.  In 
his February 13, 2023, deposition, claimant testified that he was fired from Auto Pro 
Touch-up because his supervisor wanted him to do physical activities that they knew 
claimant could not do. (Ex. H, Depo. p. 13)  However, claimant’s personnel record 
shows he was terminated for four instances of insubordination in February 2022. (Ex. Q, 
pp. 121-122)  According to Auto Pro Touch-up, claimant was arguing with supervisors, 
refusing to have an electrician he hired to do some work at Auto Pro Touch-up sign a 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 18 
 
W9 and telling his supervisor to “get it signed yourself,” yelling aggressively and 
refusing to use work order forms despite repeated requests, failing to stop at stop signs 
while driving a work vehicle, and smoking inside of the building at his desk and near the 
door despite the policy of no smoking within 20 feet of the building. (Ex. Q, pp. 117-122)  
Notably, one incident of insubordination discussed in the personnel file did involve 
claimant refusing to help with some of the work in the shop. (Ex. Q, p. 121)  Stover 
denied yelling aggressively, ignoring a stop sign, and smoking inside the building. (Hr. 
Tr., pp. 139-140) 
In a letter to the owners of Auto Pro Touch-up, dated March 9, 2022, Stover 
offered to purchase the Auto Pro Touch-Up location he was just terminated from. (Ex. 
Q, p. 124; Hr. Tr., p. 72)  Stover was seeking to purchase, “all business assets at the 
Hudson location, including fixtures, inventory, books and records, clients, work in 
progress, vehicles, tradename, and accounts receivable.” (Ex. Q, p. 124) The letter lists 
10 terms of purchase. (Id.)  Stover testified that purchasing Auto Pro Touch-Up 
represented a better opportunity than starting his own business because the company 
already had a cash flow and employees to perform the physical labor for him. (Hr. Tr., 
pp. 72-73)  He further testified he felt confident in his physical and cognitive capabilities 
to purchase and run Auto Pro Touch-up. (Hr. Tr., pp. 142-143)  
Stover eventually accepted a position hauling livestock feed for Standard 
Nutrition in early 2023. (Hr. Tr., p. 74)  In this position, Stover drives an 18-wheel semi-
truck to a location, empties the feed with an auger, and returns his truck to be reloaded. 
(Hr. Tr., pp. 75-76)   He has to drive on gravel or dirt roads approximately 50 percent of 
his drives. (Ex. H, Depo. p. 18)  He continued to work in this position as of the date of 
hearing.  
In terms of his functional abilities, Stover testified he feels comfortable lifting 20 
pounds once, 10 pounds occasionally, and little to no weight frequently. (Hr. Tr., pp. 51-
52)  As for his other abilities, Stover testified he can stand for 10 to 20 minutes, and he 
can walk no more than 50 feet at a time. (Hr. Tr., p. 52)  Stover uses a cane when he 
goes out in public, but does not require the cane at all times. (Hr. Tr., pp. 54-55)  At the 
evidentiary hearing, claimant stood up from his seated position approximately one hour 
into questioning. 
The diagnostic imaging collected in this case includes CT scans of the cervical 
spine and head, three MRIs of the right shoulder, an MRI of the lumbar spine, an MRI of 
the cervical spine, an MRI of the right lower extremity, and EMGs of the right arm and 
leg.  With the exception of the third MRI of the right shoulder, collected more than two 
years after the date of injury, and those images relating to the right elbow, defendants 
assert all of the diagnostic imaging collected in this case returned unremarkable or 
negative for evidence of an acute injury. (JE1, pp. 29, 45-46, 73; JE3, pp. 153, 155-156, 
158-159, 161-162; JE11, pp. 204-205)   
Given the lack of objective medical evidence to show claimant sustained 
significant injuries, it is reasonable for defendants to question claimant's credibility. 
Indeed, there is a fair amount of evidence in the record to suggest that the claimant 
lacks credibility.   

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 19 
 
The evidentiary record reveals numerous instances of inconsistent reporting and 
inaccuracies in the information provided by Stover to his various medical providers.  The 
inconsistencies include consciously omitting his past treatment during his initial 
evaluation with Dr. Stanford, progressively increasing the height from which he fell, 
reporting both that he did and did not lose consciousness, and reporting to Dr. Segal 
that he had not used any medication for anxiety or depression for eight years prior to 
the date of injury.   
Defendants further note that claimant failed objective validity tests administered 
by both treating and expert physicians. (See JE13, p. 218; Ex. F, p. 67)  Additionally, 
several medical records document Stover giving poor effort and having a bad attitude. 
(See JE7, p. 187; JE12, p. 217; Ex. A, pp. 5-6; Ex. D, p. 31)  While I find these medical 
records concerning, I note that there exist alternative explanations as to why claimant 
might provide poor or inconsistent effort, such as pain. (See JE9, p. 190; JE12, p. 218; 
Ex. A, p. 5)   
The evidentiary record also contains screen captures of claimant’s social media 
accounts that appear to show him enjoying time with family and interacting with friends. 
(Ex. O)  One such photo portrays claimant leaning up against a motorcycle on February 
22, 2019. (Ex. O, p. 107)  The photo is captioned: “This place s how Real men do it ! 
You ride 120 at 20 degrees baby[.]” (Id.)  At hearing, claimant confirmed this is a photo 
of him riding his friend’s motorcycle back to his house for him in the middle of February. 
(Hr. Tr., p. 81)  Claimant asserts the photo appeared on his Facebook account as a 
“time-hop” notification and he subsequently reposted it to his Facebook page. (Id.)  He 
asserts the photo was taken before the February 8, 2018, work injury. (Id.)  In another 
post, claimant loaded a photo of a new snowblower that he referred to as his new toy. 
(Ex. O, p. 110)  The photo notes claimant is “Ready for whatever comes” and states, 
“Bring it snowman[.]”  At hearing, claimant confirmed that he has a snowblower, but 
asserts he has only used it once to show his son how it worked. (Hr. Tr., p. 79)    
I do not find these photos of isolated incidents to be convincing evidence that 
claimant is being wholly untruthful about the extent of his injuries.  That being said, the 
photos support a finding that claimant is likely exaggerating his symptoms and abilities 
to some extent.   
I find that the medical records in evidence do not disclose objective findings to 
definitively explain the majority of claimant’s subjective complaints.  I also find that 
claimant exaggerates his symptoms and downplays his residual abilities, which 
diminishes his overall credibility.  Nevertheless, claimant has largely reported the same 
or similar symptoms since the date of injury.  While it is evident that claimant 
exaggerates his symptoms and functional abilities, I do believe that claimant 
experiences real and legitimate symptoms to some extent.  As I’ve noted in past 
decisions, what may appear as an exaggeration or overreaction on the surface, could 
very well be manifestations of an underlying mental health or somatic disorder.     
Stover has alleged that he sustained permanent injuries to his head, neck, right 
shoulder, right arm, low back, right hip, and right leg.  He also asserts the stipulated 
work injury materially aggravated pre-existing mental health conditions.  Defendants 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 20 
 
concede claimant sustained permanent disability with respect to the right elbow; 
however, they assert there is no objective medical evidence to support claimant’s 
argument that he sustained a permanent injury or material aggravation to any body part 
other than the right elbow.   
In support of his claim, Stover relies on the medical opinions of Dr. Hines and Dr. 
Segal.  Stover also relies on the opinions of Ms. Douglas, his primary care provider and 
advanced registered nurse practitioner; however, I have a difficult time affording her 
opinions significant weight.  While I have no doubt Ms. Douglas is a qualified and 
respected practitioner, she is not as specialized or qualified as the other experts that 
have provided opinions in this case.  Additionally, Ms. Douglas provided no rationale for 
her causation opinions; rather, she simply completed a “check the box” report following 
a conference call with claimant’s counsel.  There is no evidence as to what information 
Ms. Douglas reviewed prior to providing her causation opinions.  Lastly, at the time of 
Ms. Douglas’ report, she was still recommending diagnostic imaging and referring 
claimant for further evaluation. (See JE1, p. 54)  She did not provide an updated report 
confirming her opinions following claimant’s subsequent treatment with Dr. Stanford and 
Dr. Hines.  For these reasons, I do not find Ms. Douglas’ opinions to be persuasive. 
 
I similarly have a difficult time accepting the opinions of Dr. Hines.  As claimant’s 
treating neurologist, Dr. Hines’ report addressed the alleged closed head injury.  Dr. 
Hines opined that claimant’s MRI of the brain revealed a “definitive injury” to the 
thalamus and diagnosed claimant with thalamic pain syndrome. (Ex. 5, p. 263)  Dr. 
Hines is the only physician to opine the diagnostic imaging of claimant’s brain revealed 
a definitive injury.  He is similarly the only physician to assess thalamic pain syndrome.  
In contrast, Dr. Friedgood saw no evidence of an acute injury to the thalamus.  Instead, 
like the interpreting physician, Dr. Friedgood discovered a calcified lesion abutting the 
left ventricle. (Ex. V, p. 149; see JE11, p. 205)  He explained the cystic lesion, as shown 
on the CT scan and MRI, was congenital and present prior to the date of injury. (Ex. V, 
p. 149)  Notably, Dr. Segal also believed the imaging revealed a congenital cyst. (Ex. 1, 
p. 52) 
As discussed, Dr. Segal’s reports are subject to criticism for a number of 
reasons.  The two main reports – which span over 230 pages – suggest Dr. Segal 
perceived his role in this claim as an advocate for claimant and not that of an objective 
expert.  He relied heavily on claimant’s reported history and symptoms in reaching his 
conclusions and largely disregarded all of the objective diagnostic imaging.   
Both reports contain several diagnoses that lack adequate medical support.  For 
instance, Dr. Segal diagnosed and assigned permanent impairment for ulnar 
neuropathy. (Ex. 2, pp. 98-99, 132)  No other provider has diagnosed ulnar neuropathy.  
Additionally, Dr. Segal offered a generalized diagnosis of “Overuse injury” for the left 
shoulder rather than specifying a particular condition. (Ex. 2, p. 108)  Despite a lack of 
diagnostic imaging or formal diagnosis, Dr. Segal assigned permanent impairment to 
the alleged left shoulder condition.  Again, no other provider diagnosed a left shoulder 
injury.  There is little to no evidence of claimant sustaining a sequela injury to the left 
shoulder.   

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 21 
 
One of the closer calls in this case is the alleged causal relation between the 
February 8, 2018, work injury and the right rotator cuff and labrum tears.  Unfortunately, 
Dr. Segal failed to adequately address this issue in his reports.  In his initial report, Dr. 
Segal assessed right shoulder arthropathy. (Ex. 1, pp. 53-54)  He explained, “Because 
the MRIs showed only bursitis, yet the function is quite limited, the diagnosis of the 
shoulder will be right shoulder arthropathy.” (Ex. 1, p. 54)  Importantly, it does not 
appear as though Dr. Segal was able to review the first two MRIs of claimant’s right 
shoulder. (See Ex. 1, pp. 35-37)  He referenced the findings made by the interpreting 
physician; however, he did not summarize either report in his “Review of the Actual 
Images” section. (Ex. 1, pp. 35-37)   
In his second report, Dr. Segal discussed the first and third MRIs, but not the 
second. (Ex. 2, pp. 89-90)  He suggested the findings of the third MRI might have been 
apparent on the first MRI if intra-articular contrast was used.  Notably, all three MRIs 
were collected without contrast.  Dr. Segal did not directly address how or why the third 
MRI, collected nearly two years after two unremarkable right shoulder MRIs, revealed 
tears of the supraspinatus and labrum, while the first two did not.  When addressing the 
IME reports of the various expert physicians in this case, Dr. Segal opined, “Because 
MRIs have false negatives, and Mr. Stover’s right shoulder symptoms did not change, 
and there was no intervening injury, that tear was caused by the work injury of February 
8, 2018.” (Ex. 2, p. 104)  This is the extent of Dr. Segal’s analysis as to whether the 
February 8, 2018, work injury caused the tears in claimant’s rotator cuff and labrum.  Dr. 
Segal briefly notes that there is documentation in the medical records of an injury to the 
right shoulder joint in his “Overall Summary” section; however, he did not include 
specific discussion of the right shoulder in his “Discussion of the Diagnoses” section. 
(Ex. 2, pp. 101, 108-122)   
Lastly, Dr. Segal failed to follow the AMA Guides in several respects.  Most 
notably, Dr. Segal incorrectly combined claimant’s loss of strength with loss of range of 
motion when assessing impairment.  The AMA Guides specifically note, “Decreased 
strength cannot be rated in the presence of decreased motion, painful conditions, 
deformities, or absence of parts that prevent effective application of maximal force in the 
region being evaluated.” (AMA Guides, p. 508)  Dr. Segal briefly addressed this concern 
in his May 5, 2023, supplemental report; however, I did not find his explanation 
convincing. (Ex. 2, p. 212)  Moreover, this agency has previously rejected Dr. Segal’s 
impairment ratings for this very reason. Carmer v. Nordstrom, Inc., File No. 1656062.01 
(App. Dec. 29, 2021)  For these reasons, I do not find the opinions of Dr. Segal and Dr. 
Hines to be persuasive.   
In spite of this finding, I note that all three neurologists to examine Stover 
believed he sustained at least a mild concussion from his fall on February 8, 2018.  
Stover’s current medical condition remains a point of contention among the three 
consulting neurologists, each offering distinct perspectives. 
Dr. Hines, claimant’s treating neurologist, assessed post-traumatic migraine 
syndrome. (Ex. 5, p. 265)   

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 22 
 
Dr. Friedgood found no neurologic evidence of post-concussion syndrome.  He 
opined that the effects of Stover’s mild concussion likely resolved over several months 
and were no longer contributing to Stover’s complaints. (Ex. E, p. 63)  Dr. Friedgood’s 
opinions are subject to criticism due to the lack of substantial explanation for the 
symptoms Stover endured both six months post-injury and persistently to the present 
day.   
Dr. Segal diagnosed post-concussive syndrome, post-traumatic migraines, 
vestibular dysfunction, sleep disorder, cognitive dysfunction, and emotional and 
behavioral impairments. (Ex. 2, pp. 108-214)  He concedes that there is not much 
discussion in the records of the post-concussive symptoms relative to their severity; 
however, he relates the same to Stover and his medical providers being more focused 
on the physical injuries.  He also suggests Stover could have incorrectly assumed his 
symptoms were from some non-related etiology, such as the aging process. (Ex. 2, p. 
97) 
I note that Stover has consistently reported striking his head on the ground 
during his fall on February 8, 2018.  Four days later, Stover complained of a headache 
that started February 9, 2018. (JE2, p. 124)  He went on to describe significant and 
persistent headaches to Dr. Fowler and Dr. McMains. (JE2, p. 127; JE4, p. 169)  
Several physicians evaluated Stover and evaluated the permanent effects, if any, of the 
alleged closed head injury.  Claimant’s testimony is consistent with the medical records 
that note he was experiencing three to four headaches per week prior to being 
prescribed Nurtec. (Hr. Tr., p. 34; JE1, pp. 96, 110)   
While claimant has the tendency to exaggerate his symptoms and abilities, the 
reporting of his ongoing headaches has been consistent.  Similarly, while I find Dr. 
Segal’s advocacy for Stover may have influenced an overly lenient approach in 
attributing certain symptoms to the traumatic brain injury, I nevertheless accept Dr. 
Segal’s opinion causally relating claimant’s traumatic brain injury and post-concussive 
syndrome to the February 8, 2018, work injury.  However, given my credibility findings 
and the overall lack of evidence, I find claimant provided insufficient evidence causally 
connecting the alleged word-finding issues, memory deficits, tinnitus, vestibular 
function, sleep disturbances, and emotional sequela to the work injury. 
Dr. Segal assigned 7 percent whole person impairment for cognitive impairment, 
7 percent whole person impairment for post-traumatic headache. (Ex. 2, pp. 125-128)  
Dr. Segal utilized the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition, when assessing claimant’s permanent impairment. Dr. Segal is the only 
physician to assign impairment to claimant’s closed head injury.  I accept the 7 percent 
whole person impairment rating as accurate.   
Drs. Fowler, Aviles, and McMains agreed that claimant sustained five percent 
right upper extremity impairment. (JE4, p. 175; Ex. B, p. 9; Ex. C, p. 22)  I find Dr. 
Fowler’s initial impairment rating to be the most convincing and credible in the 
evidentiary record.  I accept the impairment rating assigned by Dr. Fowler as accurate 
and find that claimant carried his burden of proving he sustained permanent injuries to 
his right elbow and head as a result of the February 8, 2018, stipulated work injury. 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 23 
 
Having found claimant sustained a permanent disability as a result of the 
February 8, 2018, work injury, the next issue to be decided is the extent of claimant’s 
industrial disability. 
Several physicians weighed in on claimant’s need for any permanent restrictions 
related to his injuries.  Dr. Aviles did not believe claimant required any permanent 
restrictions. (Ex. B, pp. 9-10)  Dr. McMains recommended permanent work restrictions 
of no climbing ladders and no use of vibratory tools in the right hand. (Ex. C, p. 22)  Dr. 
Fowler recommended claimant present for a functional capacity evaluation to determine 
his permanent work restrictions. (JE4, p. 175)  Dr. Fields opined that claimant did not 
require permanent restrictions as it related to the right elbow. (Ex. D, p. 33)  Following a 
period of recovery, Dr. Stanford released claimant to full duty work without restrictions. 
(JE1, p. 85)   
Following his initial evaluation, Dr. Segal recommended claimant only lift zero to 
five pounds, occasionally, and six to eight pounds, rarely. (Ex. 1, p. 64)  He also 
restricted claimant to 10 consecutive minutes of sitting, standing, and walking. (Id.)  Dr. 
Segal concluded that claimant was not capable of sustaining gainful, full-time 
employment in any job category. (Id.) In his second report, Dr. Segal recommended 
claimant lift 25 pounds, occasionally.  He also provided that claimant could sit or stand 
20 minutes at a time, and walk on flat surfaces for five minutes at a time. (Ex. 2, p. 138)  
Dr. Segal made several other recommendations for restrictions with respect to 
claimant’s cognitive impairments. (Ex. 2, pp. 137-138)  
As mentioned, claimant also participated in three functional capacity evaluations.  
The first FCE placed claimant in the sedentary demand category. (JE9, p. 190)  Mr. 
Short’s FCE placed claimant in the sedentary-light demand category. (Ex. 3, p. 242)  
The results of the last FCE were deemed invalid due to inconsistent performance. (Ex. 
F, p. 67) 
It is clear to the undersigned that claimant requires some form of permanent 
restrictions with respect to his right elbow and closed head injuries; however, given the 
credibility issues with Dr. Segal’s opinions, and claimant’s performance in the various 
validity tests, I do not expressly adopt any specific restrictions. 
Claimant is a high school graduate with a degree from the Motorcycle Mechanic’s 
Institute in Phoenix, Arizona. (Ex. R, p. 128)  His past work includes painting and 
fabricating, production consulting, work as a service technician, and several managerial 
and supervisory roles. (Ex. R, pp. 125-128)  He has also owned and operated two 
businesses. (Ex. R, pp. 126-127)  Claimant’s work injury will restrict him from returning 
to some of the past work for which he is fitted.   
On the other hand, claimant has returned to work for two different companies 
since his full-duty release from Dr. Stanford.  At the time of hearing, claimant was 
hauling livestock feed with a semi-truck on a full-time basis for Standard Nutrition. (Hr. 
Tr., p. 74)  He is able to drive the semi-truck on gravel and pull his body weight up into 
and out of the truck. (Hr. Tr., pp. 153-154)  Claimant reported to Dr. Segal that his 
headaches were what slowed him down the most at work; however, he testified that he 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 24 
 
has not had to leave work at Standard Nutrition because of his headaches. (Ex. 2, pp. 
80, 84) 
Having considered claimant's age, educational background, employment history, 
residual symptoms, ability to retrain, motivation to continue working, claimant's 
anticipated retirement age, permanent impairment, functional ability, and all other 
industrial disability factors set forth by the Iowa Supreme Court, I find that he has 
sustained a 25 percent industrial disability as a result of his February 8, 2018, work 
injury. 
Dr. Knudson, Dr. Aviles, Dr. McMains, and Dr. Fields placed claimant at 
maximum medical improvement for his physical injuries as of March 11, 2019.  Dr. 
Segal estimated maximum medical improvement for claimant’s head injury and 
associated diagnoses to be one year after the injury, or February 8, 2019.  According to 
Dr. Segal, this is when claimant reached a plateau from a functional standpoint.  I 
decline the opportunity to extend claimant’s recovery period to December 15, 2022, 
when claimant’s migraine medication regimen was optimized.  Therefore, I find the 
proper date for the commencement of permanent partial disability benefits is March 12, 
2019. 
There is a dispute as to whether claimant forfeited his entitlement to weekly 
benefits by twice failing to appear for an independent medical examination with Dr. 
Friedgood.  More specifically, defendants assert claimant forfeited his entitlement to 
weekly benefits from December 7, 2020, through April 24, 2023.  Defendants assert the 
IME with Dr. Friedgood was reasonable and not duplicative because Dr. Friedgood is a 
board-certified neurologist who was well qualified to evaluate claimant’s more recent 
allegations of a permanent head injury.   
Notably, Stover was represented by a different attorney at the time of the 
December 7, 2020, IME appointment.  He testified he was not aware of the December 
7, 2020, IME appointment. (Hr. Tr., pp. 150-152)  Electronic correspondences in the 
evidentiary record show claimant’s counsel was aware of the examinations. (Ex. N, pp. 
97-101)  Claimant’s original attorney dismissed the first petition without prejudice on 
January 15, 2021.  The petition was refiled by claimant’s current attorney approximately 
16 months later on May 10, 2022.  Defendants first filed a motion to compel claimant’s 
attendance at the IME with Dr. Friedgood on March 14, 2023. 
Claimant is seeking reimbursement for unauthorized medical treatment he 
received from various providers. He provided a summary of the expenses in Exhibit 11. 
(Ex. 11, pp. 293-294)  Although the medical appointments with Dr. Hines were not 
authorized, defendants denied liability for the closed head injury.  I find the care he 
received from Dr. Hines was reasonable and beneficial under the totality of the 
circumstances.  Defendants shall reimburse claimant or communicate with claimant's 
insurance company directly to cover the costs associated with the treatment provided by 
Dr. Hines.   
The parties dispute Stover’s gross weekly earnings.  Defendants' rate calculation 
produces an average weekly rate of $973.77, and a weekly workers' compensation 
benefit rate of $628.84. (Ex. K, p. 92). Stover's rate calculation for weekly workers' 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 25 
 
compensation benefits results in an average weekly rate of $1,010.11, and a weekly 
workers' compensation benefit rate of $649.18. (Ex. 9, p. 278). 
Review of the parties' respective positions on this issue reveals the primary 
dispute is whether the pay periods ending on December 23, 2017, and January 6, 2018, 
should be excluded as unrepresentative of claimant’s customary earnings.  Claimant 
contends he was absent from work December 5, 2017, through December 6, 2017, from 
December 11, 2017, through December 12, 2017, January 2, 2018, January 15, 2018, 
and January 25, 2018. (Ex. 9, p. 278) 
Claimant’s wage records are contained in Exhibit 9.  During the pay periods in 
question, claimant was paid for 70.48 hours and 73.14 hours.  Claimant excluded these 
two pay periods from his rate calculation.  In the 10 two-week periods prior to the date 
of injury, there were 3 periods where Stover worked more than 80 hours, 4 periods 
where he worked between 70 and 79 hours, and 3 periods where he worked less than 
70 hours, including holiday and vacation time. (Ex. K, p. 92)  Defendants excluded the 
latter 3 periods from their calculation.  
For reasons that will be discussed in the Conclusions of Law section, I accept 
defendants’ rate calculation and find claimant’s weekly compensation rate to be 
$628.84.   
Lastly, Stover seeks reimbursement for Dr. Segal’s second independent medical 
evaluation under Iowa Code section 85.39 or Iowa Administrative Code Rule 4.33.  As 
correctly pointed out by defendants, claimants are only entitled to reimbursement of one 
independent medical examination, no matter how many ratings are made by an 
employer-retained physician. 
Costs will also be addressed in the Conclusions of Law section. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue to be decided is whether claimant’s injury is limited to the right 
elbow, or if he also sustained injuries to his head, neck, right shoulder, right arm, low 
back, right hip, and right leg as a result of his February 8, 2018, work injury.   
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 26 
 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke's Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense. 
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 76 N.W.2d 756 (1956). If the 
claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially aggravated, 
accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant is entitled to 
recover. Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 115 N.W.2d 812 (1962); 
Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 112 N.W.2d 299 (1961). 
In this case, defendants concede that Stover sustained a work injury on February 
8, 2018.  Defendants further concede that claimant sustained permanent impairment as 
a result of an injury to his right elbow; however, defendants dispute whether Stover 
sustained any permanent impairment to his neck, low back, right hip, right leg, right arm, 
bilateral shoulders, head, and mental health. 
I found the opinions of Drs. Fowler, Aviles, McMains, Fields, and Friedgood to be 
the most convincing on the issue of permanent disability.  With this in mind, I found 
Stover failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that he sustained permanent 
injuries to his neck, low back, right hip, right leg, and bilateral shoulders as a result of 
the February 8, 2018, work injury.   
With respect to the alleged closed head injury, I found claimant sustained a 
permanent disability due to his ongoing post-concussion syndrome as a result of his 
February 8, 2018, work injury.  I therefore conclude claimant carried his burden of 
proving he sustained a permanent disability as a result of his February 8, 2018, work 
injury.   
Having concluded claimant sustained a permanent disability to the right elbow 
and head, I similarly find that the permanent disability sustained is industrial in nature.  
As such, the next issue to be decided is the extent of claimant’s industrial disability. 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss of a scheduled member under Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(a)-(u) (2017) or for loss of earning capacity under Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v) (2017). The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an 
injured worker is entitled is determined by using the functional method. Functional 
disability is “limited to the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” 
Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 
576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998). 
Because claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial 
disability has been sustained. Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City R. 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 27 
 
Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows: “it is therefore plain that the 
legislature intended the term ‘disability’ to mean ‘industrial disability’ or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere “functional disability' to be computed in the terms of 
percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal man.” 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability bears to the 
body as a whole. Iowa Code § 85.34. 
With the appropriate industrial disability factors in mind, I found claimant 
sustained a 25 percent industrial disability.  I therefore conclude claimant satisfied his 
burden to prove he is entitled to a 25 percent industrial disability, which converts to 125 
weeks of permanent partial disability benefits. 
Having concluded claimant is entitled to 125 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits, it must be determined when payment of those benefits should begin. 
Under Iowa Code section 85.34(2), compensation for permanent partial disability 
commences “when it is medically indicated that maximum medical improvement from 
the injury has been reached and that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment can be determined” under the AMA Guides.  Dr. Knudson, Dr. Aviles, Dr. 
McMains, and Dr. Fields placed claimant at maximum medical improvement for his 
physical injuries as of March 11, 2019.  I find the proper date for the commencement of 
permanent partial disability benefits is March 12, 2019. 
Defendants assert claimant forfeited his entitlement to weekly benefits from 
December 7, 2020, to April 24, 2023, due to his repeated refusal to attend the IME 
appointment with Dr. Friedgood. 
Iowa Code section 85.39(1) (2021) states: 
85.39 Examination of injured employees. 
1. After an injury, the employee, if requested by the employer, shall 
submit for examination at some reasonable time and place and as often as 
reasonably requested, to a physician or physicians authorized to practice 
under the laws of this state or another state, without cost to the employee; 
but if the employee requests, the employee, at the employee's own cost, is 
entitled to have a physician or physicians of the employee's own selection 
present to participate in the examination. If an employee is required to leave 
work for which the employee is being paid wages to attend the requested 
examination, the employee shall be compensated at the employee's regular 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 28 
 
rate for the time the employee is required to leave work, and the employee 
shall be furnished transportation to and from the place of examination, or 
the employer may elect to pay the employee the reasonable cost of the 
transportation. The refusal of the employee to submit to the examination 
shall forfeit the employee's right to any compensation for the period of 
refusal. Compensation shall not be payable for the period of refusal. 
The question, therefore, is whether the defendants can use this code section to 
claim a forfeiture of benefits under the circumstances presented herein. 
Section 85.39 is an important provision in implementing the legislative purpose 
as set forth in detail above. “When an injury is sustained by a worker covered by our 
system of workers' compensation, a statutory process exists that not only directs the 
treatment and care for the worker, but also the future examination for any disability 
resulting from the injury following the healing period.” Des Moines Area Reg'l Transit 
Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 843 (Iowa 2015). The purpose of section 
85.39(1) “was to require an employee to appear for ‘examination’ at the instance of the 
employer, doubtless for the purpose of enabling the employer to ascertain the extent 
and character of the injury.” Daugherty v. Scandia Coal Co., 206 Iowa 120, 219 N.W. 
65, 67 (1928). This includes investigating questions of causation and disability. City of 
Davenport v. Newcomb, 820 N.W.2d 882, 892-93 (Iowa Ct. App. 2012). 
In Newcomb, the claimant alleged that he sustained a work injury. The claimant 
was provided light-duty work. The employer ultimately denied the claim and did not 
direct medical treatment. Id. at 884. After the claimant recovered, he obtained an 
evaluation and report from his treating neurosurgeon. Id. at 885. The employer then 
sought to obtain (using a motion to compel) an evaluation with its own neurosurgeon to 
elicit opinions on causation and disability. The agency denied this. Id. at 886. This 
decision was affirmed in the District Court, holding that 85.39 only applied to accepted 
claims. Id. at 893. The Court of Appeals ultimately held that this was an abuse of the 
agency's discretion as it impeded the employer's ability to develop its own evidence 
related to claimant's alleged disability. Id. 
Claimant testified he was not aware that he was scheduled for an evaluation with 
Dr. Friedgood, at defendants’ request, in December 2020.  He further testified that he 
was not informed of the appointments. (Hr. Tr., pp. 150-151)  The evidentiary record 
contains electronic correspondences from defendants to claimant’s prior attorney; 
however, the record does not contain any electronic correspondences from claimant’s 
prior attorney to defendants confirming Stover was aware of the upcoming 
appointments.   
Fundamental principles of due process demand that an individual be provided 
with adequate notice before being penalized for non-compliance. 
Iowa Code section 85.39(1) explicitly refers to the "refusal" of the employee, 
indicating an intentional act of defiance.  The law, in its intent, is to address intentional 
refusals.  In this case, the employee's lack of knowledge about the scheduled 
examination, attributed to his attorney's failure to communicate the details, absolves him 
of any intentional refusal.  It is crucial to recognize that the term "refusal" implies a 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 29 
 
conscious decision, and in the absence of such awareness, the forfeiture of 
compensation cannot be applied.  
Moreover, it is crucial to highlight that the defendants failed to exhaust all 
available remedies to address the issue. The option to file a motion to compel existed, 
providing a mechanism to compel the employee to attend the independent medical 
examination. However, this avenue was not pursued, indicating a failure on the part of 
the defendants to utilize the legal processes available to them. Forfeiture of benefits is 
an exceptionally harsh outcome, and it is essential that the employee be afforded due 
process.  The failure to explore and exhaust less severe remedies before resorting to 
such a drastic measure is inconsistent with the principles of fairness and justice inherent 
in due process.  The law should encourage the use of available legal mechanisms to 
address non-compliance before resorting to punitive measures, especially when the 
employee's lack of awareness of the examination is a mitigating factor.  Therefore, I find 
defendants failed to carry their burden of proving claimant forfeited his entitlement to 
weekly benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39(1). 
The next issue involves Stover’s weekly workers' compensation rate. Section 
85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the employee at the 
time of the injury. The section defines weekly earnings as the gross salary, wages, or 
earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the employee worked the 
customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee was injured as the 
employer regularly required for the work or employment. 
If the employee is paid on a daily or hourly basis or by output, weekly earnings 
are computed by dividing by 13 the earnings over the 13-week period immediately 
preceding the injury. Any week that does not fairly reflect the employee's customary 
earnings is excluded. Iowa Code section 85.36(6) 
The parties have a dispute regarding which weeks should be included in the 
calculation of Stover’s gross weekly earnings.  Defendants assert an average weekly 
wage of $973.77, with a corresponding weekly rate of $628.84. (Ex. K, p. 92) Claimant 
asserts an average weekly wage of $1,010.11, with a corresponding weekly rate of 
$649.18. (Ex. 9, p. 278) The only real difference in the parties' calculations is that 
claimant excluded the pay periods ending December 23, 2017, and January 6, 2018, as 
claimant only worked 73.14 and 54.48 hours during those periods, respectively. 
Although claimant was absent from work at times during these pay periods, a 
week in which the claimant received vacation or sick leave payments is not 
automatically excluded from the rate calculation. Mercy Med. Ctr. v. Healy, 801 N.W.2d 
865 (Iowa App. June 29, 2011)  The test to determine whether a week is representative 
is whether the claimant's earnings during each particular week was customary for that 
particular employee given his or her earning history as a whole.  I find that the pay 
periods ending December 23, 2017, and January 6, 2018, are representative of 
claimant’s customary earnings and should be included in the calculation of claimant’s 
gross weekly earnings. 
Therefore, I accept defendants’ gross earnings and rate calculation as the more 
accurate calculation.  I conclude claimant’s gross weekly wages are $973.77.  The 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 30 
 
parties have stipulated that claimant is married and entitled to three exemptions.  Thus, 
claimant’s weekly workers’ compensation rate is $628.84.   
Next, claimant seeks reimbursement of his second IME with Dr. Segal pursuant 
to Iowa Code section 85.39.  Alternatively, claimant requests that the costs associated 
with Dr. Segal’s second and third reports be taxed as a cost against defendants. 
Under Iowa Code section 85.39, claimant is only entitled to reimbursement of 
one IME. Larson Mfg. Co. v. Thorson, 763 N.W.2d 842, 861 (Iowa 2009)  As such, I find 
claimant failed to prove entitlement to reimbursement of Dr. Segal’s second IME under 
Iowa Code section 85.39.   
The cost of Dr. Segal’s second and third reports are recoverable as a taxable 
cost under rule 876-4.33; however, only the cost associated with the preparation of the 
written reports can be reimbursed as a cost under rule 876-4.33. Des Moines Area 
Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 846-847 (Iowa 2015).  Dr. 
Segal’s invoices are itemized.  Dr. Segal charged $2,800.00 for drafting his April 3, 
2023, report, and $1,333.33 for drafting his May 5, 2020, supplemental report. (Ex. 12, 
pp. 326-327) 
Defendants contend the April 2023 invoice is not recoverable under Rule 4.33(6) 
as Dr. Segal did not specify how much of the expense was allocated to drafting his 
report.  I disagree.  The invoice provides that Dr. Segal charged $800.00 for his records 
review, $1,400.00 for his face-to-face evaluation, and $2,800.00 for “Drafting of 
impairment rating/Report (includes Images).” (Ex. 12, p. 326)  Defendants argue 
“includes Images” indicates that a portion of the $2,800.00 is attributable to imaging 
studies.  I do not find defendants’ argument persuasive.  There is no indication Dr. 
Segal collected updated imaging studies during his evaluation.  The more likely 
explanation is that the April 3, 2023, report literally “includes images” from claimant’s 
past diagnostic imaging and the AMA Guides. (Ex. 2, pp. 88-93, 126-136)   
I find the cost of obtaining Dr. Segal’s reports are appropriate and assessed 
pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(6) 
Finally, claimant is seeking an assessment of costs. Costs are to be assessed at 
the discretion of the Iowa Workers' Compensation Commissioner or the deputy hearing 
the case. Iowa Code section 86.40 
Claimant is seeking his filing fee in the amount of $103.00. This is a permissible 
cost pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33(7). I conclude defendants are liable for this cost.  
Claimant is also seeking $157.50 and $72.50 for deposition transcripts. (Ex. 12, 
p. 323) This is a permissible cost pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33(2). I conclude 
defendants are liable for this cost. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant one hundred twenty-five (125) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits commencing on March 12, 2019. 

STOVER V. SCHOOL BUS SALES CO. 
Page 31 
 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the weekly rate of seven hundred seventeen 
and 64/100 dollars ($717.64) per week. 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. 
Defendants shall pay directly to the medical provider, reimburse claimant for any 
out-of-pocket expenses, and hold claimant harmless for all causally related medical 
expenses contained in Claimant's Exhibit 11. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant's costs totaling four thousand four hundred 
sixty-six and 33/100 dollars ($4,466.33) 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this __30th _ day of January, 2024. 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Benjamin Roth (via WCES) 
Robert Gainer (via WCES) 
Gregory M. Taylor (via WCES) 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
   
