Case Number: 5051639.02
Case Title:  DUNLAP, DYLAN V. VARIED INDUSTRIES
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Dunlap Dylan-5051639.02R.PDF
========================================================================

 
 
BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
VARIED INDUSTRIES, INC. and  
  : 
GREAT WEST CASUALTY, 
  : 
 
 
  :                    File No. 5051639.02 
 
Petitioners, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
REVIEW-REOPENING 
vs. 
 
  :  
 
 
DECISION 
 
 
  : 
 
  
  : 
DYLAN DUNLAP, 
  : 
 
 
  :                       
 
Respondent. 
  :  
     Head Note Nos.: 1108.50, 1804 
 
 
  :                                         2403, 2502, 2907 
 
 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Varied Industries, Inc., and Great West Casualty, defendants, filed a petition 
seeking review-reopening of a prior decision of this agency.  Specifically, defendants 
seek to review and reopen a June 7, 2019 review-reopening decision, which was 
summarily affirmed by the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner on April 9, 
2020, and ultimately affirmed by the District Court for Polk County in an October 13, 
2020, decision on judicial review.   
Dylan Dunlap will be referred to as the claimant in this decision and Varied 
Industries, Inc., and Great West Casualty, as defendants, notwithstanding the fact 
Varied Industries, Inc. and Great West Casualty filed the petition for review-reopening.   
In the underlying review-reopening decision, the presiding deputy commissioner 
found that claimant sustained a work-related injury to his right shoulder and was also 
diagnosed with complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS).  The deputy commissioner 
also found that Dunlap was entitled to permanent total disability benefits as the result of 
the July 23, 2014 date of injury.   
The defendants filed a review-reopening petition on December 19, 2023, seeking 
a decrease in the permanent disability award.  This review-reopening proceeding came 
on for hearing before the undersigned on February 17, 2025, via videoconference in the 
Des Moines, Iowa venue.   
Krista Sheppard was the only witness to testify live at the time of the review-
reopening hearing.  The defendants also attempted to call Shelley Allision as a witness, 
however, claimant objected to the lay testimony.  (Transcript, pages 14-20) Because 
defendants failed to disclose Shelley Allision in their discovery responses the 
undersigned found it was unfairly prejudicial to the claimant and the objection was 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Jun-25  11:18:45     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

VARIED INDUSTRIES, IN/GREAT WEST CASUALTY  V. DUNLAP 
Page 2 
sustained.  (Tr. pp. 14-20)   Ms. Allison’s testimony was excluded from evidence but 
defendants were allowed to call her as an offer of proof.  (Tr. pp. 38-53)   
Claimant offered exhibits 1 through 10 which were admitted without objection. 
The defendants offered exhibits A through L. Claimant objected to Exhibit L which is an 
affidavit dated May 27, 2022, of Amanda Clement, a private investigator in a prior case.  
(Tr. pp. 7-13) Claimant objected because they first received the affidavit four days prior 
to the hearing and set forth why it was unfairly prejudicial.  (Tr. p. 10) The undersigned 
found that Exhibit L was in violation of the hearing assignment order, and of agency rule 
4.19(3) and the objection was sustained.  Exhibit L was not admitted into the record.  
Exhibits H, pp. 67-69 contained images of a minor; it was agreed that these images 
should not be part of the record.  (Tr. pp. 27-28) All other exhibits were received into the 
evidentiary record without objection.  Due to a lack of communication between the 
parties, no joint exhibits were filed in this case.  (Tr. p. 8) 
The parties also submitted a hearing report, which contains stipulations.  The 
parties’ stipulations were accepted by the presiding deputy commissioner and are now 
relied upon in entering this decision.  The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on April 
9, 2025, at which time the case was considered fully submitted. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether defendants have established that there has been a substantial 
change in condition sufficient to justify a reopening of the June 7, 2019 
review-reopening decision, as ultimately affirmed in the October 13, 2020 
District Court decision. 
2. If defendants have established a substantial change in condition, the extent of 
claimant’s current industrial disability and resulting entitlement to permanent 
partial disability benefits, including a claim for permanent total disability. 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of his independent medical 
evaluation expense pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
4. Whether defendants should be responsible to reimburse claimant for out-of-
pocket expenses. 
5. Whether costs should be assessed against the defendants. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 

VARIED INDUSTRIES, IN/GREAT WEST CASUALTY  V. DUNLAP 
Page 3 
In a June 7, 2019 review-reopening decision, another deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner concluded that claimant, Dunlap, sustained injury to his 
right shoulder and was diagnosed with Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS) 
which was causally related to his work injury at Varied Industries on July 23, 2014.  The 
deputy found that Dunlap established he sustained permanent impairment to his right 
shoulder and CRPS caused by the work injury.  (Review-reopening decision, June 7, 
2019, p. 19) The deputy found that as a result of the work injury Dunlap sustained 32 
percent functional permanent impairment of the whole person due to his CRPS and an 
additional 13 percent functional impairment of the whole person for his right upper 
extremity. (Review-reopening decision, June 7, 2019, p. 22) Based on the opinion of 
Keith Bengtson, M.D., the deputy also found that as the result of the injury Dunlap was 
unable to use his right upper extremity in a productive manner in an employment 
situation.  (Review-reopening decision, June 7, 2019, pp. 23-23) Dunlap was awarded 
permanent total disability in the review-reopening decision.   
Defendants now contend that Dunlap’s physical condition has substantially 
improved since the 2019 review-reopening hearing and that his permanent total 
disability award should be reviewed and decreased.  Specifically, defendants contend 
that over the past six years Dunlap’s CRPS condition has improved and is no longer a 
supported diagnosis.  Dunlap asserts that the defendants have failed to carry their 
burden of proof to show that he sustained a change in his physical condition since the 
date of the award of permanent total disability.  
At the time of the February 17, 2025, review-reopening hearing Dunlap was 34 
years old.  (Ex. I, Deposition, p. 4) He resided in Marble Rock, Iowa.  (Ex. I, Depo. p. 5) 
He is right-hand dominant.  (Ex. 1, p. 1)  Since the 2019 review-reopening decision 
Dunlap has not had any additional education or training and has not been employed.  
(Ex. 3, pp. 37-38)   
On March 5, 2019, Keith Bengtson, M.D., of the Mayo Clinic issued a letter to 
Dunlap’s attorney.  (Ex. 10, p. 61b) He assigned permanent restrictions and he stated 
Dunlap should not use his right arm or hand for any work-related activity.  (Ex. 10, p. 
61b) 
Dunlap was seen at the Mayo Clinic on November 5, 2020.  (Ex. D, p. 31) This 
was his first visit in one and a half years.  Over the last 15 months he developed 
increased sweating in his right foot.  He noticed this particularly in the winter time when 
his foot felt much colder on the right than on the left.  The impression was history of 
right upper extremity CRPS and onset right anterior thigh pain with elements of hip 
pathology, meralgia paresthetica, or mid lumbar radiculitis.  (Ex. D, p. 31)  
On January 11, 2024, Dunlap went to the Mayo Clinic where he saw Dr. 
Bengtson.  (Ex. 10, p. 64) Dr. Bengtson noted that Dunlap returned after four years.  He 
continued to have right upper extremity pain with particularly limited use of his right 
shoulder.  Dunlap did more of his heavy activities with his left hand.  He had not 
returned to work.  Dr. Bengtson noted that the patient continued to have slightly 

VARIED INDUSTRIES, IN/GREAT WEST CASUALTY  V. DUNLAP 
Page 4 
erythematous. He noted limited range of motion of the shoulder.  He also noted altered 
sensation to light touch throughout the right upper extremity.  Dr. Bengtson’s impression 
was chronic right upper extremity CRPS.  (Ex. 10, p. 64) Dr. Bengtson did not have any 
treatment to offer Dunlap.  He hoped that new advances in medicine might provide relief 
for Dunlap in the future.  (Ex. 10, p. 64) 
On March 18, 2024, Dr. Bengtson authored a responsive missive to claimant’s 
counsel.  (Ex. D, p. 29) He was asked to comment on any clinical improvement of 
Dunlap’s right upper extremity between May 26, 2022 and his latest visits on January 
11, 2024.  (Ex. D, p. 29) He noted that previously Dunlap had severe pain in his right 
shoulder and was barely able to move the shoulder.  However, on the last appointment 
he still had some limited right shoulder range of motion but appeared more comfortable 
and had some active use of his shoulder.  He opined that Dunlap did improve between 
the earliest evaluations and the last evaluation on January 11, 2024.  (Ex. D, p. 29) 
There is no mention of changing any of Dunlap’s restrictions.   
John D. Kuhnlein, M.D., examined Dunlap on December 5, 2024.  (Ex. 1) As the 
result of his examination and review of the records provided to him, Dr. Kuhnlein issued 
a report on January 20, 2025.  He was asked to provide an assessment of the injuries 
sustained by Dunlap as a result of the July 23, 2014 work incident.  His assessment 
was: 
a. Right shoulder posterior labral tear with 
i. October 27, 2014, arthroscopic posterior labral repair and rotator 
interval closure/plication (Poffhoff) 
ii. August 31, 2016, labral repair (Nepola) 
b. Recurrent labral tear, biceps tear, and suprascapular nerve entrapment with  
i. November 27, 2017, arthroscopic suprascapular nerve release, 
debridement or pan labral tear, biceps tenotomy and subpectoral 
biceps tenodesis (Elhassan) 
c. Complex regional pain syndrome right upper extremity 
d. Possible neuropathic pain extension to the right lower extremity. 
(Ex. 1, p. 27) 
Dr. Kuhnlein was asked whether he felt there had been a change in Dunlap’s 
physical condition since the March 5, 2019 review-reopening hearing.  Dr. Kuhnlein 
responded, 
While the examination is not currently consistent with the Budapest criteria 
diagnosis for Complex Regional Pain Syndrome, Mr. Dunlap has been 
given this diagnosis by multiple physicians with expertise in this area in 
the past with objective evidence of complex regional pain syndrome.  In 
this case, “the damage has been done,” so even with the resolution of the 
CRPS, Mr. Dunlap still exhibits significant disability related to the 
significant right shoulder pathology identified here in Iowa and at the Mayo 

VARIED INDUSTRIES, IN/GREAT WEST CASUALTY  V. DUNLAP 
Page 5 
Clinic treated with 3 surgeries and any residual effects from the CRPS in 
combination with the residual effects from his shoulder injury. 
Looking at the record over the past 5 years, since the March 5, 2019, 
review-reopening arbitration decision, there is no objective evidence that 
Mr. Dunlap is more objectively functional than he was 5 years ago.  There 
are only speculative opinions that he should be able to use his right arm 
more than he has objectively demonstrated he actually can, including the 
results of the January 6, 2025, FCE performed by Mr. Kruzich. 
Everyone is different, and the way Mr. Dunlap dresses may be dependent 
on who assists him rather than what he can do himself.  To say that it is 
incongruent for someone to be able to maneuver their right arm into a T-
shirt ignores the possibility that someone may have helped.  The mayo 
physicians told him to use the sling for comfort, and he does so when he 
makes long drives, such as the almost 2-hour drive from his home to Des 
Moines.  When someone says you should anticipate atrophy of the 
muscles int eh right upper extremity, that ignores his instructions on when 
to use and the actual use of the sling in the record.  In addition, on 
January 9, 2025, Dr. Ledet deferred examination of the shoulder joint as 
being “cruel and unnecessary,” which would tend to support the fact that 
examining the shoulder would be cruel, supporting the level of perceived 
disability even though the CRPS may have resolved or improved. 
(Ex. 1, pp. 27-28) 
Dr. Kuhnlein stated that he saw no reason to change Dr. Bengtson’s assigned 
restrictions.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 28)  
On December 16, 2024, Dr. Ledet authored a missive to defense counsel.  (Ex. 
A, pp. 1-5) He had evaluated Dunlap on November 15, 2024.  (Ex. A, p. 1) Dunlap 
reported pain in this right upper extremity varied between 6 and 10/10 intensity.  (Ex. A, 
p. 2) The worst pain over the right shoulder and ribs with radiating into the right hip.  
(Ex. A, p. 2) Dunlap presented for examination with his right arm in a sling.  Dunlap 
insisted he had to have assistance doffing and donning his jacket that was draped over 
the right arm and sling.  On examination, Dr. Ledet noted comparative examination of 
the right and left upper extremities demonstrated no atrophy, edema, sweating, tremor, 
or contracture of the extremity.  (Ex. A, p. 2) Dr. Ledet noted that CRPS is a rare 
disease and that there are 3 stages. (Ex. A, pp. 3-4)  Dr. Ledet discussed the diagnostic 
criteria for CRPS.  He believes that the clinical application of Budapest criteria is 
designed to have a high false positive rate.  (Ex. A, p. 4) He noted that CRPS is a 
condition that causes pain and disability.  It is not a condition diagnosed simply by the 
presence of pain and disability.  (Ex. A, p. 5) Dr. Ledet felt that the need for exclusion of 
conditions that would otherwise account for the degree of pain and dysfunction is 
required prior to assigning the diagnosis of CRPS.  (Ex. A, p. 5) Dr. Ledet noted that his 
physical examination on November 15 did not include the following signs of CRPS: 

VARIED INDUSTRIES, IN/GREAT WEST CASUALTY  V. DUNLAP 
Page 6 
edema, changes in skin color, changes to finger and toenails, thin and shiny skin 
texture, unusually fast or slow nail and hair growth, difficulty coordinating muscle 
movement, and unusual movement in the limb.  (Ex. A, p. 5) He stated, “the historically 
described vasomotor changes, sudomotor changes, movement disorders, or trophic 
changes (hair, nail, skin, bone) necessary to diagnose CRPS are absent upon my 
examination.”  (Ex. A, p. 5) Dr. Ledet opined that an absence of findings supports a 
resolution of the CRPS diagnosis.  He believes a better explanation for the current 
presentation of symptoms is the known condition of right shoulder pain secondary pan 
labral tear, biceps tendinitis and suprascapular nerve entrapment as well as carpal 
tunnel syndrome.  (Ex. A, p. 5) He noted that in the absence of signs and symptoms 
specific to CRPS the limitations associated with that diagnosis are no longer applicable.  
(Ex. A, p. 5)  
Dunlap attended a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) with John Kruzich, OTR 
on January 6, 2025. (Ex. C) The FCE listed the physician as Charles Mooney, M.D.  
(Ex. C, p. 24) The FCE was unable to be completed in its entirety due to an apparent 
inability of the client to participate in the functional material handling/non-material 
handling activities secondary to reports of extreme discomfort in the area of the right 
shoulder and right upper quadrant.  (Ex. C, p. 24-28) Mr. Kruzich did not classify the 
FCE as invalid or question Dunlap’s veracity.   
On January 8, 2025, Charles D. Mooney, M.D., authored a missive to 
defendants’ attorney.  (Ex. B, pp. 14-17) At the request of the defendants, Dr. Mooney 
had reviewed the previously performed IME dated February 2, 2019, the additional 
reports of Dr. Ledet, and the January 6, 2025 FCE.  (Ex. B, pp. 12-14) Dunlap reported 
that he was not taking any medications and was not performing any activities or 
rehabilitation exercises.  (Ex. B, p. 14) He reported severe ongoing right shoulder pain 
which radiated into the right chest posteriorly to the right scapula and thoracic spine.  
He reported pain radiating down his entire right arm and into his right leg associated 
with numbness and tingling and pain into the right foot. (Ex. B, p. 15) He also reported 
right foot felt colder than the left.  Dunlap reported that his symptoms were greatly 
aggravated by changes in heat and cold exposure.  He did not get relief from any 
specific activity.  He intermittently wakes due to pain.  (Ex. B, p. 15) He rated his pain as 
9 seated in the exam chair without evidence of overt distress.  (Ex. B, p. 15) He 
examined Dunlap in January 2025.  Dr. Mooney’s assessment included: 
1. Medical record evidence of right shoulder injury resulting in labral tear 
with multiple surgeries including suprascapular nerve release with 
ongoing symptoms of pain with previous diagnoses of CRPS.  On 
today’s exam objective findings do not meet accepted criteria for 
CRPS nor is there evidence of disuse atrophy which would be 
expected given the length of time since the diagnosis and claimed loss 
of use.  The discussion regarding the CRPS diagnosis in my previous 
IME is no longer applicable based on his current examination. 
(Ex. B, p. 17) 

VARIED INDUSTRIES, IN/GREAT WEST CASUALTY  V. DUNLAP 
Page 7 
 
Dr. Mooney agreed with Dr. Ledet’s December 16, 2024 IME.  Dr. Mooney 
reviewed the FCE and questioned the validity of the test.  Dr. Mooney stated that 
Dunlap “did not meet any of the demand levels for light duty with any use of his right 
hand.”  (Ex. B, p. 17) He also felt that Dunlap met the levels of sedentary duty with 
minimal right-hand usage as set forth in his prior IME. (Ex. B, p. 17) He did not 
recommend any additional restrictions.  (Ex. B, p. 17) 
On January 9, 2025, Dr. Ledet responded to a series of questions emailed to him 
from defense counsel.  (Ex. A, pp. 7-9) Dr. Ledet felt it was odd and incongruent for 
someone to have the ability to maneuver the right arm into a T-shirt without the ability to 
maneuver it into a jacket.  He has several patients under his care with severe shoulder 
injuries who can maneuver their arms into a jacket and they rarely wear a T-shirt.  (Ex. 
A, p. 8) He also noted that Dunlap presented with his right arm in a sling.  Dr. Ledet did 
not ask him about the use of the sling.  (Ex. A, p. 8) He noted that if there was regular 
use of a sling, then one would anticipate an atrophy of the muscles in the right upper 
extremity.  He did not see any such evidence in Dunlap’s right upper extremity.  Thus, 
Dr. Ledet assumed that the sling was used only intermittently.  (Ex. A, p. 8) Dr. Ledet 
stated that had “deemed it cruel and unnecessary to examine the passive range of 
motion of the right shoulder.  Therefore, I deferred the orthopedic examination of the 
joint.”  (Ex. A, p. 9) He explained that the exam of a patient with concerns for CRPS is 
dominated by visual examination and not an orthopedic evaluation of a joint.  (Ex. A, p. 
9)  
 
On January 16, 2025, Phil Davis, Vocational Specialist, authored a missive to 
claimant’s attorney.  (Ex. 2, pp. 33-35) Mr. Davis was asked to review the information 
provided to him and then provide a vocational opinion regarding Dunlap’s current 
employability.  (Ex. 2, p. 34) Mr. Davis noted that Dr. Ledet did not provide any opinions 
regarding restrictions.  Additionally, the FCE was incomplete due to Dunlap’s report of 
extreme discomfort in the area of the right shoulder and right upper quadrant.  He also 
noted that Dr. Mooney opined, “He did not meet any of the demand levels for light duty 
with any use of his right hand.  He would meet levels of sedentary duty with minimal 
right-hand usage as provided in my previous IME.”  (Ex. 2, p. 25) Dr. Mooney noted that 
those restrictions were the same as what he recommended in his initial report of 
February 22, 2019.  (Ex. 2, p. 25) Mr. Davis utilized the U.S. Department of Labor’s 
definition to state that Dunlap’s restrictions from his work injury placed him within less 
than sedentary physical demand level with material handling activities.  (Ex. 2, p. 35) 
Mr. Davis opined that from a vocational standpoint Dunlap remained 100 percent 
precluded in his ability to perform any of his past relevant work activities.  (Ex. 2, p. 35)  
 
On January 20, 2025, Dr. Mooney answered a series of questions posed to him 
by defendants’ attorney.  (Ex. B, pp. 18-23) Dunlap told Dr. Mooney that he used the 
sling on and off during the day, depending on his activity level.  (Ex. B, p. 21) He noted 
that Dunlap was able to participate in some housekeeping activities in a limited manner 
with is left upper extremity. (Ex. B, p. 20) Dr. Mooney felt that Dunlap’s perceived 9 out 
of 10 pain was incongruent with any evidence of distress and was not consistent with 9 
out of 10 pain.  (Ex. B, p. 20) Dunlap reported to Dr. Mooney that he drove his vehicle 

VARIED INDUSTRIES, IN/GREAT WEST CASUALTY  V. DUNLAP 
Page 8 
with his left hand alone and was able to provide control of his personal vehicle without 
interference of using the right arm.  (Ex. B, p. 21) With regard to physical limitations Dr. 
Mooney opined, “the previous severe limits on Mr. Dunlap’s activities are no longer 
applicable or valid and in reviewing the vocational assessment by Mr. Davis on 
1/16/2025 he is relying specifically on the previous independent medical examination 
and the functional capacity evaluation both of which require voluntary effort by the 
examinee that cannot otherwise be judged to any great accuracy.”  (Ex. B, p. 22) 
 
On January 21, 2025 Lana Sellner, a vocational consultant, issued an 
employability analysis.  (Ex. E) Ms. Sellner noted that a prior referral was made to her in 
2020.  At that time, she reviewed medical records and provided vocational 
recommendations and active vocational services to Dunlap.  (Ex. E, p. 33) However, 
Dunlap’s attorney declined the vocational assessment and any vocational services.  
(Ex. E, p. 33) (Ex. F)  In May 2021 Ms. Sellner again attempted to meet with Dunlap but 
was advised by his attorney that Dunlap had been found permanently and totally 
disabled and would not proceed with her services.  (Ex. E, p. 33) Defense counsel 
asked Ms. Sellner to provide a vocational analysis on what Dunlap could perform with 
possible skills acquisition/retraining or in the labor market given his restriction of no use 
of the dominant right hand.  (Ex. E, p. 33) She noted he was 34 years old with a valid 
driver’s license.  She set forth his educational background and his work history.  (Ex. E, 
pp. 34-35) She noted that Dunlap worked in sedentary to heavy physical demand work, 
as well as unskilled-skilled jobs for most of his work experience, which he acquired skills 
and knowledge that are transferable in other positions.  (Ex. E, p. 37) Ms. Sellner 
completed a labor market survey in the Marble Rock, Iowa area.  (Ex. E, p. 38) She 
provided a snapshot of what she believed were viable employment opportunities for 
Dunlap.  These include:  overnight security officer, a van driver, and a greeter at Buffalo 
Wild Wings.  (Ex. E, p. 39) She felt he could also consider driving positions such as 
Uber, Lyft, or courtesy driving positions.  With some training she felt he could also be a 
trainee with a trucking company.  Another potential option she listed was a cashier.  (Ex. 
E, pp. 39-40)   
 
Ms. Sellner reviewed Phil Davis’ vocational opinion.  She believed that his 
statement that the work injury placed Dunlap within a less than sedentary physical 
demand level with the material handling activities was not accurate.  (Ex. E, p. 40) Ms. 
Sellner stated, “[t]here are no medical providers that have stated sedentary work but 
assigned lifting and/or limited use to his right arm/hand.”  (Ex. E, p. 40) She noted that 
no restrictions were imposed on Dunlap’s left arm/hand and therefore the sedentary 
physical demand level was not met.  She feels he would be in the light work demand 
level.  (Ex. E, p. 40) Ms. Sellner feels that Dunlap is not precluded from the labor market 
due to his limited use of his right upper extremity.  She opined that per Dr. Mooney’s 
imposed restriction, Dunlap would have at most an 89.6 percent loss of the labor 
market.  She opined that per Dr. Kuhnlein’s imposed restriction, Dunlap would have at 
most a 91.5 percent loss of the labor market.  (Ex. E, p. 41)  
 
Krista Sheppard testified live at hearing.  (Tr. pp. 55-108) Sheppard resides in 
Charles City, Iowa.  (Tr. p. 55) She has known Dunlap since August 2024.  (Tr. pp. 55-

VARIED INDUSTRIES, IN/GREAT WEST CASUALTY  V. DUNLAP 
Page 9 
56) For a period of time they were in a relationship together and were engaged to be 
married.  (Tr. p. 56) Dunlap and Sheppard lived together from approximately November 
2014 through December 2018.  (Tr. p. 56) They have a son together who was born in 
2016.  (Tr. p. 56) Since their split there have been legal proceedings involving the 
custody of their son.  (Tr. p. 57) Sheppard testified about information she received from 
other individuals about the activities of Dunlap.  (Tr. pp. 63-68) She has personally seen 
Dunlap driving while not wearing his sling.  (Tr. p. 65) Sheppard testified regarding 
topics including but not limited to her observations of Dunlap’s activities, sightings of his 
vehicle, and social media posts including Dunlap. Sheppard and Dunlap have joint 
custody of their son, Dunlap has primary during the school year.  (Tr. p. 91) At the time 
of the review-reopening hearing Sheppard was paying child support to Dunlap.  (Tr. p. 
91) In the District Court custody hearings the Court found that Sheppard tried to 
deliberately sabotage Dunlap’s workers’ compensation benefits.  (Tr. pp. 93-94) In 2020 
the District court found Sheppard found that she had a tendency to exaggerate things.  
(Tr. p. 94) I find the testimony of Sheppard does not carry great weight.  Much of her 
testimony is based on second-hand information or speculation.  Even if I were to find 
that her testimony was credible, her testimony regarding her beliefs of Dunlap’s actual 
capabilities was not provided to any medical experts for their comment or expert 
opinion.  I give more weight to the opinions of the medical experts in this case than I do 
to the testimony of Sheppard.    
  We now turn to the medical experts in this case.  Previously, Dr. Bengtson 
opined that Dunlap should not use his right arm or hand for any work-related activities. 
(Ex. 10, p. 61b) Dr. Bengtson saw Dunlap in January 2024 and did not lift his prior 
restrictions.  (Ex. 10, p. 64) I find that Dr. Bengtson’s prior recommendation that Dunlap 
should not use his right arm or hand for any work-related activities has not changed.     
Dr. Ledet felt that Dunlap’s symptoms were more likely explained by the known 
right shoulder condition.  He believed that in the absence of symptoms specific to CRPS 
the limitations associated with CRPS no longer applied.  (Ex. A, p. 5) However, Dr. 
Ledet did not specify what those limitations were or what Dunlap’s current limitations 
should be.   
Dr. Kuhnlein noted that Dunlap’s exam was not consistent with the Budapest 
criteria for CRPS.  Regardless, he felt the damage had been done.  He believed that 
even with the resolution of the CRPS, Dunlap still exhibited significant disability related 
to his right shoulder condition and residual effects of CRPS.  (Ex. 1, pp. 27-28) 
Significantly, Dr. Kuhnlein stated, “there is no objective evidence that Mr. Dunlap is 
more objectively functional than he was 5 years ago.”  (Ex. 1, p. 28) Dr. Kuhnlein saw 
no reason to change the restrictions assigned by Dr. Bengtson.  (Ex. 1, p. 28) I find Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s opinion carries great weight because his report most directly addresses the 
issue of claimant’s functional abilities and restrictions.  Additionally, he provides the 
rationale to support his opinions. 
Mr. Kruzich was not able to complete the FCE due to Dunlap’s apparent inability 
to participate due to extreme discomfort in the area of his right shoulder and right upper 

VARIED INDUSTRIES, IN/GREAT WEST CASUALTY  V. DUNLAP 
Page 10 
quadrant.  Mr. Kruzich’s report does not contain any mention of concerns regarding 
Dunlap’s veracity or validity.  (Ex. C)  
Based on the opinions of the medical experts, I find that the defendants have 
demonstrated the Dunlap’s CRPS of his right upper extremity has improved since the 
June 7, 2019 review-reopening decision.  Additionally, there is at least one expert that 
believes Dunlap’s CRPS has resolved.  (Ex. A) However, I find that there has not been 
a change in his physical restrictions or industrial disability since the June 7, 2019 
review-reopening decision.  I find the defendants have failed to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that Dunlap’s functional abilities have changed or that 
his compensation should be diminished.  Thus, I find that defendants have failed to 
demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that Dunlap’s condition warrants a 
diminishment of his compensation as previously awarded.   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND REASONING 
Defendants bring this review-reopening proceeding from an award for payments. 
The statute provides,  
[i]n a proceeding to reopen an award for payments or agreement for 
settlement as provided by section 10A.315, inquiry shall be into whether or 
not the condition of the employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, or 
increase of compensation so awarded or agree upon.” 
Iowa Code section 10A.317. 
A review-reopening proceeding is appropriate whenever there has been a 
substantial change in condition since a prior arbitration award or settlement.  Kohlhaas 
v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387 (Iowa 2009).  Under Iowa Code section 10A.317(2)1, 
this agency is authorized to reopen a prior award or settlement to inquire about whether 
the condition of the employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, or increase of 
compensation.  Id.  
Upon review-reopening, petitioner has the burden to show a change in condition 
related to the original injury since the original award or settlement was made.  The 
change may be either economic or physical.  Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 
N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Henderson v. Iles, 250 Iowa 787, 96 N.W.2d 321 (1959).  A 
mere difference of opinion of experts as to the percentage of disability arising from an 
original injury is not sufficient to justify a different determination on a petition for review-
reopening.  Bousfield v. Sisters of Mercy, 249 Iowa 64, 86 N.W.2d 109 (1957).   
In the present case, because defendants assert claimant's condition has 
improved to the point that he is no longer permanently and totally disabled, defendants 
carry the burden of proof. See Iowa R. App. P. 6.14(6); Woodbury County v. Clausen, 
                                                                 
1 This section was previously numbered 86.14(2). 

VARIED INDUSTRIES, IN/GREAT WEST CASUALTY  V. DUNLAP 
Page 11 
759 N.W.2d 2 (Iowa Ct. App. 2008) (table).  Defendants have alleged a physical change 
in condition; defendants have not alleged an economic change. 
In the underlying decision claimant was not compensated for a scheduled 
member injury; instead, he was compensated for his industrial disability due to his July 
23, 2014 work injury. As explained by the Iowa Supreme Court, “industrial disability is 
the product of many factors, not just physical impairment.” Simonson v. Snap-On Tools 
Corp., 588 N.W.2d 430, 434 (Iowa 1999) Thus, upon review-reopening, other factors 
bearing claimant's industrial disability—such as age, education, experience, and 
inability, because of an injury, to engage in employment for which the employee is 
fitted—must also be considered when determining whether claimant's earning capacity 
has changed. See id. 
Total disability does not mean a state of absolute helplessness. Permanent total 
disability occurs where the injury wholly disables the employee from performing work 
that the employee's experience, training, education, intelligence, and physical capacities 
would otherwise permit the employee to perform. See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 
288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Diederich v. Tri-City R. Co., 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 
(1935).   
A finding that claimant could perform some work despite claimant's physical and 
educational limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total disability, 
however. See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File No. 661698 (App. October 
1987); Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 134 
(App. May 1982). 
As noted above, I found Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinions carried the greatest weight.  He 
believed that even with the resolution of the CRPS, Dunlap still exhibits significant 
disability related to his right shoulder condition and residual effects of CRPS.  (Ex. 1, pp. 
27-28) Significantly, Dr. Kuhnlein stated, “there is no objective evidence that Mr. Dunlap 
is more objectively functional than he was 5 years ago.”  (Ex. 1, p. 28) Dr. Kuhnlein saw 
no reason to change the restrictions assigned by Dr. Bengtson.  (Ex. 1, p. 28)  
Additionally, the claimant’s work experience, training, education, and other 
industrial factors set forth by the Iowa Supreme Court have remained unchanged since 
the prior award of benefits.  The only notable change is that the length of time the 
claimant has been out of the workforce has increased.  Based on the above findings of 
fact, I conclude that the defendants have failed to carry their burden of proof to 
demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that the claimant’s condition warrants 
an end to or diminishment of the compensation that he was awarded.  As such, I 
conclude defendants have failed to carry their burden of proof to reopen the prior award 
of permanent total disability benefits. Therefore, I conclude the defendants failed to 
prove that the injured worker’s earning capacity has increased or that he is no longer 
permanently and totally disabled.  The defendants’ review-reopening request is denied. 

VARIED INDUSTRIES, IN/GREAT WEST CASUALTY  V. DUNLAP 
Page 12 
Next, claimant is seeking reimbursement for the IME conducted by Dr. Kuhnlein 
on December 5, 2024.  (Ex. 1) Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-
retained physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee 
believes that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement 
for reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not ultimately prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify 
for reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008). 
In the review-reopening setting, defendants do not owe an independent medical 
evaluation unless they have obtained another permanent impairment rating from a 
physician of their own choosing since the prior award or settlement.  Kohlhaas v. Hog 
Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 387 (Iowa 2009).   
Defendants dispute claimant’s entitlement to reimbursement because Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s evaluation occurred over a month prior to any opinions from defendants’ 
doctors being served upon the claimant.  I conclude that claimant failed to establish 
entitlement to reimbursement of Dr. Kuhnlein’s independent medical evaluation fee for 
at least two reasons.  First, claimant did not establish that defendants obtained a 
permanent impairment rating from a physician of their own choosing prior to Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s evaluation occurring.  Second, Iowa Code section 85.39 permits an 
evaluation for the purpose of obtaining an evaluation of permanent impairment.  In this 
case, Dr. Kuhnlein did not offer an opinion as to permanent impairment.  Therefore, I 
conclude that claimant is not entitled to reimbursement of Dr. Kuhnlein’s fee pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Next, claimant seeks reimbursement for mileage and out-of-pocket expenses 
incurred in connection with this case.   
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert 
v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 

VARIED INDUSTRIES, IN/GREAT WEST CASUALTY  V. DUNLAP 
Page 13 
Claimant seeks reimbursement for mileage and food expenses incurred in 
connection with medical examinations.  (Cl. Ex. 8, pp. 56-57) The only expense that 
defendants dispute is the receipt from Sonic Drive-Thru in the amount of $31.11.  (Ex. 8, 
p. 57) Defendants argue that the receipt demonstrates that two meals were purchased 
but they only owe for one.  I find that it is reasonable for defendants to reimburse claimant 
for one sandwich ($7.19), one beverage ($3.84), and one side ($7.29).  Thus, I find 
defendants shall reimburse claimant in the amount of $18.32 for the Sonic Drive-Thru 
expenses.  (Ex. 8, p. 57) I find defendants shall also reimburse claimant for the remaining 
expenses in the amount of $446.75 as set forth on exhibit 8, page 56.  Thus, defendants 
shall reimburse claimant in the amount of $465.07. 
Finally, claimant seeks an assessment of costs against the defendants. (Ex. 9)  
Assessment of costs is a discretionary function of the agency.  Iowa Code section 
10A.328.  876 IAC 4.33.  I find that the claimant was successful in his case and therefore 
exercise my discretion to assess costs against the defendants.   
First, claimant seeks the costs associated with the vocational report of Phil Davis 
in the amount of $1,100.00. (Ex. 9, p. 58-59) I find that the report of Mr. Davis was helpful 
in this case. The cost of two practitioner reports is allowed as costs pursuant to our rule 
876 
IAC 
4.33. 
The 
commissioner 
has 
applied 
this 
to 
reports 
by vocational experts. See Kirkendall v. Cargill Meat Solutions Corp., File No. 5055494 
(App. December 17, 2018); Voshell v. Compass Group, USA, Inc., File No. 5056857 
(App. September 27, 2019); Simmer v Menards, File No 5041139 (App. April 29, 2020). 
Thus, I find that an assessment of costs in the amount of $1,100.00 for the report of Mr. 
Davis is appropriate.  Defendants shall pay costs in the amount of $1,100.00 for the 
report. 
Second, he seeks reimbursement in the amount of $7,800.00 for the IME of Dr. 
Kuhnlein.  Iowa Code section 85.39 is the sole method for reimbursement of an exam by 
a physician of the employee’s choice.  If an injured worker seeks reimbursement for an 
IME, the provisions established by the legislature, under Iowa Code section 85.39, must 
be followed.  Only the costs associated with preparation of the written report of a 
claimant’s IME can be reimbursed as a cost at hearing under rule 876 IAC 4.33.  DART 
v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 846-847 (Iowa 2015).  According to Dr. Kuhnlein’s itemized 
invoice, $5,940.00 of his bill was for the report preparation.  (Ex. 9, p. 60) Defendants 
assert no compelling argument with respect to the reasonableness of Dr. Kuhnlein’s fee.  
As such, I find the cost of obtaining Dr. Kuhnlein’s report is appropriate and assessed 
pursuant to 876 IA 4.33(6). Defendants shall pay costs in the amount of $5,940.00 for the 
report. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
The petition for review-reopening is dismissed.   

VARIED INDUSTRIES, IN/GREAT WEST CASUALTY  V. DUNLAP 
Page 14 
Defendants shall continue to pay claimant permanent total disability benefits at a 
rate of $311.92 and continuing during the period of permanent total disability. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for out-of-pocket expenses as set forth 
above. 
Defendants shall pay the costs as set forth above.   
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2), and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this 25th day of June, 2025. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
James M. Ballard (via WCES) 
Stephen William Spencer (via WCES 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
       ERIN Q. PALS 
       DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
       COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
