Case Number: 21010516.01
Case Title:  MOLINA, CONCEPCION V. WELLS' ENTERPRISES, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Molina, Concepcion-21010516.01.District Court Decision.PDF
========================================================================

IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR WOODBURY COUNTY 
 
 
CONCEPCION MOLINA, 
 
          Petitioner, 
 
vs. 
 
WELLS ENTERPRISES, INC., 
 
          Respondent 
 
 
CASE NO.  CVCV208430 
 
 
RULING AND ORDER RE:  PETITION 
FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW 
 
 
The above file came before the Court at the time and date set for submission in 
regard to the Petition for Judicial Review filed by Petitioner or Claimant Concepcion 
Molina (hereinafter “Molina”).  Giving consideration to the agency record, the parties’ 
briefs, and applicable law, the Court enters the within Ruling.   
FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND 
 
Molina is 61 years old and began employment with Respondent/Employer Wells 
Enterprises, Inc. (hereinafter “Wells”), in February 2015.  As part of this employment 
process, Molina passed a pre-employment physical.  Her first position at Wells was in 
sanitation, which involved cleaning the production area as well as heavy equipment and 
machines.  After approximately one-and-a-half years, Molina bid for and obtained a job in 
production.  As a production worker, she first was placed in the “CAT B” job putting dilly 
bars into a roll and then placing the rolls in a separate area.  She then worked on the 
“stickless 19” line in production taking products off a conveyor belt and packing it into a 
box.  She was in this position at the time of and during the COVID-19 pandemic.  All of 
these positions involved physical demands or requirements as a result of her 
employment. 
 
According to Molina, she developed pain and limitations in her wrists, right worse 
E-FILED                    CVCV208430 - 2024 OCT 09 08:06 AM             WOODBURY    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 1 of 19

 
2
than left.  After reporting the pain to Wells, Molina was referred for an appointment at 
MercyOne Siouxland Occupational Health where she was initially seen on September 17, 
2020, and then had follow-up visits with Dr. Cassens and PA-C Walker.  Dr. Cassens put 
Molina on restrictions of no lifting more than five pounds, occasional gripping, and avoid 
pushing/pulling.  She was treated conservatively by MercyOne until being referred to Dr. 
Manon Matos, an orthopedic specialist at CNOS, and Molina was first seen by Dr. Matos 
in March 2021.  After a second visit, Dr. Matos discussed with Molina the possibility of 
surgery; however, Molina was reluctant and concerned about such surgery and declined 
that option.   
 
The adjuster through Sedgwick handling the worker’s compensation claim for 
Wells solicited opinions from Dr. Matos concerning Molina.  Following a response from 
Dr. Matos, who effectively deferred any opinions and suggested an evaluation by Dr. 
Martin, Sedgwick also retained Dr. Douglas Martin who conducted a file review of Molina’s 
claim.  Based on that file review, Dr. Martin expressed the opinion that Molina’s bilateral 
wrist pain and difficulties were the result of an untreated rheumatoid arthritis; that this 
degenerative rheumatoid arthritis was not aggravated or exacerbated by Molina’s work; 
and there was nothing suggesting that her wrist condition and any restrictions were work-
related.   
 
In regard to these opinions of Dr. Martin, Molina had previously been diagnosed 
with rheumatoid arthritis in approximately 2015.  She was seen periodically for such 
arthritis by Dr. Wisco, ARNP Stewart, and then Rheumatologist Jenna King from 2017 
until 2021.   
 
Molina’s last day of employment at Wells was August 13, 2021.  Her worker’s 
E-FILED                    CVCV208430 - 2024 OCT 09 08:06 AM             WOODBURY    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 2 of 19

 
3
compensation claim was denied, and Molina filed her formal Petition for Worker’s 
Compensation Benefits on August 20, 2021.  The date of injury for her claimed cumulative 
or repetitive injury was established as June 23, 2020.  As part of her worker’s 
compensation claim, Molna also sought and obtained an independent medical evaluation 
by Dr. Bansal in February 2022.  Dr. Bansal examined Molina, reviewed her records, and 
concluded that limitations due to Moina’s wrists were the result of an aggravation or 
acceleration of her arthritis caused by the repetitive use or trauma of her employment at 
Wells. 
 
In her Petition, Molina alleged injury to the bilateral hands and arms – an additional 
initial claim of depression or mental injury is not pursued as part of this Petition for Judicial 
Review.  Molina claimed and claims that, as a result of the pain and injury in her right 
wrist, she also developed a cumulative or repetitive trauma injury to her left wrist due to 
overuse syndrome. 
 
A contested hearing was held on August 8, 2022, before Deputy Worker’s 
Compensation Commissioner James Christenson.  Deputy Christenson issued a decision 
in favor of Wells, specifically finding and concluding that Molina’s claimed injuries and 
disabilities were due to her rheumatoid arthritis and that she did not meet her burden of 
proving a work-related injury.  Molina then appealed that decision of Deputy 
Commissioner Christenson, and Commissioner Joe Cortese upheld and affirmed Deputy 
Christenson’s decision on appeal.  Molina thereafter filed the within Petition for Judicial 
Review of Commissioner Cortese’s decision. 
 
Additional references to the factual and procedural record are included in the 
Court’s Conclusions and Analysis below.  This Court has reviewed the entire agency 
E-FILED                    CVCV208430 - 2024 OCT 09 08:06 AM             WOODBURY    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 3 of 19

 
4
record as submitted by the parties.  To the extent evidence presented or aspects of the 
record are not specifically referenced herein, the Court concludes such evidence or 
aspects of the record are cumulative or otherwise not dispositive of the issues or the 
Court’s Conclusions. 
STANDARD OF REVIEW 
 
The standard of review applicable to agency action is delineated in Iowa Code 
Section 17A.19. The section provides that the reviewing district court shall grant 
“appropriate relief from agency action” if the court has decided that the agency action is 
based upon the occurrence of any one of several factors. Iowa Code § 17A.19(10). One 
occurrence that mandates relief is when an agency’s decision is “[b]ased upon an 
erroneous interpretation of a provision of law whose interpretation has not clearly been 
vested by a provision of law in the discretion of the agency.”  Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(c). 
Relief from an agency’s decision is also appropriate when the agency’s interpretation of 
law or application of law to fact is “[b]ased upon an irrational, illogical, or wholly 
unjustifiable” interpretation or application. Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(l), (m). Additionally, 
relief from an agency decision should be granted when the agency’s decision was 
“[o]therwise unreasonable, arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion.” Iowa Code § 
17A.19(10)(n).  
Most importantly in relation to the claims asserted by Molina, relief from an agency 
decision is granted when the decision is “[b]ased upon a determination of fact clearly 
vested . . . to the agency that is not supported by substantial evidence in the record before 
the court when that record is viewed as a whole.”  § 17A.19(10)(f).  The district court is 
“bound by the agency's fact findings if those findings are supported by substantial 
E-FILED                    CVCV208430 - 2024 OCT 09 08:06 AM             WOODBURY    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 4 of 19

 
5
evidence. Evidence is substantial if a reasonable person would find it adequate for 
reaching a decision.” Fairfield Toyota, Inc. v. Bruegge, 449 N.W.2d 395, 397 (Iowa Ct. 
App. 1989).  As has been noted, 
“The mere possibility that the record would support another conclusion does not 
permit the district court or this court to make a finding inconsistent with the agency 
findings so long as there is substantial evidence to support it.’ While the 
substantiality of evidence must take into account whatever in the record fairly 
detracts from its weight, the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions 
from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency's finding from being 
supported by substantial evidence. The question is not whether there is sufficient 
evidence to warrant a decision the agency did not make, but rather whether there 
is substantial evidence to warrant the decision it did make.” 
 
Peoples Mem'l Hosp. v. Iowa Civil Rights Comm'n, 322 N.W.2d 87, 91 (Iowa 1982) (citing 
Woods v. Iowa Dept. of Job Service, 315 N.W.2d 383, 841 (Iowa Ct. App. 1981); Universal 
Camera Corp. v. NLRB, 340 U.S. 474, 488, (1951); City of Davenport v. PERB, 264 
N.W.2d 307, 311 (Iowa 1978); Reisner v. Board of Trustees of Fire Retirement System, 
203 N.W.2d 812, 814 (Iowa 1973)). 
 
In the within matter, Molina argues that the Commissioner erred in finding that she 
did not prove that her injury arose out of and in the course of her employment – causation.  
The applicable law in regard to such causation issue is discussed below.  From a review 
standpoint under Iowa Code Section 17A.19, such argument presents a mixed question 
of law and fact.  Identifying and clarifying the specific claim of error is required in order to 
determine the appropriate review.  Meyer v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 218-220 (Iowa 
2006).   
 
A question of fact may be presented in regard to the operative events and 
circumstances that give rise to the injury.  Unless such events and circumstances are 
E-FILED                    CVCV208430 - 2024 OCT 09 08:06 AM             WOODBURY    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 5 of 19

 
6
undisputed, the Commissioner must make a determination and findings as to the facts 
leading to the injury.  On judicial review, the Court is bound by the Commissioner’s 
Findings of Fact if such Findings are supported by substantial evidence in the record as 
a whole.  As noted above, the question on appeal is not whether the evidence supports 
a different finding but whether the evidence supports the findings actually made. 
 
This causation issue can also present a mixed question of fact and law.  In 
particular, the Commissioner must determine whether the facts (as determined and found 
by the Commissioner based on the record as a whole) supports a conclusion that the 
injury arose out of and in the course of employment.  Review of this issue – application 
of the law to the facts – is based upon other grounds or subparagraphs within Section 
17A.19(10), such as irrational reasoning, failure to consider relevant facts, or irrational, 
illogical, or wholly unjustifiable application of law to the facts.  Meyer v. IBP, 710 N.W.2d 
at 218-219.  The discretion given to the Commissioner in regard to the application of law 
to the facts is less deferential than the Commissioner’s Findings of Fact. 
 
Finally, the issue of causation and claim of error may involve only a question of 
law.  Unless interpretation of the law is specifically vested by the legislature to the 
discretion of the Commissioner or involves some level of the Commissioner’s expertise, 
minimal, if any, deference is given to the Commissioner.  The Court on review is not 
bound by the Commissioner’s legal conclusions and may correct misapplications of the 
law.  Meyer v. IBP, 710 N.W.2d at 219 (noting that the court on review may substitute its 
interpretation of the law for any “erroneous” interpretation cby the Commissioner).  See 
also, MidAmerican Constr., LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.2d 838, 846 (Iowa 2024); Bluml v. Dee 
Jay’s Inc., 920 N.W.2d 82, 84 (Iowa 2018) (noting that the ourt in recent years had 
E-FILED                    CVCV208430 - 2024 OCT 09 08:06 AM             WOODBURY    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 6 of 19

 
7
repeatedly declined to give deference to the Worker’s Compensation Commissioner’s 
interpretation of law). 
CONCLUSIONS AND ANALYSIS 
 
As noted above, Molina argues that the Commissioner erred in finding and 
concluding that Molina failed to prove that she sustained a work-related injury.  In 
particular, Molina argues that the Commissioner erred in finding that Molina’s injury or 
disability was the result of or caused by rheumatoid arthritis, as opposed to the repetitive 
or cumulative trauma arising out of and in the course of her employment. 
 
In support of that claim, Molina first argues that the Commissioner applied the 
incorrect standard in regard to causation, specifically and effectively applying an incorrect 
and higher burden of proof.  Additionally, Molina argues that the Commissioner’s findings 
in regard to causation are not supported by substantial evidence when viewing the record 
as a whole. 
 
The Court therefore first addresses the question of law, specifically Molina’s 
burden of proof.  The Court then analyzes the record to determine whether the 
Commissioner’s findings are supported by substantial evidence. 
A.  Applicable Law Re:  Causation 
 
In regard to the issue of causation in a worker’s compensation case, the employee 
has the burden to prove that the injury arose out of and in the course of the employment.  
E.g., Meyer v. IBP, 710 N.W.2d at 222.  An injury arises out of employment if there is a 
causal connection between the employment and the injury; whereas, the injury is in the 
course of employment when the injury and the employment coincide as to time, place, 
and circumstances.  
E-FILED                    CVCV208430 - 2024 OCT 09 08:06 AM             WOODBURY    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 7 of 19

 
8
 
The focus of the Court and burden of the employee in regard to the “arising out of” 
element is whether the injury is a natural incident of the work.  The injury must be a 
rational consequence of the hazard connected with the employment – it must not have 
coincidentally occurred while at work but, rather, must in some way be caused by or 
related to the working environment or the conditions of the employment.  E.g., Meyer v. 
IBP, 710 N.W.2d at 222.  As noted by the Court in Meyer, the employee is only required 
to prove that a condition of the employment increased the risk of injury to establish this 
arising-out-of element.  Meyer, 710 N.W.2d at 225. 
 
The focus of the Court and burden of the employee in regard to the “course of 
employment” element is whether the injury takes place within the period of the 
employment, at a place where the employee reasonably may be, and while the employee 
is fulfilling work duties or engaged in doing something incidental thereto.  E.g., Meyer v. 
IBP, 710 N.W.2d at 222 (further noting that this element examines the work period on the 
date of the injury, the place of the injury, and the activities the worker was engaged in at 
the time of the injury).   
 
The employee must also prove that the injury proximately caused a disability.  
Proximate cause means that the injury was a substantial contributing factor to the 
disability.  This required proof of “proximate cause,” however, must be clarified.  Again, 
the employee must prove that the injury proximately caused the disability.   The employee 
is not required to prove that the employment proximately caused the injury.  Meyer v. IBP, 
710 N.W.2d at 222-223 and fn 2 and 4 (specifically noting that the “arising out of” element 
in worker’s compensation law is a less onerous causation standard than the “proximate 
cause” standard from tort law). 
E-FILED                    CVCV208430 - 2024 OCT 09 08:06 AM             WOODBURY    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 8 of 19

 
9
 
In regard to worker’s compensation injuries and causation, courts have recognized 
that an injury and resulting disability caused by repetitive or cumulative trauma can be 
found to arise out of and in the course of employment.  Work injuries and resulting 
disability may also be found to arise out of and in the course of employment even when 
the employee has a pre-existing condition and/or pre-existing disability unrelated to work.  
An employee is entitled to worker’s compensation benefits if it is proven that the pre-
existing condition or disability was aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or “lighted up” by 
an injury arising out of and in the course of employment resulting in a disability.  See, e.g., 
Zimmer v. Traveler’s Insurance Company, 454 F.Supp.2d 839, 867 (S.D. Iowa 2006); 
Floyd v. Quaker Oats, 646 N.W.2d, 105, 110 (Iowa 2002); Musselman v. Central 
Telegraph Company, 261 Iowa 352, 154 N.W.2d 128, 132 (1967).  See also, Keeran v. 
Quaker Oats Company, an unpublished decision found at 924 N.W.2d 535 (Table), 2018 
WL 4360943, *1-2 (Iowa App. September 12, 2018); Plumrose USA v. Hathaway, an 
unpublished decision found at 844 N.W.2d 469 (Table) 2014 WL 250239, *3 (Iowa App. 
January 23, 2014).   
 
In determining this causation or arising out of issue in regard to worker’s 
compensation injuries, the Court has noted that such issue is essentially within the 
domain of expert testimony.  E.g., Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Casualty Company, 
526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 1995); Musselman, 154 N.W.2d at 133.  Although the 
Commissioner in making Findings or in applying the law to the facts is required to consider 
the entire record as a whole, including all expert opinions, the weight and credibility to be 
given to the expert opinions is part of the Commissioner’s discretion as the fact finder – 
the Commissioner may accept or reject expert opinions.  In assessing such weight and 
E-FILED                    CVCV208430 - 2024 OCT 09 08:06 AM             WOODBURY    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 9 of 19

 
10
credibility, consideration should be given to the completeness of the premise given by the 
expert and all other surrounding circumstances.  Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 853 
(specifically noting that an expert opinion is not necessarily binding on the Commissioner 
when it is based upon an incomplete history). 
B.  Analysis 
 
The Court first notes that the Commissioner in his appeal decision specifically 
stated that: 
 
 
“I reach the same analysis, findings, and conclusions as those reached by 
the Deputy Commissioner.  Pursuant to Iowa Code Sections 17A.5 and 86.24, I 
affirm and adopt as the final Agency decision those portions of the proposed 
arbitration decision filed on December 29, 2022, which relate to the issues properly 
raised on intra-agency appeal.  I find the Deputy Commissioner provided a well-
reasoned analysis of all of the issues raised in the arbitration proceeding.  I affirm 
the Deputy Commissioner’s Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law pertaining to 
those issues.  I affirm the Deputy Commissioner's Finding that Claimant failed to 
prove she sustained a work-related injury as alleged.  Because I affirm the Deputy 
Commissioner’s Finding against Claimant on the issues of causation and 
compensability, I affirm the Deputy Commissioner’s Finding that the other issues 
raised in this matter are moot.  I affirm the Deputy Commissioner’s Order that the 
parties pay their own costs of the arbitration proceeding.  I affirm the Deputy 
Commissioner's Findings, Conclusions, and Analysis regarding the above-stated 
issues.” 
 
The Commissioner in the appeal decision further and specifically ordered that, “The 
arbitration decision filed on December 29, 2022, is affirmed in its entirety.” 
 
The within Judicial Review is of the Commissioner’s appeal decision (final agency 
action) filed April 6, 2023.  Based on the Commissioner’s appeal decision effectively 
affirming, adopting, and incorporating all Findings and Conclusions of the Deputy 
Commissioner, the Court in its analysis below considers and refers to that arbitration 
decision of the Deputy Commissioner filed December 29, 2022, as adopted as the 
E-FILED                    CVCV208430 - 2024 OCT 09 08:06 AM             WOODBURY    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 10 of 19

 
11
Commissioner’s final decision.   
1.  Interpretation and Application of the Law 
 
As noted above, Molina argues that the Commissioner applied an incorrect law or 
erroneous burden of proof in regard to her injury.  The Court, therefore, reviews the 
Commissioner’s decision to determine whether there was an erroneous interpretation of 
the law and/or whether there was an erroneous application of the law to the facts.  In 
doing so, the Court gives no deference to the interpretation of the Commissioner.  The 
Court does not conclude that this question of law has been specifically vested to any 
expertise of the Commissioner by the legislature. 
 
The Commissioner in his decision set forth Conclusions of Law applicable to 
Molina’s claim.  In particular, the Commissioner stated that the first issue to be determined 
is whether Molina sustained a work injury that “arose out of and in the course of 
employment” at Wells.  The Commissioner’s Conclusions of Law stated that the “arising 
out of” element refers to the cause or source of the injury, and the “in the course of” 
element refers to the time, place, and circumstances of the injury.  The Commissioner’s 
Conclusions of Law further state that an injury arises out of employment when there is a 
causal relationship existing between the injury and the employment, specifically that the 
injury must be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and 
not merely incidental to the employment.  The Commissioner’s Conclusions of Law further 
state that an injury occurs in the course of employment when it happens within a period 
of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when performing 
employment duties and the employee is fulfilling those duties or during an activity 
incidental to such duties.   
E-FILED                    CVCV208430 - 2024 OCT 09 08:06 AM             WOODBURY    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 11 of 19

 
12
 
The Commissioner’s Conclusions of Law further state that Molina had the burden 
of proving that the “injury” is a proximate cause of the “disability” on which her claim was 
based, further defining proximate cause as a substantial factor in bringing about the result 
and not necessarily the only cause.  Finally, the Commissioner’s Conclusions note that 
the causal connection question is essentially within the domain of expert testimony, 
specifically noting that the weight to be given expert opinions is determined by the fact 
finder and may be affected by the accuracy of the facts relied upon by the expert along 
with all other surrounding circumstances. 
 
In this judicial review, this Court concludes that such Conclusions of Law 
(interpretation of the law) made by the Commissioner were a correct statement of the law 
in this matter.  Such Conclusions of Law as stated by the Commissioner in the decision 
are consistent with the applicable law determined by this Court as set forth above. 
 
The Court further concludes that there was no erroneous application of the law to 
the facts by the Commissioner.  The Commissioner in its analysis of the record as set 
forth in the decision properly applied the law as to causation to the evidence presented. 
 
In this regard, the Court recognizes that the Commissioner in its decision did not 
include in his Conclusions of Law any reference or statements regarding aggravation of 
a pre-existing condition.  As noted above, this Court agrees with Molina that her burden 
to prove that her wrist injuries arose out of her employment at Wells is satisfied if she 
proves her underlying rheumatoid arthritis was aggravated, accelerated, worsened, or 
“lighted up” by her employment.  Although such law was not specifically included or 
referenced in the Commissioner’s Conclusions of Law, the Commissioner in his decision 
specifically addressed and considered Dr. Bansal’s opinion that Molina aggravated her 
E-FILED                    CVCV208430 - 2024 OCT 09 08:06 AM             WOODBURY    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 12 of 19

 
13
wrist arthritis due to the work she performed at Wells.  This Court concludes that the 
Commissioner rejected such opinions based upon the Commissioner’s Findings of Fact 
and not an erroneous interpretation or application of the law.  The Commissioner in his 
decision, for example, did not state anything to the effect that Molina had to prove 
something more than such an aggravation.  The Court in this judicial review does not 
conclude that the Commissioner applied such a higher burden of proof.  It appears to this 
Court that the Commissioner considered this aggravation claim in determining whether 
Molina proved that her wrist injury arose out of her employment at Wells.  The 
Commissioner did not erroneously interpret the law or erroneously apply the law to the 
facts.   
 
In regard to this application of the law to the facts, the Court also recognizes and 
considers the Commissioner’s reference to the medical evidence and opinions that 
Molina’s pain was “largely” due to her arthritis and that “most” of the pain related to her 
arthritis.  The Court considers and recognizes that the Commissioner in the decision has 
minimal, if any, discussion or analysis in regard to Molina’s work activities and whether 
such work activities would have increased her risk of injury.   
 
These issues somewhat overlap the Commissioner’s Findings which are 
discussed below.  The Court at this time, otherwise, concludes that the lack of discussion 
or analysis by the Commissioner does not necessarily mean the Commissioner 
misapplied the law to the facts.  There is nothing in the Commissioner’s decision, for 
example, suggesting that Molina failed to prove that the conditions of her work and work 
activities were the sole cause of her injury.  There is nothing in the decision suggesting 
that Molina failed to prove that her injury and limitations of her risks were a rational 
E-FILED                    CVCV208430 - 2024 OCT 09 08:06 AM             WOODBURY    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 13 of 19

 
14
consequence only of the conditions of her employment and work activities. 
 
Additionally, although discussed more below, “pain,” “injury,” and “disability” are 
not all the same.  The Commissioner’s reference to medical opinions that Molina’s pain 
was largely or mostly related to her rheumatoid arthritis does not mean that the 
Commissioner misapplied the law in regard to Molina’s proof of an aggravation.  The 
Court’s conclusion might be different if the Commissioner determined that Molina’s injury 
or disability was “mostly” or “largely” the result of her arthritis but still denied Molina’s 
claim – use of the term “mostly” or “largely” would inherently indicate that the injury or 
disability was at least “partly” the result of repetitive use or trauma at work and, thus, an 
aggravation would be proven.  Again, the Commissioner in the decision only referenced 
Molina’s pain being largely related to her arthritis. 
2.  Commissioner’s Findings of Fact 
 
Because the Court concludes the Commissioner interpreted and applied the 
correct law or legal standards applicable to Molina’s claim, a review of the 
Commissioner’s Findings of Fact must be made.  As noted above, the Court in this regard 
must determine whether the Commissioner’s Findings are supported by substantial 
evidence based upon a review of the record as a whole.   
 
Based upon a review of this matter, the Court concludes that the Commissioner’s 
Findings of Fact are supported by substantial evidence.  In reaching this conclusion, the 
Court certainly recognizes and agrees with Molina that there was evidence supporting a 
finding that she sustained a permanent aggravation of her underlying rheumatoid arthritis 
as a result of her employment at Wells.  There was evidence supporting a finding that her 
bilateral wrist injuries arose out of and in the course of her employment. 
E-FILED                    CVCV208430 - 2024 OCT 09 08:06 AM             WOODBURY    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 14 of 19

 
15
 
The type of work she was performing at Wells, specifically including the repetitive 
pinching, grabbing, holding, and other use of her hands, was the type of activity that could 
cause her injury.  There is a reasonable causal connection, and cumulative or repetitive 
trauma injuries would be a rational consequence of the type of work she was performing.  
Molina’s testimony and the history presented in the medical records refer to the pain and 
limitations she was experiencing as a result of her work.  This work-related history is 
referenced in the records at MercyOne Occupational Health (PA Walker and Dr. 
Cassens), Sioux City Physical Therapy, Dr. Manon Matos, and in the Wells Occupational 
Nurse records.  Dr. Bansel also specifically opined to a reasonable degree of medical 
certainty that Molina sustained that aggravation injury. 
 
As noted above, however, this Court on appeal or judicial review is not determining 
whether a different finding would be supported by the evidence.  This Court on judicial 
review also is not tasked and does not have the authority to make its own independent 
findings.  The sole question is whether the Commissioner’s Findings are supported by 
substantial evidence. 
 
In this regard, Molina primarily argues that the opinion of Dr. Martin in this case is 
simply not credible and, thus, is not sufficient to establish substantial evidence in support 
of the Commissioner’s decision.  Dr. Martin, however, expressed an opinion that Molina’s 
injury, complaints, and limitations in regard to her wrists were the result of her rheumatoid 
arthritis and that there was no work component involved.  Some deference is generally 
given to the fact finder (Commissioner in this case) as to the credibility and weight given 
to the opinions of experts.  In this case, the Commissioner gave more weight and 
credibility to the opinion of Dr. Martin than the opinion of Dr. Bansel. 
E-FILED                    CVCV208430 - 2024 OCT 09 08:06 AM             WOODBURY    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 15 of 19

 
16
 
Additionally, Molina’s argument in this judicial review in regard to the credibility of 
Dr. Martin includes references to other cases and Dr. Martin’s general experience and 
history of giving opinions favorable to employers and their worker’s compensation 
insurance carriers.  This Court on judicial review, however, questions whether such 
history or “reputation” is part of the record reviewed in this matter as it relates to the 
Commissioner’s Findings of Fact. 
 
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the Commissioner in the decision did not 
rely exclusively on the opinion of Dr. Martin.  As noted in the decision, the Commissioner 
referred to the records and opinions of Dr. King and Dr. Manon Matos, two treating 
providers of Molina.  The Commissioner found from the records that both Dr. King and 
Dr. Manon Matos related Molina’s wrist pain and limitations to her arthritis.  The Court 
concludes such Findings are supported by substantial evidence in the record as a whole. 
 
It is clear from those records that Molina experienced pain in her wrists, worse on 
the right side, while working at Wells.  Pain, however, is not the same as an injury.  There 
is substantial evidence in the record indicating that Molina had preexisting degenerative 
issues and, in particular, arthritic conditions in her wrists before and unrelated to her work 
at Wells.  There is substantial evidence in the records indicating that Molina suffered pain 
and limitations doing activities with her hands as a result of that arthritis.  Pain scales are 
subjective and may have questionable import, particularly when comparing pain scales 
given two to four years apart.  As found by the Commissioner, however, Molina rated her 
wrist pain on a scale of 0 to 10 higher at times before the date of injury than after or while 
being treated for the alleged work injury, and the medical records submitted as exhibits 
in this matter support that finding.  
E-FILED                    CVCV208430 - 2024 OCT 09 08:06 AM             WOODBURY    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 16 of 19

 
17
 
Dr. King, in particular, saw and treated Molina for her arthritis both before and after 
the alleged work injury.  Based on the records, Dr. King consistently diagnosed and 
related Molina’s wrist pains and limitations to that arthritis.  The MRI’s taken in 2020 and 
2021 revealed findings according to Drs. Manon Matos, King, and Martin, compatible with 
inflammatory arthritis and degenerative conditions – i.e., bilateral scapholunate advance 
collapse (SLAC) pattern form arthritis.  Although Molina clearly experienced pain working 
with her hands at Wells, there is substantial evidence in the record supporting the 
Commissioner’s Finding that Molina failed to prove she sustained an injury, aggravation 
or otherwise, as a result of her work at Wells. 
SUMMARY 
 
In this Petition for Judicial Review, the Court concludes that Molina has not 
established that: 
 
1.  The Commissioner’s decision was based upon an erroneous interpretation of a 
provision of law; or 
 
2.  The Commissioner’s decision was based upon a determination of fact that is 
not supported by substantial evidence in the record; or 
 
3.  The Commissioner’s decision is the product of reasoning that is so illogical as 
to render it wholly irrational; or  
 
4.  The Commissioner’s decision is based on an irrational, illogical, or wholly 
unjustifiable interpretation of a provision of law clearly vested to the discretion of the 
Commissioner; or 
 
5.  The Commissioner’s decision is based upon an irrational, illogical, or wholly 
unjustifiable application of law to the fact that has clearly been vested in the discretion of 
E-FILED                    CVCV208430 - 2024 OCT 09 08:06 AM             WOODBURY    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 17 of 19

 
18
the Commissioner; or  
 
6.  The Commissioner’s decision is otherwise unreasonable, arbitrary, capricious, 
or an abuse of discretion. 
 
For these reasons and as further discussed above, this Court concludes that the 
Commissioner’s decision should be affirmed.   
RULING AND ORDER 
 
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED that the decision of the Iowa Worker’s 
Compensation Commissioner dated April 6, 2023, is AFFIRMED.  The costs of this 
Judicial Review are taxed to Molina. 
E-FILED                    CVCV208430 - 2024 OCT 09 08:06 AM             WOODBURY    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 18 of 19

State of Iowa Courts
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV208430
MOLINA, CONCEPCION  V. WELLS ENTERPRISES
Type:
OTHER ORDER
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2024-10-09 08:06:44
E-FILED                    CVCV208430 - 2024 OCT 09 08:06 AM             WOODBURY    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 19 of 19
