Case Number: 20007087.01
Case Title:  ALMENDINGER, STEVEN V. CR SIGNS & LIGHTING
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Almendinger Steven-20007087.01D.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
STEVEN ALMENDINGER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
File No. 20007087.01 
 
 
  :  
 
 
vs. 
 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
CR SIGNS & LIGHTING, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  :                ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  :                           
 
 
  : 
COLUMBIA MUTUAL INSURANCE 
  :  
COMPANY,  
  :     Head Note Nos.: 1803; 3001; 4000.2 
 
 
  :                        
 
Insurance Carrier,   
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
The claimant, Steven Almendinger, filed a petition for arbitration and seeks 
workers’ compensation benefits from CR Signs & Lighting, employer, and Columbia 
Mutual Insurance Company, insurance carrier.  The petition was filed on March 23, 2002.  
The claimant was represented by Tom Wertz. The defendants were represented by 
Ronald Frank. 
 
The matter came on for hearing on March 13, 2023, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joe Walsh in Des Moines, Iowa via Zoom video 
conferencing system.  The record in the case consists of Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 3, 
and Defense Exhibits A through F. The claimant testified at hearing. The matter was 
recorded electronically on the agency’s recording software.  By agreement of the parties, 
no court reporter was utilized, and the digital recording is the only record. 
 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
 
1. The extent of permanent partial impairment in the claimant’s right 
shoulder.  Claimant also contends the commencement date for 
permanency is incorrect. 
 
2. The correct rate of compensation. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Jun-15  14:23:50     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

ALMENDINGER V. CR SIGNS & LIGHTING 
Page 2 
 
 
3. Penalty. 
 
4. Costs. 
 
STIPULATIONS 
 
Through the hearing report, the parties stipulated to the following: 
 
1. The parties had an employer-employee relationship. 
 
2. Claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
employment on June 17, 2020.  The parties have stipulated that this injury 
is a cause of some temporary and permanent disability in claimant's right 
shoulder.  Claimant is not alleging industrial disability. 
 
3. Temporary disability/healing period and medical benefits are no longer in 
dispute. The claimant has listed healing period as a dispute, however, 
claimant has admitted that all temporary disability benefits were actually 
paid. Claimant is merely alleging benefits were paid at an incorrect lower 
rate. 
 
4. There is no issue involving credit. Claimant was paid 21 weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits at the rate of $626.21. 
 
5. Claimant is not seeking any further medical expenses. 
 
6. The parties have stipulated that claimant was married and entitled to two 
(2) exemptions for purposes of rate calculation. 
 
7. Affirmative defenses have been waived. 
 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
Steven Almendinger was 50 years old as of the date of hearing. The parties have 
stipulated that Mr. Almendinger sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course 
of his employment on June 17, 2020. The parties have further stipulated that this work 
injury is a cause of some temporary and permanent disability. The primary question in the 
case is the extent of permanent impairment as measured by the AMA Guides, Fifth 
Edition. 
 
Mr. Almendinger testified live and under oath at the video hearing. I found his 
testimony to be highly credible. His testimony was simple and straightforward. His 
answers were consistent with other portions of the record.  There was nothing about his 
demeanor which caused me any concern for his truthfulness. 

ALMENDINGER V. CR SIGNS & LIGHTING 
Page 3 
 
 
Mr. Almendinger worked for CR Signs & Lighting as an installer. His work involved 
the installation and repair of various signs. He was paid $22.00 per hour for his work, and 
he averaged more than 40 hours per week. He was paid bi-weekly. In calculating his 
average wages prior to the injury, the employer chose to exclude certain weeks (referred 
to as “Covid weeks”) as non-representative. Instead of going back further to obtain a 13 
week average; however, the adjustor simply calculated an average using approximately 
10 weeks. (Claimant’s Exhibit 2, page 55) This resulted in an average weekly wage 
(AWW) of $958.10. The claimant disagreed with this calculation at hearing and went back 
further, obtaining a full 14-week period for his calculations. (Ex. 2, pp. 54, 56-58) The 
claimant calculated his AWW at $1,024.57. I find that the claimant’s calculation set forth 
on Claimant’s Exhibit 2, page 54, is the best calculation of his customary earnings in the 
quarter leading up to his work injury. I further find that the employer’s calculation was not 
unreasonable. 
 
Claimant’s counsel raised the rate issue with defendants prior to hearing. In 
response to counsel’s inquiry, defendants further investigated the matter and alleged the 
rate should actually be lower. (Defense Exhibit F) 
 
Mr. Almendinger testified that on June 17, 2020, while he was placing some 
cardboard into a dumpster, wind caught the cardboard, jerking his right shoulder in the 
process. He testified he heard a pop and experienced immediate pain in his right 
shoulder. He was seen the same day at MercyCare Urgent Care. He had x-rays which 
showed no fracture.  He then followed up with MercyCare Occupational Health and had 
an MRI, which revealed a labral tear, partial tears of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus, 
as well as a complete rupture of the long head of the biceps. He was referred to a 
specialist, Matthew Bollier, M.D., where he underwent surgery on August 4, 2020. The 
surgery was described as right shoulder arthroscopy, capsular release, extensive 
debridement, open subpectoral biceps tenodesis, subacromial decompression and distal 
clavicle excision. (Def. Ex. B, p. 1)  He then underwent a fairly routine postoperative 
course of treatment which included physical therapy. 
 
Dr. Bollier placed Mr. Almendinger at maximum medical improvement on 
November 9, 2020, and assigned a 4 percent rating of the right upper extremity. The 
following was documented at that time: 
 
Today, Mr. Almendinger reports significant improvement in pain following 
surgery. Patient is happy with his overall progress and feels as though he 
can perform most of his duties at work without restrictions at this time. He 
has been working in physical therapy to progress his range of motion and 
strength. Patient reports minor pain tin the anterior aspect of the right 
shoulder when performing pull-ups and lifting overhead however this has 
significantly improved. 
 
(Ex. B, p. 1) He was released without any formal restrictions. His impairment rating was 
assigned utilizing range of motion measurements. (Ex. B, pp. 5-6) Mr. Almendinger 

ALMENDINGER V. CR SIGNS & LIGHTING 
Page 4 
 
testified that Dr. Bollier did not use any type of measuring device to measure his loss of 
range of motion. 
 
Thereafter, Mr. Almendinger returned to work for CR Signs & Lighting and 
continued to perform his regular job without any restrictions. He testified that following his 
release, he continued to have shooting and stabbing pain, limited range of motion, 
strength loss, and some numbness and pinching at times. He testified that there are 
certain overhead tasks that he no longer does at work due to his strength loss. 
 
Mr. Almendinger exercised his right to an 85.39 independent medical evaluation in 
November, 2021. He was evaluated by David Segal, M.D. Dr. Segal performed a 
thorough evaluation of the medical file, and examined him as well.  Dr. Segal prepared 
an extensive detailed report. He diagnosed the following: 
 
The diagnoses that are causally related to Mr. Almendinger’s work injury of 
June 17, 2020, are as follows: 
 
Right Shoulder Diagnoses: 
1.  Supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and subscapularis partial tear and 
tendinopathy 
2.  Rupture Long Head Biceps Tendon 
3.  Permanent aggravation of degenerative changes of the acromioclavicular 
joint. 
4.  Impingement syndrome 
5.  Labral tears SLAP tear 
6.  Subacromial bursitis 
7.  Status post right rotator cuff and labral repair, subacromial decompression 
with distal clavicle excision, biceps tenodesis, capsule release. 
 
Right Upper Extremity Diagnosis: 
1.  Right Ulnar neuropathy 
2.  Right Grip weakness 
 
(Ex. 9, p. 13) 
 
Dr. Segal then justified these diagnoses in significant detail. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 13-24) 
He then assigned 14 percent impairment to the right shoulder for range of motion loss, 8 
percent to the right shoulder for strength deficits, and 10 percent for the distal clavicle 
excision.  (Ex. 1, pp. 26-27) Dr. Segal meticulously documented the ROM losses with his 
use of goniometer and photographs. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 26, 41-43)  He combined all of these 
ratings and arrived at a 29 percent impairment for the shoulder.  He combined this rating 
with his rating of Mr. Almendinger’s impairment for loss of hand grip strength due to right 
ulnar neuropathy of 13 percent, for a total impairment of 37 percent to the right upper 
extremity. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 28) He also recommended permanent medical restrictions. 
 
 

ALMENDINGER V. CR SIGNS & LIGHTING 
Page 5 
 
I find Dr. Segal’s impairment rating to be compelling. It is meticulously documented 
and well-reasoned. 
 
At some point, Mr. Almendinger testified he asked for further medical evaluation 
for treatment purposes. He was sent to Matthew White, M.D. at Physicians’ Clinic of Iowa.  
There is no record that Dr. White provided any further treatment recommendations. While 
his clinical note is not in evidence, Mr. Almendinger testified that Dr. White recommended 
massage therapy, physical therapy, and acupuncture. Mr. Almendinger further testified 
that Dr. Bollier did not want to see him again. (Def. Ex. D, Almendinger Depo., p. 20)  Dr. 
White did provide an alternative impairment rating, which was requested by defendants. 
Dr. White provided the following opinion: 
 
I recently received correspondence from your office requesting review of 
Mr. Almendinger's visit in clinic and any permanent partial impairment for 
his shoulder condition. I last evaluated Steven on 7/13/2022 as a second 
opinion and recommended no further treatments at that time. Clinical 
measurements were completed at that visit. In addition, it was noted at the 
time of his surgery with an outside surgeon, he underwent a distal clavicle 
excision or by AMA Guides standards a "resection arthroplasty" of the distal 
clavicle as referenced on page 506 of the guide.  
 
Using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 5th 
Edition, and based upon clinical measurements, he has a shoulder 
impairment of 13% based upon Figures 16-40 (page 476), 16-43 (page 
477), 16-46 (page 479) and table 16-27 (page 506) of the guide.   
 
(Def. Ex. C, p. 1) Mr. Almendinger credibly testified that Dr. White did not use any type of 
formal measuring device when calculating his loss of range of motion. 
 
The record reflects that Mr. Almendinger’s condition worsened since he was 
released from care by Dr. Bollier. Specifically, he developed ulnar neuropathy down his 
right arm and his range of motion and strength worsened. Mr. Almendinger testified 
credibly that he continues to have significant limitations in his shoulder, including 
weakness, limited range of motion, strength loss, and intermittent numbness. This 
impacts his activities of daily living as well as his ability to work. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The first question submitted is the extent of impairment in the claimant’s right 
shoulder which resulted from the stipulated work injury. The parties have stipulated that 
his disability is a scheduled member disability to his right shoulder. 
 
Since the parties have stipulated that the disability is a scheduled member 
evaluated under Section 85.34(2)(n), the issue is to assess the degree of impairment to 
the claimant’s right shoulder.   
 

ALMENDINGER V. CR SIGNS & LIGHTING 
Page 6 
 
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not 
loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to the 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the workers’ compensation commissioner by 
rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not 
be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment 
pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining 
functional disability and not loss of earning capacity. 
 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) (2021).  
 
Thus, the law, as written, is not concerned with an injured worker’s actual loss of 
use or functional disability as determined by the evidence, but rather the impairment rating 
as assigned by the adopted version of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment. The only function of the agency is to determine which impairment rating 
should be utilized.  While no explicit guidance is provided in the statute for this analysis, 
presumably the rating which most closely aligns with the worker’s actual functional 
disability. 
 
In this case, there are three impairment ratings in the record. All of these ratings 
were measured under the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition. Dr. Bollier assigned a 4 percent rating. Dr. Segal assigned 29 percent rating for 
the shoulder and an additional rating for the arm, totaling 37 percent. Dr. White assigned 
a 13 percent rating. 
 
Dr. Bollier’s rating was assigned a mere four months after the surgery while Mr. 
Almendinger was undergoing physical therapy. He did not utilize any measuring device 
to accurately assess Mr. Almendinger’s loss of range of motion. Mr. Almendinger’s 
physical symptoms actually worsened after this assessment. I therefore reject Dr. Bollier’s 
rating. 
 
Dr. Segal assessed Mr. Almendinger’s impairment in November 2021, one year 
after his release from care. Therefore, the timing of his rating is more appropriate. He had 
an opportunity to review Mr. Almendinger’s condition at a point in time when he had been 
working full-duty for an extended period of time following his recuperation. His review of 
the records is meticulously documented. His evaluation was thorough and included 
photographs of range of motion measurements.  He used a goniometer to assess the loss 
of range of motion. He meticulously evaluated each of Mr. Almendinger’s diagnoses and 
corresponded those with available medical records. While Dr. Segal’s rating is thorough 
and well-documented, it is noted that this is a very high impairment rating which is 
somewhat unusual for a post-surgical shoulder with a decent result. 
 
Dr. White assigned a 13 percent rating. His medical note is not in the record. The 
only evidence in the record of his assessment is in a letter to defense counsel wherein he 

ALMENDINGER V. CR SIGNS & LIGHTING 
Page 7 
 
cites to the sections of the Guides he utilized to reach his rating.  Mr. Almendinger testified 
that he did not use any measuring device to measure his loss of range of motion. 
 
Of the three ratings, Dr. Segal’s rating is the most thorough and complete. My only 
function in this matter is to assess the most accurate impairment rating. Prior to the 2017 
statutory changes, I would have been allowed to utilize agency expertise to assess Mr. 
Almendinger’s actual functional disability. Based upon this record, I would likely have 
found that his functional disability is somewhere between 13 and 37 percent. Under the 
post-2017 statutory changes, this is disallowed. I am forced to choose which rating is the 
best rating to assess his permanent impairment of his right shoulder. In this record, it is 
quite clear that Dr. Segal’s rating is superior for the reasons stated. I therefore find that 
the claimant has sustained a 37 percent impairment of his right shoulder. I conclude this 
entitles him to 37 percent of 400 weeks under subsection (n), or 148 weeks. Benefits 
should commence on January 5, 2021.  See Iowa Code section 85.34(2) (2021). 
 
The next issue is the rate of compensation. 
 
Section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the 
employee at the time of the injury. The section defines weekly earnings as the gross 
salary, wages, or earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the 
employee worked the customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee was 
injured as the employer regularly required for the work or employment. The various 
subsections of section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings depending 
upon the type of earnings and employment. 
 
If the employee is paid on a daily or hourly basis or by output, weekly earnings are 
computed by dividing by 13 the earnings over the 13-week period immediately preceding 
the injury. Any week that does not fairly reflect the employee’s customary earnings is 
excluded, however. Section 85.36(6). 
 
In this case, the difference between the calculations of the parties lies in how they 
handled certain non-representative weeks. The record reflects claimant was paid on a bi-
weekly basis. There are two pay periods in the immediate 13-week period prior to the 
injury, which the parties seem to agree were non-representative. The defendants 
characterized these weeks as “Covid weeks”, as Mr. Almendinger apparently was not 
allowed to work during these times due to Covid protocols in the workplace. The 
defendants initially simply excluded these weeks in their initial calculations and utilized a 
10-week period instead of obtaining a full quarter’s worth of wages. The claimant also 
excluded those weeks in his calculations, however, instead of just ignoring them, he went 
back two more pay periods (4 weeks) to obtain a full quarter of wages for his assessment.  
I find this is a superior method of calculating his customary gross earnings, since he 
regularly worked more than 40 hours per week in his job. When this was brought to the 
attention of defendants, their response was to include to the “Covid weeks” in the 
calculation as though Mr. Almendinger had worked regular 40 hour weeks in those 
periods. Again, while this is not unreasonable per se, I find it is not the best method for 
assessing his customary earnings. Therefore, I find that Mr. Almendinger’s average 

ALMENDINGER V. CR SIGNS & LIGHTING 
Page 8 
 
weekly wage prior to his work injury was $1,024.57 per week. I therefore conclude that 
the appropriate rate of compensation is $665.78 per week. 
 
The next issue is penalty. 
 
“Because penalty benefits are a creature of statute, our discussion begins with an 
examination of the statutory parameters for such benefits.” Keystone Nursing Care Ctr. 
v. Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 299, 307 (Iowa 2005). Under Iowa Code section 86.13(4)(a): 
 
If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs without 
reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or 
insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits, the workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or chapter 85, 85A, 
or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, 
delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 
 
This provision “codifies, in the workers’ compensation insurance context, the 
common law rule that insurers with good faith disputes over the legal or factual validity of 
claims can challenge them, if their arguments for doing so present fairly debatable 
issues.” Covia v. Robinson, 507 N.W.2d 411, 412 (Iowa 1993) (citing Dirks v. Farm 
Bureau Mut. Ins. Co., 465 N.W.2d 857, 861 (Iowa 1991) and Dolan v. Aid Ins. Co., 431 
N.W.2d 790, 794 (Iowa 1988)). “The purpose or goal of the statute is both punishment 
and deterrence.” Robbennolt v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229, 237 (Iowa 1996). 
 
The legislature established in Iowa Code section 86.13(4)(b) a burden-shifting 
framework for determining whether penalty benefits must be awarded in a workers’ 
compensation case. See 2009 Iowa Acts ch. 179, § 110 (codified at Iowa Code 
§ 86.13(4)(b)); see also Pettengill v. Am. Blue Ribbon Holdings, LLC, 875 N.W.2d 740, 
746–47 (Iowa App. 2015) as amended (Feb. 16, 2016) (discussing the burden-shifting 
required by the two-factor statutory test). The employee bears the burden to establish a 
prima facie case for penalty benefits. See Iowa Code § 86.13(4)(b). To do so, the 
employee must demonstrate a denial, delay in payment, or termination of workers’ 
compensation benefits. Iowa Code § 86.13(4)(b)(1). If the employee fails to prove a 
denial, delay, or termination, there can be no award of penalty benefits and the analysis 
stops. See id. at § 86.13(4)(b); see also Pettengill, 875 N.W.2d at 747. However, if the 
employee makes the requisite showing, the burden of proof shifts to the employer. See 
id. at § 86.13(4)(b); see also Pettengill, 875 N.W.2d at 747. 
 
It is noted that I have found that the rate in this case was underpaid. Therefore, the 
burden shifts to the employer to prove their rate calculation was reasonable. I find that 
the employer’s rate calculation was, in fact, reasonable. Therefore, I conclude that no 
penalty is due. 
 
The final issue is costs. 
 

ALMENDINGER V. CR SIGNS & LIGHTING 
Page 9 
 
 
Iowa Code section 86.40 states: 
 
All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be taxed in 
the discretion of the commissioner. 
 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
 
Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) costs of persons reviewing 
health service disputes. Costs of service of notice and subpoenas shall be 
paid initially to the serving person or agency by the party utilizing the 
service. Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, doctors or 
practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called or by whom 
the report is requested. Witness fees shall be paid in accordance with Iowa 
Code section 622.74. Proof of payment of any cost shall be filed with the 
workers’ compensation commissioner before it is taxed. The party initially 
paying the expense shall be reimbursed by the party taxed with the cost. If 
the expense is unpaid, it shall be paid by the party taxed with the cost. Costs 
are to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers’ 
compensation commissioner hearing the case unless otherwise required by 
the rules of civil procedure governing discovery. This rule is intended to 
implement Iowa Code section 86.40. 
 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.17 includes as a practitioner, “persons 
engaged in physical or vocational rehabilitation or evaluation for rehabilitation...”  A report 
or evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert constitutes a practitioner report under 
our administrative rules.  Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. November 
23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. December 8, 
2010) The entire reasonable costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ reports may be taxed as 
costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33. Caven v. John Deere Dubuque Works, File Nos. 
5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009).    
      
Claimant seeks the costs set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 3. I find these costs are 
reasonable. 
 
 

ALMENDINGER V. CR SIGNS & LIGHTING 
Page 10 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED:  
 
Defendants shall pay the claimant one hundred forty-eight (148) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits at the rate of six hundred sixty-five and 78/100 
($665.78) per week commencing January 5, 2021. 
 
Defendants are responsible for the rate underpayment on the temporary disability 
paid from June 18, 2020, through November 8, 2020. 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
 
Defendants shall be given credit for the 21 weeks previously paid. 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
 
Costs are taxed to defendant in the amount of one hundred sixty-four and 57/100 
($164.57). 
 
Signed and filed this   15th    day of June, 2023. 
 
 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Thomas Wertz (via WCES) 
 
Ronald Frank (via WCES) 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days from 
the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal must be filed 
via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been granted, the notice of 
appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ 
Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal must be received by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be extended to 
the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
