Case Number: 22700540.01
Case Title:  URGELL-RUEDA, GENIS (DEC) V. EAGLE BORING GROUP, LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Urgell-Rueda Genis - 22700540.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ANA ROSARIO FLORES MONTOYA, 
  : 
As Administrator of the Estate of GENIS   : 
 
FILE NO.  22700540.01 
URGELL-RUEDA, and as parent, 
  : 
Guardian and Next Friend of E.D.U.F., 
  : 
a minor, 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
   A R B I T R A T I O N                       
MCS COMMUNICATION, LLC, 
  : 
 
Employer, and 
  : 
 
        D E C I S I O N 
ACCIDENT FUND INSURANCE 
  : 
COMPANY OF AMERICA, 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
  :                                 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
EAGLE BORING GROUP, LLC, 
  : 
 
Employer, and 
  : 
BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY DIRECT 
  : 
Headnote Nos.:  1402.10, 1403.30, 
INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  : 
1901, 2001 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
  
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
  
 
Claimant Ana Rosario Flores Montoya, parent of E.D.U.F., a minor, and the 
administrator of the estate of Genis Urgell-Rueda, deceased, filed a petition in 
arbitration seeking workers’ compensation benefits from several potential defendants, 
including MCS Communication, LLC, employer, and Accident Fund Insurance Company 
of America, insurer, Excel Utility Contractors, LLC, employer, and Great Western 
Insurance Company, insurer, Eagle Boring Group, LLC, employer, and Berkshire 
Hathaway Direct Insurance Company, insurer, Newcom Technologies, Inc., employer, 
and Hartford Casualty Insurance Company, insurer, City of Pella, Iowa, employer, and 
Employers Mutual Casualty Company, insurer, Pella Coop Electric Association, 
employer, and Federated Rural Electric Insurance Exchange, insurer, Pella Fiber, 
employer, and Employers Mutual Casualty Company, insurer, and Vannguard Utility 
Partners, Inc., employer, and AMCO Insurance Company, insurer. 
 
 
Prior to the date of hearing, claimant dismissed all defendants except for MCS 
Communication, LLC, employer, and Accident Fund Insurance Company of America, 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-May-30  13:55:53     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

URGELL-RUEDA V. MCS COMMUNICATION AND EAGLE BORING GROUP 
Page 2 
insurer, and Eagle Boring Group, LLC, employer, and Berkshire Hathaway Direct 
Insurance Company, insurer.   
 
 
The hearing occurred before the undersigned on August 22, 2023. 
 
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  In the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of those 
stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision, 
and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties' stipulations will be raised or 
discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 16; Claimant's Exhibits 
1 through 18; Defendants' Exhibits A through K; and Defendants’ Exhibits AA through 
EE. Claimant testified on her own behalf.  Defendants Eagle Boring Group and 
Berkshire Hathaway Direct Insurance Company called Jose Martin Espinal Diaz.  
Defendants MCS Communication, LLC and Accident Fund Insurance Company of 
America called Jose Anaya.  Claimant and Jose Espinal testified using the services of a 
Spanish to English interpreter, Ernest Nino-Murcia.  The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the evidentiary hearing.  The case was considered fully submitted upon 
receipt of the parties' briefs on September 29, 2023.   
    
STIPULATIONS 
 
1. Genis Urgell-Rueda  died on August 1, 2020, while performing activities arising 
out of and in the course of his employment; 
 
2. The commencement date for death benefits, if awarded, is August 1, 2020; and 
 
3. Genis Urgell-Rueda earned $800 per week, was single, and entitled to 1 
exemption, making his weekly rate $506.38. 
 
ISSUES 
  
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
 
 
1. Whether Genis Urgell-Rueda was an employee of MCS Communication, LLC 
or Eagle Boring Group, LLC on the date of injury; 
  
 
2. Whether the intoxication defense under Iowa Code section 85.16 bars 
recovery; 
   
 
3. Whether Genis Urgell-Rueda had a dependent child on the date of injury; 
  
 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits; and 
   
 
5. Costs.  

URGELL-RUEDA V. MCS COMMUNICATION AND EAGLE BORING GROUP 
Page 3 
   
FINDINGS OF FACT 
  
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
 
This case results from a terrible tragedy that took the lives of two young men.  
The decedent in this case, Genis Urgell-Rueda, was thirty-five years old at the time of 
his death. (Joint Exhibit 9, page 64)  This case was brought by Ana Rosario Flores 
Montoya.  Genis and Ana Rosario Flores Montoya were married from 2009 to 2016. 
(Hearing Transcript, page 21)  The couple had one minor child who was born in 2011. 
(Joint Exhibit 11, p. 66; Hr. Tr., pp. 21-22)  According to Ms. Flores Montoya, Genis 
lived with his sister, Maria Urgell, in Richmond, Virginia. (Hr. Tr., p. 23) 
 
The salient issue before the undersigned is the identity of Genis Urgell-Rueda’s 
employer.  The three main employers that will be discussed in this case are Excel Utility 
Contractors, MCS Communication, LLC, and Eagle Boring Group.  As a brief overview, 
the City of Pella contracted with Excel Utility Contractors, LLC (Excel) to perform 
services, including but not limited to, installing underground fiber optic internet cables in 
2020.  It is undisputed that Excel served as the prime or general contractor for the 
project.  Of note, no party asserts that Genis was employed by Excel.   
 
Excel entered into a subcontract with defendant MCS Communication, LLC, to 
install innerducts for the fiber optic cables. (Ex. 1, p. 36, Depo. pp. 21-22)  Jose Anaya 
is the president of MCS Communication, LLC, which is headquartered in North Carolina. 
(Hr. Tr., p. 59)  Mr. Anaya testified live at the evidentiary hearing and via deposition.  
MCS Communication, LLC, asserts it subsequently entered into a subcontract with 
Eagle Boring Group to provide labor.  Jose Martin Espinal Diaz (Jose Espinal) is the 
owner of Eagle Boring Group, which is headquartered in Richmond, Virginia. (Ex. K, p. 
8)  Jose Espinal testified live at the evidentiary hearing and via deposition.  Excel was 
not aware of MCS Communication’s subcontract with Eagle Boring Group. (See Ex. 1, 
p. 37, Depo. p. 28) 
 
On the morning of August 1, 2020, The City of Pella Police Department received 
reports of an explosion at the intersection of Main Street and Lincoln Street. (JE1, p. 5)  
Lieutenant Paul Haase responded to the scene of the explosion and observed two 
persons, later identified as Genis Urgell-Rueda and Nelson Figueroa, on the ground 
near construction equipment. (JE1, p. 4)  The initial assessment of the accident 
suggested that the two workers were utilizing construction equipment, including a 
jackhammer, high-pressure water, and an industrial vacuum while preparing the ground 
for fiber optic wire. (Id.)  It appeared the jackhammer breached a concrete housing that 
contained an underground high voltage electrical line. (Id.)  Pella Community 
Ambulance personnel advised Lt. Haase that both males were deceased. (Id.)   
 
Justin Bailey, a detective with the City of Pella Police Department, arrived on 
scene approximately one hour after Lt. Haase. (See JE1, pp. 4, 6)  After being briefed 

URGELL-RUEDA V. MCS COMMUNICATION AND EAGLE BORING GROUP 
Page 4 
on the situation, Detective Bailey spoke with Rod Krueger, the Project Supervisor for 
Excel Utility Contractors to discuss who was working on-site at the time of the 
explosion.  Mr. Krueger directed Detective Bailey to the on-site supervisor, Jose Anaya. 
(JE1, p. 6)  According to Detective Bailey’s notes, Mr. Anaya advised that he knew the 
two decedents as Genis and Nelson. (JE1, p. 6)  Mr. Anaya further reported that there 
was a third individual, Jhoni Cruz-Navarro, that was on-site at the time of the explosion.  
Mr. Navarro was transported to Pella Regional Health Center for his injuries.  (See id.) 
 
 
Detective Bailey eventually spoke with Mr. Navarro regarding what led to the 
explosion.  Mr. Navarro remembered Genis trying to dismantle the concrete barrier with 
a jackhammer.  The next thing he remembered was a large explosion and fireball that 
threw him backwards. (JE1, p. 7)   
 
Audio recordings were transcribed and entered into evidence as Claimant’s 
Exhibit 7.  Claimant asserts the audio recordings are of conversations between Mr. 
Navarro and members of Genis’ family.  Mr. Navarro was not deposed and did not 
testify live at the evidentiary hearing.  As such, I did not have the opportunity to observe 
Mr. Navarro or his demeanor.  The transcribed recordings are obviously not sworn 
statements.  The transcriptions are not dated, signed, or notarized.   
 
 
According to one of the recordings, Mr. Navarro contacted Ms. Flores Montoya 
shortly after his release from the hospital to notify her of Genis’ death. (See Ex. 7, p. 86)  
During the conversation, Ms. Flores Montoya and her niece asked Mr. Navarro for 
details regarding the accident and Genis’ whereabouts. (See Ex. 7, pp. 86-87)  Mr. 
Navarro reported that he was in Iowa and offered to send Ms. Flores Montoya his 
location. (Ex. 7, p. 86)  Mr. Navarro relayed that he had been working with his friend, 
Genis, for two years and the news of Genis’ death was hard on him. (Id.)  During the 
conversation, Mr. Navarro relayed that the two had just started working for this 
particular employer that same week; however, he did not know the name of the 
company. (Id.)  At the end of the conversation, Ms. Flores Montoya asked Mr. Navarro 
to have the police contact her. (See Ex. 9, p. 87) 
 
 
According to Pella Police’s command log, “Sherlin Urgelo” called in and reported 
that her uncle “Genisis Urgelo” may have been involved in an accident. (JE1, p. 12)  
The call was placed at 10:33 a.m. (Id.)  
 
 
Kurtis Grubb, a safety compliance officer with Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA), presented to the scene of the accident to conduct an 
investigation on August 3, 2020. (JE2, p. 14)  Shortly thereafter, Mr. Grubb conducted a 
meeting with several members from Excel Utility, an inspector for Newcom, and Mr. 
Anaya. (Id.)  During the meeting, Mr. Anaya told Mr. Grubb that he handles the daily 
operations, directs all the employees work, provides the equipment used, and answers 
any questions that may come up. (Id.)  Mr. Anaya reportedly told Mr. Grubb that he 

URGELL-RUEDA V. MCS COMMUNICATION AND EAGLE BORING GROUP 
Page 5 
hired the two decedents based on the experience noted on their applications.  He later 
indicated that the workers were 1099 employees.  According to Mr. Anaya, one of the 
employees had been with MCS for one month while two other workers had just started 
the week of the accident.  (Id.) 
 
Following this initial meeting, Mr. Grubb conducted an inspection of the area 
where the explosion occurred and conducted employee interviews to determine the 
likely sequence of events that led to the employees coming into contact with the 
underground electrical lines.  According to his report, Genis, Nelson, and Jhoni were in 
the process of potholing to locate underground electrical utilities on the morning of 
August 1, 2020. (JE2, p. 15)  Shortly after starting the potholing procedure, the crew 
encountered pieces of concrete and asphalt at 10 to 16 inches deep. (JE2, p. 15; see 
Ex. H, p. 1)  Genis and Nelson placed a call to Mr. Anaya regarding the same.  
According to the report, Genis and Nelson relayed their belief that the concrete was 
over pour from the curb section of the road. (JE2, p. 16)  They further relayed that they 
were retrieving the air compressor and jackhammer to break up the concrete. (Id.)  Mr. 
Grubb concluded that Mr. Anaya did not tell the workers to wait until his arrival before 
attempting to remove the concrete. (Id.)  Mr. Anaya believed he would get to the jobsite 
before the crew began removing the concrete. (See JE2, p. 15)  The crew began to use 
a hydro excavator with a water jet to remove dirt above the electrical line.  They then 
used a jackhammer to break apart the concrete.  As the jackhammer broke through the 
concrete, the metal bit made contact with a 12,470-volt underground distribution line 
that was encased in a concrete duct, which caused the explosion. (See JE2, p. 15) 
 
According to Mr. Anaya, Genis and Nelson called him on the morning of the 
accident and told him that they had encountered a hard surface area and they needed 
additional equipment to break through the same. (Hr. Tr., p. 65)  Mr. Anaya told Genis 
and Nelson to wait for him to get to the jobsite to assess the situation. (Id.)  According to 
Excel’s Final Incident Investigation Report, Genis and Nelson made the decision to act 
around known policy and procedure and called Carlos Espinal to bring the crew a 
jackhammer and air compressor. (Ex. H, p. 1)  Carlos confirmed he brought the air 
compressor and jackhammer to Genis and Nelson on the date of injury. (Ex. BB, Depo. 
p. 23) 
 
At the conclusion of its investigation, OSHA issued citations to both Excel Utility 
and MCS Communication. (JE2, pp. 18, 22-25; see Ex. CC, Depo. p. 25)  Mr. Grubb 
provided testimony via deposition on April 12, 2023. (Exhibit CC)  Mr. Grubb testified 
that any party can appeal citations if they dispute the facts, or any liability, including not 
actually being the proper employer. (Ex. CC, Depo. pp. 4-44)  He further testified that 
during his investigation he was never informed that Genis, Nelson, and Johni worked for 
any entity other than Excel Utility or MCS Communication. (Ex. CC, Depo. pp. 18-19)   
 

URGELL-RUEDA V. MCS COMMUNICATION AND EAGLE BORING GROUP 
Page 6 
Turning to the main issue in this case, claimant asserts Genis was more likely 
than not an employee of Eagle Boring Group on the date of injury.  Eagle Boring Group 
disputes this allegation and instead asserts that Genis was an employee of MCS 
Communication.   
 
Little is known of Genis’ employment history and how he ended up working the 
Pella Fiber job.  It is believed that Genis and Mr. Navarro were working in Florida for a 
period of time before taking on the Pella Fiber project. (See Ex. 7, p. 86; Hr. Tr., p. 23)  
According to Mr. Anaya, Genis contacted Carlos Espinal for work, and Carlos Espinal 
arranged to have him picked up and brought to the job site in Iowa. (Hr. Tr., p. 68)  Mr. 
Anaya testified that Genis and Mr. Navarro arrived together. (Id.)   
 
Jose Espinal denied employing Genis or Jhoni Navarro; however, he conceded 
that Nelson Figueroa, who was working with Genis and Jhoni on the date of injury, had 
been an employee of Eagle Boring Group for approximately three months. (JE16, Depo. 
p. 20)  Jose Espinal asserts he sent Carlos and six other employees to Iowa.  The 
employees were Umberto, Giovanni, Nelson, Illian, Aliberto, and Hernan. (JE16, Depo. 
p. 13) 
 
Numerous reports and documents were generated in connection with the Pella 
Fiber project and the August 1, 2020, accident.  Several of the reports include 
statements relating to who employed Genis Urgell and Nelson Figueroa.  For instance, 
in his police report, Officer Haase stated, “Nelson and Genis were working for Excel 
Utility Contractors who were contracted by Pella Fiber.” (Ex. I, p. 1)  In comparison, Mr. 
Grubb’s report provides that Genis and Nelson worked for Jose Anaya or were 1099 
employees. (JE2, p. 14)  I did not find the reports overly helpful or convincing on the 
issue of who employed Genis; however, the reports were considered when assessing 
the credibility of the various witnesses. 
 
Claimant’s hearing testimony did little to clear up the issue of Genis’ employer on 
the date of injury.  Initially, Ms. Flores Montoya testified that Jose Anaya of Eagle Boring 
Group employed Genis and drove him to Iowa. (Hr. Tr., p. 27)  Once notified that there 
were two individuals named Jose in this case, she admitted that she did not know which 
Jose drove Genis from Richmond, Virginia to Iowa. (Hr. Tr., pp. 27-28)  Ms. Flores 
Montoya testified she believed Genis worked for Eagle Boring Group because Genis’ 
sister, Maria Urgell, traveled to Iowa and met with Jose, “And it was Jose who 
presented himself as the person who had been employing Genis.  He received her as 
Genis’s boss.” (Hr. Tr., p. 30) 
 
Jose Anaya acknowledged that he communicated with Genis’ family through 
Maria, and that he met with Maria when she traveled to Iowa. (Hr. Tr., pp. 75, 78)  
According to Mr. Anaya, Maria understood that Genis was employed by Eagle Boring 
Group and not MCS Communication. (Hr. Tr., p. 76)  Additionally, Mr. Anaya admitted to 

URGELL-RUEDA V. MCS COMMUNICATION AND EAGLE BORING GROUP 
Page 7 
paying Genis’ funeral bill, but asserted this only occurred after Jose Espinal refused to 
respond to Maria’s requests to pay for the same. (Hr. Tr., pp. 75-76) 
 
Factors to be considered in determining whether an employer-employee 
relationship exists include the right of selection, the responsibility for the payment of 
wages, the right to terminate the relationship, and the right to control the work.  The 
courts will also consider who benefits from the work being performed and the parties’ 
intentions.  Mindful of these factors, I examine the relevant evidence available. 
 
During discovery, MCS Communication produced a contract between MCS 
Communication and Eagle Boring Group providing that Eagle Boring Group was a 
subcontractor of MCS Communication. (JE6)  The contract was reportedly signed by 
Mr. Anaya and Jose Espinal’s brother, Carlos Espinal on June 13, 2020. (JE6, p. 43; Hr. 
Tr., pp. 62-63) The contract reads: 
 
Subcontractor agrees to furnish all labor, services, installation, insurance, 
small tools and follow the description required for the prompt and efficient 
execution of the work described herein and to perform the work necessary 
or incidental to complete the installation of underground facilities for project 
called PELLA FIBER for the city of Pella, Iowa. 
(JE6, p. 41)  According to the contract, Eagle Boring Group agreed to place conduit, 
hand holes, and fiber in accordance with the prime contract. (JE6, p. 39)   
 
At hearing, Mr. Anaya confirmed that MCS Communication entered into a 
contract with Eagle Boring Group providing that Eagle Boring Group was a 
subcontractor of MCS Communication. (Hr. Tr., p. 61)  Mr. Anaya further testified that 
Carlos Espinal signed the contract on behalf of Eagle Boring Group. (Hr. Tr., pp. 62-63)  
He noted that this was not the first time in which MCS Communication had worked with 
Carlos Espinal and Eagle Boring Group. (Hr. Tr., pp. 85-86; JE4, p. 36)   
 
It is undisputed that Eagle Boring Group sent its workers to Iowa for the Pella 
Fiber project; however, Eagle Boring Group disputes the existence of a formal contract 
with MCS Communication.  According to Jose Espinal, Eagle Boring Group employees  
“just went there to help Jose Anaya because he already has all the machinery, but we 
didn’t have any type of agreement.” (JE16, Depo. p. 16; see JE16, Depo. p. 19)   
 
Jose Espinal provided testimony via deposition and live at the evidentiary 
hearing.  He asserted that his brother, Carlos Espinal, did not have the authority to enter 
into contracts on Eagle Boring Group’s behalf. (JE16, Depo. p. 16-17)  He further 
asserted that Carlos did not sign the contract in question and Eagle Boring Group did 
not have an official agreement with MCS Communication. (JE16, Depo. pp. 16, 19)  
Carlos Espinal provided testimony via deposition on April 12, 2023. (Ex. BB)  When 
approached about the contract discussed above, Carlos denied the existence of any 

URGELL-RUEDA V. MCS COMMUNICATION AND EAGLE BORING GROUP 
Page 8 
contract between MCS Communication and Eagle Boring Group. (Ex. BB, Depo. p. 17)  
He also denied signing any contract on behalf of Eagle Boring Group. (Ex. BB, Depo. p. 
18)   
 
The circumstantial evidence supporting the authenticity of the contract greatly 
outweighs the testimony of Carlos and Jose Espinal.  The document is signed by 
“Carlos” and each page of the contract is initialed “ce.”  Additionally, Eagle Boring 
Group’s subsequent actions are consistent with the terms of the alleged contract. (JE6, 
pp. 39-42)  For instance, the contract required Eagle Boring Group to certify that it 
possessed workers’ compensation insurance. (Id.)  The evidentiary record contains a 
Certificate of Liability Insurance, dated June 22, 2020. (JE5, p. 37)   The certificate 
confirms that Eagle Boring Group possessed workers’ compensation insurance.  The 
policy covered Eagle Boring Group for one year from June 9, 2020. (Id.)  Jose Anaya is 
listed as the certificate holder, or the person who requested the Certificate of Liability 
Insurance from the insured, Eagle Boring Group. (Id.)  Additionally, Jose Espinal 
produced Eagle Boring Group’s taxpayer identification number to MCS Communication 
so payments could be issued pursuant to the contract. (Ex. G, p. 1) 
 
I find the document in question is authentic and Carlos Espinal signed the 
Contract for Risk Transfer on behalf of Eagle Boring Group.  
 
 
As to the payment of wages, no payroll records exist that definitively establish 
who paid Genis for his work; however, the greater weight of the evidence suggests 
Eagle Boring Group was responsible for paying Genis’ wages.   
 
MCS Communication did not pay any of Eagle Boring Group’s employees 
directly. (Hr. Tr., pp. 66-67)  Carlos Espinal confirmed that MCS Communication paid 
Jose Espinal and then Jose Espinal paid his employees. (Ex. BB, Depo. pp. 15, 26)  
With respect to travel and lodging, Carlos testified that MCS Communication paid for the 
hotel and then deducted the total amount from Eagle Boring Group. (Ex. BB, Depo. p. 
16)  Jose Espinal testified that Eagle Boring Group paid for its employee’s gas and hotel 
expenses. (JE16, Depo. p. 24)  
 
Both MCS Communication and Eagle Boring Group were asked to provide 
payroll records through discovery.  MCS Communication complied with the request and 
produced payroll records and W-2s for its employees.  There is no record of MCS 
Communication paying Genis. (Ex. F, pp. 1-49)    
 
In contrast, defendant Eagle Boring Group never produced a check stub, bank 
record, or any other document to show the payments made to Eagle Boring Group 
employees.  Jose Espinal testified at his deposition that he threw away all of his payroll 
records relating to the Pella Fiber project. (JE16, Depo. p. 30)  However, at hearing, Mr. 

URGELL-RUEDA V. MCS COMMUNICATION AND EAGLE BORING GROUP 
Page 9 
Espinal testified that he had never been asked for written proof of payment, but the 
same could be obtained from the bank. (Hr. Tr., p. 52)   
 
Additionally, Jose Espinal testified at his deposition that his brother, Carlos 
Espinal, paid Genis’ girlfriend or “lover” for the work Genis performed while in Iowa. 
(JE16, Depo. pp. 22-23)  He later claimed that the payment was a “gift” from Carlos and 
not payment for work. (JE16, Depo. p. 34-36)  Carlos Espinal conceded that he paid 
Genis’ girlfriend “like $300,” but asserted it was because she was heartbroken and in 
need, not because of the work Genis performed. (Ex. B, Depo. p. 21)  While I have little 
doubt Maria was heartbroken, I do not find Carlo’s explanation for his payment 
convincing. 
 
As for the right to control, the parties dispute the extent of Jose Anaya’s 
responsibilities, job duties, and ability to control the work of the Eagle Boring Group 
employees.  Mr. Anaya asserts he was the only MCS Communication employee present 
at the Pella Fiber project and his job duties consisted of directing and supervising his 
subcontractor. (Hr. Tr., p. 64)  He asserts MCS Communication did not supply any of 
the labor for the Pella Fiber project; however, the company did provide all of the heavy 
operating equipment and protective gear for use by Eagle Boring Group employees. 
(Ex. AA, p. 8, Depo. p. 29; Hr. Tr., pp. 29, 80-81)  Mr. Anaya asserts he communicated 
the plans to Carlos Espinal and then Carlos would tell his employees what needed to be 
done. (Ex. AA3, Depo. p. 43)  He asserts MCS Communication was not involved in the 
hiring of Eagle Boring Group’s employees or responsible for training any of Eagle 
Boring Group’s employees. (Hr. Tr., pp. 63-64) 
 
Jose Anaya provided somewhat conflicting testimony regarding his ability to 
reprimand Eagle Boring Group employees at the Pella Fiber job.  At his deposition, Mr. 
Anaya was asked whether he would have been able to reprimand or punish Genis and 
Nelson for not waiting for him to arrive at the jobsite. (Ex. AA, Depo. p. 87)  Mr. Anaya 
answered, “Absolutely” and then explained that he would write people up for such 
actions. (Id.)  However, at hearing, Mr. Anaya testified he would not write them up, but 
would suggest a different way to address the problem. (Hr. Tr., p. 81)  He further 
testified that he would go directly to Carlos and let him know that what the workers were 
doing was not right so Carlos could redirect the workers. (Id.) 
 
Several factors suggest that Genis was involved in the daily operations and 
logistics of Eagle Boring Group, which in turn supports a finding that Eagle Boring 
Group had a degree of direction and control over Genis’ work.  As mentioned, Genis 
was engaged in the same work as Nelson Figueroa, an Eagle Boring Group employee, 
when the accident occurred. (JE16, Depo. p. 20)  According to Jose Anaya, Carlos 
Espinal brought Genis and Jhoni to the jobsite to perform work for Eagle Boring Group.  
Although relatively insignificant, it is also worth mentioning that Genis stayed at the 
same hotel as all of the other Eagle Boring Group employees.  Carlos Espinal testified 

URGELL-RUEDA V. MCS COMMUNICATION AND EAGLE BORING GROUP 
Page 10 
that Genis and the Eagle Boring Group employees were the only workers that stayed at 
the hotel in question.  Ultimately, I find Carlos Espinal directed the work performed by 
the employees of Eagle Boring Group while Jose Anaya provided general oversight and 
supervision. 
 
With respect to the question of who benefited from Genis’ work, it is clear Eagle 
Boring Group directly benefited from Genis’ work.  MCS Communication produced 
payment records demonstrating it paid Eagle Boring Group $168,929.20 as a third-party 
subcontractor. (Ex. F, pp. 51-63)   
 
 
In addition to the above factors, claimant, defendant MCS Communication, and 
defendant Accident Fund Insurance Company of America challenge Jose Espinal’s 
credibility. The credibility of the witnesses in this case is particularly relevant as Jose 
Espinal, Carlos Espinal, and Jose Anaya provided irreconcilable testimony.   
 
Jose Espinal did not present himself as a credible witness.  His testimony was 
evasive, and he frequently contradicted himself.  For instance, Mr. Espinal testified at 
his deposition that Eagle Boring Group performed work at the Pella Fiber project for 
MCS Communication. (Ex. J, Depo. pp. 12-13)  He further testified that MCS 
Communication paid Eagle Boring group for its work on the project. (Ex. J, Depo. p. 16)  
However, at hearing, Mr. Espinal testified that he had never heard of MCS 
Communication. (Hr. Tr., p. 51)  This testimony is further contradicted by Jose Anaya’s 
testimony that MCS Communication had worked with Eagle Boring Group prior to the 
Pella Fiber project.  
 
The evidentiary record also contains several reports that reflect poorly on Jose 
Espinal’s credibility and overall character.  For example, Jose Anaya testified that at 
some point after the August 1, 2020, accident, Jose Espinal called him and threatened 
to sue him for telling OSHA that Genis was employed by Eagle Boring Group.  
According to Jose Anaya, Jose Espinal said “he was going to hire his own lawyer to sue 
and that I was going to find out who he was.” (Ex. AA, p. 16, Depo. p. 76) 
 
Additionally, there is evidence to suggest that Jose Espinal deliberately misled an 
investigator that was retained by defendants MCS Communication and Accident Fund 
Insurance Company of America.  MCS Communication retained Advantage Surveillance 
to investigate Jose Espinal and Eagle Boring Group. (Ex. K)  An investigator presented 
to the listed address for Eagle Boring Group on December 9, 2020. (Ex. K, p. 2)  Mr. 
Espinal answered the door. (Id.; Hr. Tr., p. 49)  He told the investigator that he did not 
own and had never worked for Eagle Boring Group. (Id.)  He further told the investigator 
that he had never heard of Genis Urgell or that anybody had been electrocuted on 
August 1, 2020. (Id.)  At hearing, Jose Espinal confirmed that an investigator came to 
his home; however, he testified he did not understand what the investigator was saying 
because he does not speak English. (Hr. Tr., p. 49)  I find the evasive nature detailed by 

URGELL-RUEDA V. MCS COMMUNICATION AND EAGLE BORING GROUP 
Page 11 
the investigator matches Jose Espinal’s demeanor at hearing.  The investigator’s 
reporting of his discussion with Mr. Espinal is believable. 
 
Lastly, there is hearsay evidence of an admission from Jose Espinal.  Ms. Flores 
Montoya filed the current petition in arbitration on June 2, 2022.  Six days later, on June 
8, 2022, an individual purporting to be Jose Martin Espinal Diaz (Jose Espinal), the 
owner of Eagle Boring Group, contacted claimant’s attorney’s office.  Utilizing the 
services of a translator, the individual reported that he was contacting her on behalf of 
Eagle Boring Group, that he could not afford an attorney, and he had no insurance.  He 
further reported that he employed Genis for two days and paid him in cash. (Ex. D, p. 
13; Ex. 11, p. 91)  The paralegal that spoke with the individual provided him with the 
contact information for Eagle Boring Group’s attorney. (Ex. D, p. 13)  Claimant’s 
attorney immediately notified all parties of the interaction. (Ex. 11, p. 91)  At hearing, 
Jose Espinal did not expressly deny making the phone call, but he did deny that he ever 
hired Genis. (Hr. Tr., pp. 55-56)   
 
Considering the numerous contradictions in Jose Espinal’s deposition and trial 
testimony, as well as his interactions with Jose Anaya and defendants’ investigator, I do 
not find Jose Espinal to be a credible witness.   
 
I similarly do not find Carlos Espinal to be a credible witness.  In addition to his 
testimony regarding the Contract for Risk Transfer and gifting Genis’ girlfriend money, 
the evidentiary record contains several other instances of contradiction and deceit.  
When asked about Genis Urgell-Rueda, the individual at the center of this lawsuit, 
Carlos Espinal testified, “Genis Rueda? No, I don’t think I have ever – I met so many 
people but Genis Rueda? Who is Genis Rueda? The one that got hurt?” (Ex. BB, p. 32, 
Depo. pp. 18-19)  On the issue of wages, Carlos Espinal testified that Jose Espinal paid 
his employees with the mobile banking application “Zelle.” (Ex. BB, p. 31, Depo. p. 15)  
He later testified that Eagle Boring Group employees were paid by check and received 
W-2s. (Ex. BB, p. 33, Depo. p. 24)  Jose Espinal testified Eagle Boring Group 
employees did not receive W-2s and were sometimes paid in cash. (Hr. Tr., p. 55) 
 
Defendants Eagle Boring Group and Berkshire Hathaway Direct Insurance 
Company challenge the credibility of Jose Anaya.  Indeed, claimant’s hearing testimony 
and the initial reports of Kurtis Grubb are fairly damaging to Jose Anaya’s credibility.  
That being said, claimant’s knowledge of Genis’ employer was entirely secondhand and 
unconvincing.  It was clear to the undersigned that claimant did not know who employed 
Genis.  Additionally, while Mr. Grubb believed that Genis was employed by MCS 
Communication based on the information gleaned from his investigation, he did not 
make a formal determination as to who employed Genis. (Ex. CC, Depo. p. 34) 
 
Despite the above noted concerns regarding Jose Anaya’s credibility, I find his 
version of events and testimony to be significantly more credible than the testimony of 

URGELL-RUEDA V. MCS COMMUNICATION AND EAGLE BORING GROUP 
Page 12 
Carlos and Jose Espinal.  His testimony at hearing was largely consistent with his 
deposition testimony and defendants’ investigative report.  I ultimately find that Jose 
Anaya’s testimony on matters material to this case was generally credible. 
 
Ultimately, I find that Excel Utility Contractors was the general or prime contractor 
for the Pella Fiber project where Genis was injured on August 1, 2020.  I find that Excel 
Utility Contractors hired MCS Communication as a subcontractor.  I further find that 
MCS Communication hired Eagle Boring Group as a subcontractor and that MCS 
Communication paid Eagle Boring Group an agreed upon fee for its services. 
 
MCS Communication provided Eagle Boring Group with all heavy operating 
equipment and protective gear to complete the project.  Eagle Boring Group provided 
their own, smaller tools for the project.  Eagle Boring Group provided their own 
transportation and lodging.  MCS Communication paid Eagle Boring Group and Eagle 
Boring Group paid its employees. 
 
Jose Anaya instructed the Eagle Boring Group employees as to what tasks 
needed to be completed; however, there is no indication he instructed the employees 
how to go about completing their work.  Such instructions were unnecessary, as the 
Eagle Boring Group employees handled, “[T]he same simple job that we used to do all 
the time, like trying to dig out cable, put pipe in for gasses, the same.” (Ex. BB, Depo. p. 
26) 
 
Based on all of these factors, I find that Genis Urgell-Rueda was an employee of 
Eagle Boring Group on August 1, 2020.  Having concluded Genis was an employee of 
Eagle Boring Group, I must now address the affirmative defense of intoxication.  For this 
issue, we first turn to the autopsy report and the findings from Detective Bailey’s 
investigation. 
 
Detective Bailey received the autopsy report for Genis on October 9, 2020. (JE1, 
p. 8)  The report is dated August 13, 2020. (JE13, p. 68)  Mitchel Morey, M.D., a 
forensic pathologist, determined that Genis died of a high voltage electrocution. (JE13, 
p. 72)  Toxicological analysis of postmortem blood samples revealed the presence of 
Delta-9-THC, the principle psychoactive ingredient of marijuana.1  The test sample 
contained 57 ng/ml. (JE13, p. 76)  The report explains that Delta-9-THC “rapidly leaves 
the blood, even during smoking, falling to below detectable levels within several hours.” 
(JE13, p. 76)  The report continues, “THC concentrations in blood are usually about 
one-half of serum/plasma concentrations.  Usual peak levels in serum for 1.75% or 
3.55% THC  marijuana cigarettes: 50-270 ng/ml at 6 to 9 minutes after beginning 
smoking, decreasing to less than 5 ng/ml by 2 hrs.” (Id.)  The report cautioned that the 
                                                 
1 The urinalysis also found, “Cannabinoids presumptively positive.” (JE13, p. 68) 

URGELL-RUEDA V. MCS COMMUNICATION AND EAGLE BORING GROUP 
Page 13 
test is an unconfirmed screen and confirmation by a more definitive technique was 
recommended. (Id.) 
 
 
In her sworn testimony, Ms. Flores Montoya acknowledged that Genis had 
utilized marijuana in the past, but was unaware as to whether he used marijuana on the 
date of injury. (Hr. Tr., pp. 34-35)  According to the autopsy report, Genis did not have 
marijuana on his person at the time of death; the report lists his personal effects as two 
napkins, a lighter, a red survey flag, a vise grip tool, headphones, an apparent ring, and 
a significant amount of cash. (JE13, p. 69) 
 
 
Ronald Henson, Ph.D. is an independent consultant that was retained by the 
claimant to opine on the allegations that Genis was intoxicated at the time of the injury.  
Dr. Henson reviewed the police reports, Genis’ autopsy report, the laboratory reports, 
and the deposition transcripts of Mr. Anaya, Mr. Krueger, and Mr. Sellers. (Ex. 2, p. 42)  
Following his review of these materials, Dr. Henson opined, 
 
The Blood THC delta-9-57 ng/mL drug finding in this case cannot conclude 
to a reasonable degree of scientific certainty the result is in anyway reliable 
nor associated with the work-related injury accident in this case involving 
Mr. Urgell.  Even if the cannabinoid result is accepted as reliable, the result 
cannot conclude to a reasonable degree of scientific certainty that Mr. Urgell 
was in any way impaired during the time of the work-related accident in this 
case.  Further, the results if accepted as reliable, was [sic] not a significant 
contributing factor to the work injury. 
 
(Ex. 2, p. 43) 
 
 
According to Dr. Henson’s research, there is a poor correlation between blood 
THC concentration and performance on tests measuring impairment.  Moreover, blood 
THC levels are not a reliable indicator of impairment. (Ex. 2, p. 43)  Dr. Henson 
considered the absence of 11-Hydroxy delta-9 and no reported Carboxy delta-9 to be 
noteworthy; however, he did not explain why. (Id.) 
 
 
In response to Dr. Henson’s report, defendants MCS Communication and 
Accident Fund retained Douglas Martin, M.D., to opine on Genis’ toxicology report. (See 
Exhibit E, pp. 1-5) 
 
 
 
According to Dr. Martin, the medical literature does include formulas for 
estimating the time of use based on plasma concentrations of THC; however, the 
formulas typically also rely upon some knowledge of whether an individual is a chronic 
user and what comorbidities exist. (Ex. E, pp. 2-3) 
 

URGELL-RUEDA V. MCS COMMUNICATION AND EAGLE BORING GROUP 
Page 14 
 
Dr. Martin admits that it is difficult to gauge the level of impairment with any type 
of THC positive forensic test. (Ex. E, p. 3)  He further opined he could not determine the 
level of Genis’ intoxication at the time of the injury, noting, “THC is particularly 
troublesome in this respect with regards to trying to correlate levels of impairment with 
the levels of the drug found in the system.” (Ex. E, p. 4)  Nevertheless, Dr. Martin 
opined the likelihood that Genis’ delta 9 THC levels created an impairing or intoxicating 
situation is quite high. (Ex. E, pp. 3-4)   
 
 
Joshua Radke, M.D., of the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, also 
addressed Genis’ alleged intoxication on behalf of MCS Communications and Accident 
Fund. (Ex. E, pp. 6-8)  Dr. Radke is board-certified in Emergency Medicine, Medical 
Toxicology, and Addiction Medicine. (Ex. E, p. 6)  Unlike Dr. Henson and Dr. Martin, 
who provided fairly broad opinions regarding the likelihood that Genis was intoxicated, 
Dr. Radke’s report is thorough and objective.   
 
 
Dr. Radke first addressed Genis’ delta-9 THC level of 57 ng/mL. Dr. Radke 
highlighted one study that attempted to find a relationship between THC levels and the 
degree of impairment.  The study evaluated motor control and cognitive function in 
twenty (20) recreational marijuana users after smoking specific doses of THC.  The 
study found that at levels between 5 and 10 ng/mL, participants showed severe 
impairment in most performance tests (75-90%).  The study found that at levels greater 
than 30 ng/mL, participants showed severe impairment in 100% of the performance 
tests. (Ex. E, p. 7)   
 
 
Dr. Radke then discussed the pharmacokinetics and timing of THC levels. (Id.)  
According to a commonly used Forensic Toxicology textbook, THC levels typically peak 
at 70-80 ng/mL in 15 to 20 minutes, and fall to single digits after three hours. (Id.; citing 
Disposition of Toxic Drugs and Chemicals in Man, 11th Edition, by Randall C. Baselt, 
Ph.D., 2017)  With this in mind, Dr. Radke estimated that claimant likely used THC 
within 1-3 hours of the accident. (Ex. E, p. 7)   
 
 
Next, Dr. Radke addressed the absence of 11-hydroxy delta-9 THC and delta-9 
carboxy THC in Genis’ test results. (Id.)  He noted that the absence of these two 
metabolites does not call into question the validity of the results. (Id.)  He explained that 
both metabolites could be present, they were just at levels lower than the testing 
thresholds. (Id.) 
 
Ultimately, Dr. Radke opined that a level of delta-9 THC of 57 ng/mL is in a range 
that is consistent with recent use and well above levels that have been shown to cause 
intoxication and impairment. (Ex. E, p. 8)  As such, Dr. Radke opined, to a reasonable 
degree of medical certainty, that Genis was likely intoxicated and impaired at the time of 
his death. (Id.) 
 

URGELL-RUEDA V. MCS COMMUNICATION AND EAGLE BORING GROUP 
Page 15 
Dr. Radke acknowledged several limitations and noted that it is difficult to 
interpret a laboratory value in isolation to determine intoxication. (Ex. E, p. 7)  That 
being said, he relied on scientific research to guide his analysis and ultimate conclusion.  
His analysis is consistent with the information provided in the toxicology report. (See 
JE13, p. 76) (“Usual peak levels in serum for 1.75% or 3.55% THC marijuana cigarette: 
50 – 270 ng/mL at 6 to 9 minutes after beginning smoking, decreasing to less than 5 
ng/mL by 2 hrs.”)  Thus, I find Dr. Radke’s estimate that Genis likely used THC within 1-
3 hours of the accident persuasive.  Further, given that Genis had 57 ng/mL of Delta-9 
THC in his bloodstream at the time of death, I am also persuaded by Dr. Radke’s 
opinion that the “very high” level of delta-9 THC in Genis’ system means he was likely 
intoxicated and impaired at the time of death. (Ex. E, p. 8) 
 
In contrast, I do not accept Dr. Henson’s opinion that the cannabinoid result 
cannot conclude to a reasonable degree of scientific certainty that Mr. Urgell was in any 
way impaired at the time of the work-related accident.  Based on the 2017 amendments, 
it is claimant’s burden to overcome the presumption of intoxication following a positive 
test result.  Even without knowing Genis’ level of impairment, there was a high level of 
delta-9 THC in Genis’ blood and the urine screen was presumed positive for 
cannabinoids.  I find claimant provided insufficient evidence to overcome the 
presumption that Genis’ reason, judgment, and inhibitions were not affected by the 
delta-9 THC in his system.  I find claimant failed to overcome the presumption Genis 
was intoxicated at the time of the accident.   
 
I similarly find claimant failed to overcome the presumption that Genis’ 
intoxication significantly contributed to his injuries.  The evidentiary record indicates 
Genis and his co-workers disregarded instructions to wait for Mr. Anaya's presence 
before attempting to dismantle the concrete structure.  Moreover, the workers either 
failed to notice or ignored the utility locates indicating the presence of a high-voltage 
electrical line.  It is possible the workers did not understand or misinterpreted the 
markings; however, this alternative seems unlikely given that Eagle Boring Group is in 
the business of boring. (See JE16, Depo. p. 11; Ex. BB, Depo. p. 13)  In fact, when 
asked what work Eagle Boring Group was instructed to perform at the Pella Fiber 
project, Carlos Espinal testified, “Well, the same simple job that we used to do all the 
time, like trying to dig out cable, put pipe in for gasses, the same.” (Ex. BB, Depo. p. 26)  
Ultimately, I find claimant failed to dispel the question of whether Genis’ decision to 
dismantle the concrete structure was a reasonable decision not impacted by his 
intoxication. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The initial dispute between the parties is whether claimant has proven Genis was 
an employee of Eagle Boring Group at the time of the injury. 
 

URGELL-RUEDA V. MCS COMMUNICATION AND EAGLE BORING GROUP 
Page 16 
It is claimant’s duty to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he was an 
employee within the meaning of the law. Where claimant establishes a prima facie case, 
defendants then have the burden of going forward with the evidence which rebuts 
claimant’s case. The defendants must establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, 
any pleaded affirmative defense or bar to compensation. Nelson v. Cities Serv. Oil Co., 
259 Iowa 1209, 146 N.W.2d 261 (1966). 
  
 
Factors to be considered in determining whether an employer-employee 
relationship exists are: (1) the right of selection, or to employ at will, (2) responsibility for 
payment of wages by the employer, (3) the right to discharge or terminate the 
relationship, (4) the right to control the work, and (5) identity of the employer as the 
authority in charge of the work or for whose benefit it is performed. The overriding issue 
is the intention of the parties. Where both parties by agreement state they intend to form 
an independent contractor relationship, their stated intent is ignored if the agreement 
exists to avoid the workers’ compensation laws, however. Likewise, the test of control is 
not the actual exercise of the power of control over the details and methods to be 
followed in the performance of the work, but the right to exercise such control. Also, the 
general belief or custom of the community that a particular kind of work is performed by 
employees can be considered in determining whether an employer-employee 
relationship exists. Caterpillar Tractor Co. v. Shook, 313 N.W.2d 503 (Iowa 1981); 
McClure v. Union et. al., Counties, 188 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa 1971); Nelson, 259 Iowa 
1209, 146 N.W.2d 261; Lembke v. Fritz, 223 Iowa 261, 272 N.W. 300 (1937); Funk v. 
Bekins Van Lines Co., I Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 82 (App. December 
1980). 
  
The primary purpose of the workers' compensation statute is to benefit the worker 
insofar as the statute permits. The law is to be interpreted liberally to achieve that result. 
Additionally, the statute is intended to cast upon the industry in which the worker is 
employed a share of the burden resulting from industrial accidents with the ultimate cost 
to be borne by the consumer as part of the product cost. For that reason, “any worker 
whose services form a regular and continuing part of the costs of the product, and whose 
method of operation is not such [an] independent business that it forms in itself a separate 
route through which [the worker's] own costs of industrial accident can be channeled, is 
within a presumptive area of intended protection.” Shook at 506. 
 
Genis was performing boring duties on August 1, 2020, because Eagle Boring 
Group had contracted with MCS Communication to provide labor for the Pella Fiber 
project.  Genis had to do the work in accordance with Eagle Boring Group’s contract 
with MCS Communication. There is little to no evidence that Mr. Anaya performed 
physical labor or helped Eagle Boring Group employees in finishing various tasks.  His 
role was one of general supervision. 
 
Carlos Espinal, on behalf of Eagle Boring Group, obtained the Pella Fiber project 
work from MCS Communication and directed where his Eagle Boring Group employees 
should present for work.  Eagle Boring Group also arranged to pick up and drive Genis 
and Jhoni Navarro to Pella, Iowa from Richmond, Virginia.   

URGELL-RUEDA V. MCS COMMUNICATION AND EAGLE BORING GROUP 
Page 17 
 
Eagle Boring Group was responsible for the payment of wages.  Jose Espinal, on 
behalf of Eagle Boring Group, received payment from MCS Communication and then 
distributed a portion of those funds to Eagle Boring Group employees.  Jose Espinal 
testified that his brother, Carlos Espinal, paid Genis’ “lover” for the work Genis had 
done. (JE16, Depo. p. 35) 
 
The boring work Genis performed was for the benefit of Eagle Boring Group and 
helped to carry out Eagle Boring Groups’ contract with MCS Communication. 
 
These facts are consistent with a finding that Genis was an employee of Eagle 
Boring Group and not MCS Communication.  I find claimant produced sufficient 
evidence to establish a prima facie case that Genis was an employee of Eagle Boring 
Group on the date of injury. 
 
Defendants assert the affirmative defense of intoxication as set forth in Iowa 
Code section 85.16.   
 
Iowa Code section 85.16(2)(b) provides: 
 
(1) If the employer shows that, at the time of the injury or immediately following 
the injury, the employee had positive test results reflecting the presence of 
alcohol ... it shall be presumed that the employee was intoxicated at the time 
of the injury and that intoxication was a substantial factor in causing the injury. 
 
(2) Once the employer has made a showing as provided in subparagraph (1), the 
burden of proof shall be on the employee to overcome the presumption by 
establishing that the employee was not intoxicated at the time of the injury, or 
that intoxication was not a substantial factor in causing the injury. 
 
In this case, I found Genis had a positive test result reflecting the presence of 
marijuana.  Thus, claimant must show that Genis was not intoxicated or that his 
intoxication was not a substantial factor in causing his injury. 
 
“Intoxication” is not defined in chapter 85; however, the Iowa Supreme Court 
adopted the following definition: 
 
A person is “under the influence of alcohol” and therefore intoxicated when one 
or more of the following are true: 
 
(1) the person's reason or mental ability has been affected; (2) the person's 
judgment is impaired; (3) the person's emotions are visibly excited; and (4) 
the person has, to any extent, lost control of bodily actions or motions. 

URGELL-RUEDA V. MCS COMMUNICATION AND EAGLE BORING GROUP 
Page 18 
 
Garcia v. Naylor Concrete Co., 650 N.W.2d 87, 90 (Iowa 2002) (citing Benavides v. J.C. 
Penney Life Insurance Co., 539 N.W.2d 352, 355 (Iowa 1995). The Court also noted 
“blood-alcohol level revealed by chemical testing is important evidence on the question 
of intoxication.” Id. 
 
 
In this case, I found Dr. Radke’s opinions regarding Genis’ impairment status to 
be persuasive.  Based on the legislature's 2017 amendments, it is claimant's burden 
to overcome the presumption of intoxication.  While there is little evidence that Genis 
was belligerent or disruptive in any way, claimant failed to dispel the question of 
whether Genis’ decision to dismantle the concrete structure was a reasonable decision 
not impacted by intoxication.  Thus, I conclude claimant failed to carry the burden of 
overcoming the presumption that Genis’ intoxication was a substantial factor in causing 
his injuries.  Defendants’ affirmative intoxication defense under Iowa Code section 
85.16 succeeds and claimant’s claim is barred. 
 
ORDER 
  
 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
  
 
Claimant takes nothing. 
 
MCS Communication, LLC and Accident Fund Insurance Company of America 
are dismissed with prejudice and owe no benefits to claimant. 
Signed and filed this __30TH _ day of May, 2024. 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Jenna Cruise (via WCES) 
Joshua Dewald (via WCES) 
Bryan Brooks (via WCES) 
Laura Ostrander (via WCES) 
 
 

URGELL-RUEDA V. MCS COMMUNICATION AND EAGLE BORING GROUP 
Page 19 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days from the date 
above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ 
Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the 
following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, 
Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a 
weekend or legal holiday. 
 
 
 
