Case Number: 23700673.01
Case Title:  BULMAN, TRAVIS V. SCOTT COUNTY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Bulman Travis-23700673.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
TRAVIS BULMAN, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
        File Nos. 23006721.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
            23700673.01 
 
 
 
  : 
 
 
 23700674.01 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :              ARBITRATION DECISION     
SCOTT COUNTY, 
  : 
 
 
  :                        
 
Employer, 
  :             Head Notes: 1108.20; 1402.30; 
 
Self-Insured, 
  :      1402.40; 1801; 1802; 1803; 2204; 2206;  
 
Defendant. 
  :           2501; 2601.10; 2701; 2907; 4000.2   
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Travis Bulman filed petitions in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against Scott County, Iowa, self-insured employer, for alleged 
work injuries on three separate dates: March 20, 2022 (File No. 23700673.01); October 
30, 2022 (File No. 23700674.01); and November 14, 2022 (File No. 23006721.01). The 
claims were consolidated, and came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing 
on June 19, 2024. The hearing took place via Zoom, with all parties and the court 
reporter appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report for each file prior to the commencement of the 
hearing. On the hearing reports, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those 
stipulations were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ 
stipulations will be made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record for all three files includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 11, 
Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 19, and Defendant’s Exhibits A through GG.  
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. Claimant’s wife, Emily Bulman, also 
testified. The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on 
June 19, 2024. The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on September 6, 2024, and 
the case was considered fully submitted on that date. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Mar-24  09:52:13     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES 
 
File No. 23700673.01 (March 20, 2022) 
 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of 
employment on March 20, 2022; 1 
2. Whether and to what extent claimant is entitled to temporary total disability 
and/or healing period benefits; 
3. Whether claimant has reached maximum medical improvement and whether 
the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability at this time; 
4. If so, the nature and extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability 
benefits; 
5. The commencement date for permanent disability benefits, if any are 
awarded; 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.27; 
7. Payment of certain medical expenses; 
8. Reimbursement of claimant’s independent medical examination under Iowa 
Code section 85.39; 
9. Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 
10A.315; and 
10. Taxation of costs. 
 
File No. 23700674.01 (October 30, 2022) 
 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of 
employment on October 30, 2022;  
2. Whether and to what extent claimant is entitled to temporary total disability 
and/or healing period benefits; 
3. Whether claimant has reached maximum medical improvement and whether 
the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability at this time; 
4. If so, the nature and extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability 
benefits; 
5. The commencement date for permanent disability benefits, if any are 
awarded; 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.27; 
7. Payment of certain medical expenses; 
8. Reimbursement of claimant’s independent medical examination under Iowa 
Code section 85.39; 
9. Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 
10A.315; and 
10. Taxation of costs. 
                                                                 
1 Each hearing report states that defendant stipulates that claimant sustained a work-related mental 
health injury, specifically post-traumatic stress disorder, but disputes each alleged injury date. 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 3 
 
File No. 23006721.01 (November 14, 2022) 
 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of 
employment on November 14, 2022;  
2. Whether and to what extent claimant is entitled to temporary total disability 
and/or healing period benefits; 
3. Whether claimant has reached maximum medical improvement and whether 
the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability at this time; 
4. If so, the nature and extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability 
benefits; 
5. The commencement date for permanent disability benefits, if any are 
awarded; 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 85.27; 
7. Payment of certain medical expenses; 
8. Reimbursement of claimant’s independent medical examination under Iowa 
Code section 85.39; 
9. Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 
10A.315; and 
10. Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
his demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 40-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
43) He is married and has two young children. He graduated from high school in 2002, 
after which he attended classes at a few community colleges until finally receiving his 
associate’s degree in 2012 or 2013. (Tr., p. 44; Claimant’s Exhibit 14, p. 177) He later 
attended Upper Iowa University and received a bachelor's degree in public 
administration in approximately 2021. (Cl. Ex. 14, p. 177) He testified that he returned to 
college for the bachelor’s degree in part to boost his resume for advancing his career. 
(Tr., p. 45) He had the goal of possibly running for sheriff one day. He testified that he 
has always been driven to reach leadership-type positions, and he has a family history 
in law enforcement, which was an inspiration to him.  
 
Claimant started work as a deputy sheriff for Scott County, Iowa, on June 23, 
2014. In order to begin his job as a deputy sheriff, he first had to pass both physical and 
mental testing, including the MMPI. (Tr., p. 46) From 2014 until 2022, claimant did very 
well as a deputy sheriff. His reviews were positive, and he got along with members of 
the community and his coworkers. He had excellent attendance, which he believes was 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 4 
 
near-perfect. (Tr., p. 47; See also Cl. Ex. 8) He became a drug recognition expert 
(DRE), which is an officer trained to evaluate people suspected of being under the 
influence of drugs. Claimant testified that the training process to become a DRE is 
lengthy and grueling, and possibly the most difficult academic training that law 
enforcement has to offer. In addition to performing evaluations of people, a DRE officer 
also provides expert testimony in court and assists in prosecution.  
 
Claimant’s wife, Emily Bulman, also testified on claimant’s behalf. Her testimony 
was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and her demeanor at the time of 
hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt her veracity. She was a credible 
witness. She testified that claimant was “incredibly” proud of being a DRE, and also won 
awards for being the top DRE in the region, and having the most DRE stops in Iowa 
during one of his years of service. (Tr., pp. 20-21; See also Cl. Ex. 8) In addition to the 
DRE awards, he also received awards from the Governor’s Traffic Safety Bureau. (Tr., 
p. 46; See also Cl. Ex. 8) Overall, it appears claimant was good at his job as a deputy 
sheriff and enjoyed his work. 
 
Claimant has a history of mental health treatment related to depression and 
anxiety. He started seeing Sarah Kivisto, LISW, for therapy in 2017. (Tr., p. 48) He 
testified that depression and anxiety were becoming a problem for him around that time 
and he started to have suicidal ideations. At his deposition, claimant testified that he 
thought he had struggled with depression to some extent his entire life, but in 2017 it 
started to become a problem, which is why he sought mental health counseling. (Cl. Ex. 
19, Deposition Transcript, p. 60) 
 
Medical records in evidence indicate that claimant was referred by his primary 
care physician, D.V. Singh, M.D., to the Robert Young Center in January of 2018. (Joint 
Exhibit 2, p. 20) His initial diagnostic assessment was completed by Christine Harrison, 
LISW, on January 24, 2018. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 21, 23) She noted the presenting problem as 
claimant’s feelings of depression since the prior October. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 23) He had 
started going to therapy, and his therapist had recommended he see Dr. Singh 
regarding medication. He started taking Prozac two to three weeks prior, and Dr. Singh 
referred him to the Robert Young Center. 
 
The diagnostic assessment noted that claimant had prior suicidal thinking, with a 
plan. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 25) He denied suicidal thoughts at that time. The initial diagnosis was 
adjustment disorder with depression. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 28) It appears that claimant initially 
thought that Ms. Harrison would be able to provide therapy and prescribe his 
medication, which was not accurate. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 29) Ms. Harrison told him he was free 
to continue therapy with Ms. Kivisto, or change to therapy with her, and he indicated he 
wanted to change. However, it does not appear he changed, as he was not seen at the 
Robert Young Center again until 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 31) 
 
Claimant did continue therapy with Ms. Kivisto. The records in evidence begin on 
August 4, 2020, and on that date she noted flat affect and mild to moderate symptoms 
of depression. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 124) Therapy records are voluminous, but throughout the 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 5 
 
remainder of 2020, Ms. Kivisto’s objective findings continued to include flat affect and 
mild to moderate depressive symptoms, and at times also included mild to moderate 
anxiety. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 124-128)  
 
In early 2021, claimant’s symptoms were objectively more moderate to severe in 
nature. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 129-130) He also reported more suicidal thoughts, but denied a 
plan. By March 23, 2021, however, he reported improvement in his mood, which he 
attributed to a new prescription for testosterone. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 132) Ms. Kivisto’s 
objective findings noted mild symptoms of anxiety and depression. Claimant’s 
symptoms continued to fluctuate between mild and moderate until August 31, 2021. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, pp. 132-138) On that date, claimant reported that his 22-year-old nephew had 
died by suicide recently. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 139) Ms. Kivisto observed his symptoms of 
depression and anxiety to be moderate, but noted they had been severe at times over 
the past week. Over the remainder of 2021, his symptoms were recorded as mainly 
moderate in nature, although occasionally severe. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 139-148) He also 
continued to occasionally experience suicidal thoughts. At his visit on December 10, 
2021, he noted that his job as a deputy sheriff was the biggest thing that gave him 
purpose in life, and that is was the one thing he knew he was good at. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 148) 
On January 7, 2022, claimant reported moderate depression and anxiety, severe at 
times, over the past week. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 149) 
 
Claimant returned to the Robert Young Center on January 21, 2022, on the 
referral of Dr. Singh, who continued to prescribe his medications. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 31) He 
reported symptoms including feeling down and hopeless, lack of interest, trouble getting 
out of bed, poor concentration, anxiety and flashbacks with panic attacks, irritability, 
restlessness and excessive worry, mood swings, and suicidal thoughts without plan or 
intent. He noted a car accident in which he went through the windshield and sustained a 
head injury, as well as the recent suicide of his nephew. After assessment, it was 
suggested he be referred for a psychiatric evaluation. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 35) In the meantime, 
he continued to see Ms. Kivisto, who noted some improvements in his mood. (Jt. Ex. 3, 
pp. 151-153) 
 
On March 17, 2022, claimant saw Mi Nelson, M.D., at the Robert Young Center 
for his psychiatric evaluation. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 36) Dr. Nelson noted claimant had a history 
of depression and anxiety, and had been in therapy with Ms. Kivisto for the past few 
years. At the time of the evaluation, he was taking Wellbutrin and Zoloft, which were 
somewhat helpful, and had been receiving testosterone injections for several years. He 
noted that with his job as a sheriff’s deputy, he sometimes investigated crimes scenes 
“which could be gruesome but not triggering as frequently as it could be.” With his 
current medications, he felt he was better than he was three to four years prior, but still 
had as many bad days as good days and still had regular feelings of suicidal ideation 
but no intent. He reported feeling on edge at times with rare panic, and denied 
flashbacks or nightmares.  
 
After evaluation, Dr. Nelson decided to first try to maximize his current 
medications since he was getting partial benefit. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 39) She increased his 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 6 
 
dosages, told him to continue psychotherapy with Ms. Kivisto, and wanted him to follow 
up with her in six to eight weeks. At her deposition, Dr. Nelson testified that claimant did 
not have the diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) at the time of his first 
visit on March 17, 2022. (Defendant’s Exhibit GG, p. 215; Deposition Transcript p. 34)  
 
On March 20, 2022, the first of three significant work situations occurred. 
Claimant testified to this event in extreme detail. (Tr., pp. 50-58) This deputy observed 
claimant to have a very flat affect while providing this testimony, and it seemed as 
though the events of that day are burned into his memory. In brief, there was a situation 
that involved a standoff with an armed subject. After a short pursuit involving other 
officers, claimant arrived at the scene where the subject eventually crashed his vehicle. 
(Tr., pp. 50-53) Claimant observed the vehicle to be empty, and noticed the subject 
walking westbound down the eastbound lanes of Kimberly Road, in Davenport, Iowa, 
holding a gun to his head. (Tr., pp. 52-53) Claimant drew his service weapon and 
ordered the subject to drop the gun, which the subject ignored. (Tr., p. 54) After 
positioning himself behind the engine block of his vehicle, all while aiming his service 
weapon at the subject, claimant realized that he would have to shoot if the subject made 
any sudden movements whatsoever. (Tr., pp. 54-55) The officers eventually surrounded 
the subject, and a crowd began to build in the nearby mall parking lot. (Tr., p. 56) After 
about two hours, the subject shot himself in the head, and died immediately. (Tr., p. 57) 
Claimant was then responsible to help process the crime scene, and collected the gun 
and shell casing, and took photographs of the scene and waited for the medical 
examiner to arrive. (Tr., p. 58)  
 
Claimant saw Ms. Kivisto on April 1, 2022, and noted the events of March 20 had 
been on his mind. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 154) He described having a “front-row seat” to the 
standoff and eventual suicide of the subject. He said that he knew if the subject pointed 
his gun at anyone other than himself he would have had to shoot him, and he was 
worried about the crowd, which included young children, that had gathered to watch. He 
said he was happy that he did not have to shoot the subject, and that it was the closest 
he had ever been to shooting someone. He said he felt numb after the experience and 
then began to wonder if there was something else he could have done. Ms. Kivisto 
noted claimant had good insight regarding the event, and despite the significant 
situation stressors he had made efforts to cope in a “safe/constructive” manner. They 
also discussed his recent visit with Dr. Nelson and the increases in his medications. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 155) 
 
Claimant continued his regular sessions with Ms. Kivisto in April and May. (Jt. Ex. 
3, pp. 156-159) He returned to Dr. Nelson on June 15, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 40) At that 
appointment, he reported he was doing better until a situation a few weeks prior. He 
noted the traumatic experience in March with the standoff had led to some 
hypervigilance, intrusive thoughts, and flashbacks initially. Then, a few weeks prior to 
his appointment, he had some training at work that involved a similar situation and he 
was “very triggered,” and had a lot of mixed emotions and return of acute stress 
reaction. He reported it was very difficult to relax, he was “not quite” at baseline, and 
had been somewhat on edge, even on vacation the week prior.  

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 7 
 
 
Dr. Nelson further increased his Zoloft, and added a trial of clonidine. (Jt. Ex. 2, 
p. 42) She discussed her concern for PTSD symptoms, and recommended claimant 
increase the frequency of his therapy with Ms. Kivisto. At his next appointment with Ms. 
Kivisto on June 24, 2022, she recommended he see her weekly rather than monthly. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 160) He also reported having several panic attacks, including one at the office 
at work followed by several later that night. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 161) He said the last time he 
had a panic attack was 15 years prior while on his honeymoon in Mexico, and that was 
the only other panic attack he had ever experienced. Claimant also noted at that 
appointment that Dr. Nelson had brought up the possibility of a career change, which 
was disturbing to claimant, as he loved his job and could not imagine doing anything 
else. However, after the past couple days he had been seriously contemplating other 
options. Ms. Kivisto discussed the diagnosis of PTSD and the impact of work-related 
trauma at length, and whether it would be better for claimant and his family for him to 
step away from law enforcement.  
 
Claimant continued weekly sessions with Ms. Kivisto. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 162-165) His 
next visit with Dr. Nelson took place on July 28, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 44) The record from 
that visit states that claimant had called back after his last visit due to panic and 
nightmares, and had started prazosin and increased the clonidine. He had not had 
panic since. Dr. Nelson again noted her concern for PTSD and ongoing traumatic 
exposures. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 46) She adjusted his medications and recommended he 
discuss eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) with Ms. Kivisto. In 
her deposition, Dr. Nelson explained that EMDR is a treatment for PTSD. (Def. Ex. GG, 
p. 216; Depo. Tr., p. 39) 
 
Claimant continued regular sessions with Ms. Kivisto. They discussed EMDR, 
and began using the technique on August 19, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 166-171) He 
continued to display symptoms of moderate to severe depression and moderate anxiety 
during his sessions with Ms. Kivisto. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 172-182) 
 
His next appointment with Dr. Nelson took place on September 15, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 
2, p. 48) He reported having a very good two to three weeks of feeling good and happy. 
Dr. Nelson again noted concern for PTSD and ongoing traumatic exposures. (Jt. Ex. 2, 
p. 50) Claimant’s medications were again adjusted and he was to continue with 
psychotherapy and EMDR. He did continue regular session with Ms. Kivisto, again with 
mainly moderate symptoms of depression and anxiety, at times severe. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 
183-190) At his visit on October 21, 2022, Ms. Kivisto noted a significant improvement 
in his mood, and he denied any thought of self-harm or suicide. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 191) 
Improvement in his mood was again noted on October 28, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 192) 
 
On October 30, 2022, claimant experienced another significant incident while 
working. He again testified about the incident in great detail, and this deputy observed 
him to have a very flat affect while describing the scene. On that day, claimant was 
helping with patrol due to being short-staffed. (Tr., p. 59) It was hunting season, and he 
decided to take a routine patrol through a public hunting and wildlife area, just to check 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 8 
 
things out. (Tr., p. 60) He ended up at the Princeton gun and archery range, and as he 
pulled into the parking lot, he noticed a truck in the far back corner of the lot. He could 
see the driver’s side of the truck and noticed something on the ground on the other side, 
which struck him as odd. (Tr., pp. 60-61) He got out of his vehicle to investigate, and 
saw that an individual had shot himself in the head and died. (Tr., p. 61) Claimant 
testified in great detail regarding the person’s wound, and how his head and face 
looked, stating that “his face kind of looked like a rubber Halloween mask just kind of 
laying on the floor all caved in.” (Tr., pp. 61-62) 
 
Claimant testified that after discovering the deceased individual, he took the next 
steps of contacting dispatch and his shift lieutenant, as well as requesting a medical 
examiner. (Tr., p. 62) He was told it would be a while before the medical examiner 
would arrive, and he went about securing and processing the scene. (Tr., pp. 62-63) He 
then began to search the vehicle to see if he could confirm the decedent’s identity. (Tr., 
p. 63) He found the man’s cell phone, and could see that he had received a text 
message from his father containing a Bible verse and telling him to be kind to himself. 
(Tr., p. 64) Claimant testified it was at that point that things “really started to bother me, 
so to speak.” He was still having suicidal ideations at that time, and the decedent was 
close to his age, so he began drawing connections between himself and the decedent. 
(Tr., pp. 64-65) He ended up remaining at the scene alone with the decedent for about 
three hours before the medical examiner arrived. (Tr., p. 65)  
 
Claimant eventually found out that the decedent was from Montana, and 
contacted authorities there to make notification. (Tr., pp. 65-66) Eventually the 
decedent’s family contacted claimant via phone, and some time later traveled to Iowa to 
collect the decedent’s belongings and met with claimant in person. (Tr., pp. 66-68) He 
testified that mentally, after this event, he was not doing well, as the image of the man 
lying on the ground with his face looking like a “Halloween mask” stuck in his head, and 
he was kind of imagining himself in the same position due to his suicidal ideations. (Tr., 
pp. 68-69) He discussed the situation at his next therapy appointment on November 2, 
2022, and noted that he could not fight off the idea that someday he would reach his 
breaking point and would also take his own life. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 193-194) He denied 
suicidal intent or plan, and Ms. Kivisto reviewed his safety plan with him.  
 
Just a couple of weeks later, on November 14, 2022, the third significant incident 
occurred while claimant was working. (Tr., p. 69) On that morning, claimant was sent to 
the Walcott Mobile Home Park where a fire had occurred the night before in a mobile 
home. Claimant was advised that the fire had been extinguished, but a two-year-old boy 
was missing and presumed dead in the house. He was sent to help process the scene. 
Claimant testified that he does not recall the 15 to 20-minute drive from patrol 
headquarters to the scene, but when he arrived, they had just found the little boy. (Tr., 
pp. 69-70) Claimant testified that he was found in a bedroom of the house, “so they 
covered him with a sheet, and that was – that was it.” (Tr., p. 70) He started processing 
the scene, which included mapping the area with a drone and taking overall ground 
photos. He met with the fire marshal, who told him “one child. . .and one dog.” Claimant 
testified that the house was not yet safe to enter, so they had to cut a hole in the 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 9 
 
exterior wall to remove the deceased boy’s body. (Tr., p. 71) Right around that time, 
another officer came to claimant and told him that he could go, as he had a conference 
in Iowa City to attend that day. Claimant testified that he was grateful to that officer 
because he saved him from the worst of what he could have seen that day. (Tr., p. 72)  
 
The conference went well, and claimant testified it provided a “nice distraction” 
that day. However, the following day when he went to his office, part of his job was to 
collect the relevant photographs and reports to send to the State Medical Examiner’s 
office for the autopsy. He had to view the photos that the other officer had taken at the 
scene in order to pick which ones to send to the medical examiner. Claimant testified 
that is the part that really got to him. (Tr., pp. 72-73) He said the photos that he saw 
were “just not a recognizable human.” (Tr., p. 73) He provided a detailed and graphic 
description of both the child’s remains and the dog’s remains. (Tr., pp. 73-74) He 
testified that he managed to get everything to the medical examiner, although he does 
not remember doing it. (Tr., p. 74)  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Nelson on November 16, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 52) Dr. Nelson 
noted that claimant reported he had been having more good days, several week-long 
stretches, and surprisingly less suicidal ideation. He reported continuing EMDR weekly. 
However, a few weeks prior he had discovered a man who died by suicide, which 
triggered more intrusive thoughts and irritability. He was starting to get better, and then 
he had to process the photos from the Walcott fire the day before his appointment. Dr. 
Nelson also noted that claimant was applying for other jobs and seeing more activity 
with his drone work. Dr. Nelson adjusted claimant’s medications, and again advised him 
to continue with psychotherapy and weekly EMDR. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 54) 
 
Claimant testified that it took a couple of days after the Walcott fire, but his 
mental state continued to decline. (Tr., p. 75) Claimant saw Ms. Kivisto on November 
18, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 195) They discussed his feelings about looking for a different job 
outside of law enforcement. Ms. Kivisto noted claimant was experiencing severe trauma 
symptoms exacerbated by significant work-related trauma experienced in the days prior, 
and moderate to severe depressive symptoms. She noted that claimant would consider 
options for a higher level of care, including possibly inpatient care. Claimant told Ms. 
Kivisto that he had come to a point where he did not think he could survive in that 
environment much longer. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 196) He had been looking at different career 
options, and had an appointment scheduled to look into long-term disability from his job. 
He also thought he could possibly work in the property/evidence vault at work as he felt 
it would be less triggering.  
 
At his next appointment with Ms. Kivisto on November 23, 2022, he advised that 
he had met with his supervisor the prior Friday and had secured a week off of work. (Jt. 
Ex. 3, p. 197) He was looking into inpatient treatment programs for PTSD. Ms. Kivisto 
noted he was continuing to experience significant trauma and depression symptoms. 
 
Claimant testified he was put on administrative leave at this time, and was to 
check back in after a week. (Tr., p. 76) However, during that time he checked himself in 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 10 
 
to Clive Behavioral Health in Clive, Iowa, due to “suicidal thoughts that were just out of 
control.” Claimant’s wife testified that shortly before he went to Clive, claimant was 
scrolling Facebook and saw a picture of a cooked turkey. (Tr., p. 24) The picture caused 
him to throw his phone, and eventually he confided in his wife that seeing the picture 
gave him a terrible image of the child who died in the Walcott fire. Shortly thereafter, he 
decided to hospitalize himself, which she supported. (Tr., p. 25) 
 
Claimant was admitted to Clive Behavioral Health on November 24, 2022. (Jt. 
Ex. 4, p. 255) Upon admission he reported having three separate suicidal plans, 
including shooting himself, driving off a bridge into water, or tying weights onto himself 
and jumping into a river. On intake, he was assessed as being at high risk for suicide, 
due to severe PTSD triggered by the recent traumatic death that was experienced 
recently at work. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 267) It was determined that he required inpatient acute 
care due to “behavior which is life threatening, destructive or disabling to self or others.” 
(Jt. Ex. 4, p. 272) In an addendum to the intake evaluation, it is noted that claimant 
wished to continue to work in his current occupation “though this is clearly contributing 
to exacerbation of symptoms.” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 260) He described his admission at Clive as 
a “hail Mary” to get on the right medications for control of his symptoms, “though full 
control to satisfying degree is unlikely to be accomplished in the context of ongoing 
exposures.”  
 
Claimant was discharged from Clive Behavioral Health on December 1, 2022. (Jt. 
Ex. 4, p. 242) Upon discharge he reported an improvement in his mood and anxiety, 
and had consistently and reliably denied suicidal ideations for at least 48 hours. During 
his stay his medications were adjusted, and he had contact with his family, who were 
supportive. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 310-321) He was also able to contact a nonprofit organization 
that helps first responders a couple of times during his stay. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 302; 310) He 
said he felt a lot better after speaking to someone at the nonprofit. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 302) 
The day before his discharge, November 29, 2022, he reported feeling that his 
depression and anxiety were better than they had been in years, likely due to knowing 
he had resources and that his family was aware of what he was going through. He was 
unsure what he was going to do about his job, but felt he had options. He indicated he 
would likely be taking long-term disability and possibly changing his role. He also said 
he might end up helping the nonprofit organization or working more with his side hobby. 
 
Claimant kept in contact with the major of the sheriff’s office to keep him updated 
while he was hospitalized. (Tr., p. 76) When he returned, he met with Rhonda 
Oostenryk, who is the Scott County Risk Manager in the Scott County Attorney’s Office. 
(Tr., pp. 76-77) He testified that during the meeting he felt Rhonda was very supportive 
and told him that the county would support him and do everything they could. (Tr., p. 78) 
She discussed his disability options with him, including disability through the Iowa Public 
Employees’ Retirement System (IPERS) or workers’ compensation, and claimant said 
she strongly suggested IPERS and told him he would get more money in the end that 
way. Claimant was not offered any medical treatment at that meeting. (Tr., p. 79) 
 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 11 
 
Claimant saw Ms. Kivisto on December 2, 2022, at which time they discussed his 
stay at Clive and the status of his job. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 200-201) He continued with regular 
psychotherapy appointments. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 202-211)  
 
Claimant completed the employer’s first report of injury and emailed it to Rhonda 
on December 8, 2022. (Defendant’s Exhibit D, pp. 19-20) He testified that he completed 
the form on his own. In his email to Rhonda, he stated that he wanted to file the form 
and keep a record but he did not want to proceed with a disability claim yet. (Def. Ex. D, 
p. 19) His plan was to return to work on January 30, 2023, in light duty status.  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Nelson on January 3, 2023, and they discussed his stay at 
Clive Behavioral Health. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 56) He reported that the treatment helped, but his 
low mood and decreasing self-care was returning. He continued to experience triggers, 
as well as regular flashbacks, intrusive thoughts, and hypervigilance. He said his wife 
was supportive of him returning to work for a sense of purpose, but he was exploring his 
options. He also noted that he had been in contact with the nonprofit organization that 
helps first responders. 
 
On January 7, 2023, claimant presented to Acera Health in California, where he 
was enrolled first in residential treatment (RTC), and later transitioned to a partial-
hospitalization program (PHP). (See Jt. Ex. 6, p. 506) Claimant testified that when he 
was in the hospital in Clive, the nonprofit organization he contacted connected him with 
the facility in California and paid for his airfare. (Tr., p. 82) He was responsible for his 
own medical bills, however. 
 
Claimant was treated at Acera until March 3, 2023, for a total of 56 days. (Jt. Ex. 
6, pp. 684-685) There are over 300 pages of medical records from his treatment there, 
but in summary, upon arrival, he reported increased symptoms due to depression, 
anxiety, and PTSD. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 342-345) He participated in group and individual 
therapy sessions while there, and his medications were reviewed and monitored on a 
regular basis. (Jt. Ex. 6, pp. 356-683) Upon discharge, records indicate that claimant 
reduced his suicidal ideation and did not express more than one ideation throughout the 
entire program. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 687) He was able to make “great strides” working through 
his depression, anxiety, and PTSD. He also participated in family therapy with his wife 
and made improvements in his marriage. He was able to reduce his PTSD symptoms 
and panic attacks to none during his time in PHP, but was cautioned that he continued 
to need support for his marriage and mental health.  
 
The day before his discharge from Acera, he had a telehealth visit with Dr. 
Nelson. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 64) She noted he would continue a virtual intensive outpatient 
program (IOP) for twelve weeks following discharge, and there was also peer support in 
Davenport each month for first responders. He reported feeling good the past month in 
residential treatment, and noted the depression and PTSD were still pretty active but 
more manageable. They also discussed that doing light duty evidence work would be 
triggering considering the last month was intensive therapy with IOP after. Dr. Nelson 
noted claimant was “flexible with sense of identity but wants to continue with 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 12 
 
volunteering or teacher later for a sense of purpose.” In her assessment and plan, Dr. 
Nelson noted that claimant was demographically high risk, and again discussed concern 
for PTSD and ongoing traumatic exposures. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 66) She noted that he had 
responded to intensive therapy in a controlled environment, but he would be 
transitioning home soon and has to continue ongoing care.  
 
Claimant returned to regular sessions with Ms. Kivisto upon his return from 
California. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 212-218) He returned to Dr. Nelson on March 30, 2023, and 
reported he had been feeling better since his return home until the last week and a half. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 68) He noted he was wanting to be back at work, and was to return to light 
duty on April 10. He reported low energy, trouble getting out of bed, and struggling to 
attend to his self-care at times. He was having fewer panic episodes but they were still 
intense, and having more nightmares. He also reported negative self-talk, intensifying to 
depression. Dr. Nelson adjusted claimant’s medications, and recommended claimant 
consider TMS (transcranial magnetic stimulation). (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 70) 
 
On March 31, 2023, claimant emailed Rhonda and advised that he wanted to file 
a workers’ compensation claim. (Def. Ex. D, p. 21) He had already completed the first 
report of injury, and asked Rhonda to let him know when he would need to go to 
Genesis Occupational Health. In early April, claimant applied for Social Security 
Disability benefits. (See Def. Ex. G, H, I, J, K) 
 
On April 5, 2023, claimant returned to Dr. Nelson, despite just being seen 
recently. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 72) He said he was “at a crossroads,” and reported having 
unexpected symptoms after passing his work building in recent weeks. He was feeling 
frustration as he wanted to go back to work but was in the building for a union meeting 
and felt triggered. He had the “beginnings of a panic attack,” with no one particular 
trigger. He noted that workers’ compensation was now involved and he was very 
distressed as he might be placed in a different department but did not want to do that. 
He was unsure how light duty would be. Dr. Nelson cautioned claimant to start small 
and be aware of some degree of discomfort before pulling back as he learned to work 
through emotions and processing or tolerating the anxiety or triggers. They also 
discussed working with his therapist to create a plan for graduated exposures to the 
building environment, even if it meant driving by or parking outside without going inside.   
 
Claimant continued regular sessions with Ms. Kivisto. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 219-220) He 
was first seen at Genesis on April 12, 2023, by Stephanie Ellsworth, ARNP. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 
693) Records note that claimant described being diagnosed with PTSD as a result of 
multiple critical incidents. He reported nightmares, flashbacks, anxiety, depression, 
suicidal ideation, shaking, and panic attacks.  
 
ARNP Ellsworth noted that claimant wanted to return to work to “tie up loose 
ends” and because the people he worked with were his friends and support system. (Jt. 
Ex. 7, p. 694) He advised that Rhonda wanted him to return to work in a different 
department. He expressed interest in working in the property and evidence room.  
 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 13 
 
ARNP Ellsworth interviewed claimant and documented his history of the 
traumatic incidents while working, and his treatment to date. (Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 694-695) On 
examination, she noted depression appeared to be absent, but anxiety was present. (Jt. 
Ex. 7, p. 696) Her diagnoses were acute stress reaction; other depressive episodes; 
and anxiety disorder, unspecified. She opined that the cause of the problem was related 
to work activities, and ordered claimant to remain off work pending records.  
 
At his appointment with Ms. Kivisto the next day, April 13, 2023, claimant noted 
that the county risk manager (Rhonda) had been “pissed” when she learned that ARNP 
Ellsworth had told him to remain off work until his next appointment. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 221) 
He also said that when he asked about the status of his workers’ compensation case, 
she said “workman’s comp is not going to pay you to go to a resort,” referring to his 
inpatient treatment in California. Ms. Kivisto noted severe depressive symptoms, tearful 
at times, and moderate to severe anxiety. Claimant reported the suicidal thoughts and 
negative self-talk had been very strong that day, and vowed to remove guns from his 
home. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 222) He agreed to create a plan with his wife to safely remove the 
guns, and agreed he would not handle firearms without his wife or a colleague present 
as a safety precaution.  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Nelson on April 19, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 76). He reported 
multiple triggers and an increase in suicidal ideation with more intensity and plans. He 
discussed it with his therapist, and his wife had a friend pick up his firearms. He 
reported feeling a little better at that time, but was not at baseline. He reported recently 
meeting his future service dog, which was a good experience, but the feeling waned 
and later he felt bad again. He reported he had tried to gradually increase his exposures 
to his work building but was uncomfortable. He noted that he was uncertain if he would 
be able to return to light duty as he was uncomfortable just being in the building, but he 
also felt a transfer to another department would be too stressful as he was “in limbo with 
workman’s comp.” (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 78) Dr. Nelson discussed additional medication 
changes, but felt it was too risky as an outpatient with potential triggers.  
 
Claimant returned to see ARNP Ellsworth on April 20, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 701) He 
noted his appointments with both Dr. Nelson and Ms. Kivisto, and advised that he had 
been “up and down” the past week. (Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 701-702) He told ARNP Ellsworth that 
he wanted to return to light duty work within his department. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 702) He 
explained that his anxiety increases when faced with uncertainty, and he wanted to 
remain in a setting with which he was familiar with coworkers he knew. She advised that 
she could release him to light duty work with no law enforcement duties, but could not 
say where he would be placed on light duty. He agreed that it would be good for him to 
have some structure in his days by working. She released him to return to restricted 
duty, with no law enforcement duties. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 703)  
 
Claimant had a telehealth appointment with Ms. Kivisto the next day, April 21, 
2023, from work. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 223) He reported that an ex-girlfriend’s child had died 
recently, which made him think about the Walcott fire. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 223-224) He also 
reported that he had been released to light duty, and he had reiterated to the risk 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 14 
 
manager that he wanted to work light duty in the sheriff’s department. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 223) 
However, he said Rhonda “completely ignored it” and he was required to work light duty 
at the County Administration Building. He said the first thing he did that morning when 
he pulled into the parking lot was look and think which part of the roof would be the best 
place to jump off. He said he had spent most of the morning bawling on and off. He also 
said he had emailed Rhonda and the sheriff about his dissatisfaction with his work 
assignment.  
 
Claimant testified that he communicated to Rhonda that he was “firmly against” 
the work duties that she was assigning him. (Tr., pp. 85-86) He explained that he 
needed to be in the sheriff’s office even if he was not performing law enforcement duties 
because he needed to remain in contact with his friends there who were a part of his 
support system. (Tr., p. 86) He explained that being assigned to the Administration 
Building took that support away from him at a time when he was still not in good shape, 
mentally.  
 
Claimant continued to see Ms. Kivisto weekly, and continued to discuss his 
difficulties working in the light duty position at the Administration Building. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 
225-226) He returned to ARNP Ellsworth on May 2, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 708) He reported 
he felt his condition was getting worse, and explained his feelings and suicidal thoughts 
upon returning to light duty work at the Administration Building. (Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 708-709) 
He said that he had walked around the building and found a staircase to the top but 
there was no roof access. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 709) ARNP Ellsworth asked him if he should be 
back inpatient, and he said he had thought about it, but the suicidal thoughts were only 
passive. He reported he felt safe at home, and his wife and kids would be home that 
evening. He agreed to call 911 if things changed, and he agreed to see ARNP Ellsworth 
again the next day. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 710)  
 
The next day, May 3, 2023, claimant reported to his light duty assignment. He 
testified that his suicidal thoughts were out of control, and he took ARNP Ellsworth’s 
advice and reported it to human resources, who called 911. (Tr., p. 86)2 He was taken 
by ambulance to Genesis East emergency room, and later transferred to Mercy One 
Cedar Rapids for admission. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 741; Jt. Ex. 9, p. 753) He was admitted to the 
psychiatry department with suicide precautions, and his medications were adjusted. (Jt. 
Ex. 9., p. 766) He was discharged on May 5, 2023, once his condition had stabilized 
and he was no longer experiencing suicidal ideation. (Jt. Ex. 9, pp. 766-767) 
 
Claimant saw ARNP Ellsworth on May 8, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 715) He described 
the morning of May 3, prior to his trip to the emergency room. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 716) ARNP 
Ellsworth told claimant to return in one week, or sooner if needed. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 718) He 
was to remain off work, and continue with psychotherapy. 
 
                                                                 
2 Of note, ARNP Ellsworth added an addendum to her May 2, 2023 record to indicate claimant was taken 
off work as of his May 3, 2023 ER visit. (Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 710-711) 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 15 
 
At his visit with Ms. Kivisto on May 16, 2023, he reported he had a meeting with 
human resources that morning that went well. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 229) Later the same day he 
had an appointment with ARNP Ellsworth, who determined he was stable. (Jt. Ex. 7, pp. 
723-724) She continued to keep him off work, however. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 725) The next day, 
May 17, 2023, he had an appointment with Dr. Nelson. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 80) They discussed 
his recent hospitalization and that he had again been taken off work by ARNP Ellsworth. 
His medications were adjusted and he was told to continue with psychotherapy. (Jt. Ex. 
2, pp. 82-83)  
 
Claimant continued regular visits with Ms. Kivisto. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 231-233) On 
June 1, 2023, claimant was released to return to work with no law enforcement duties. 
(Jt. Ex. 7, p. 731) He saw ARNP Ellsworth on June 9, 2023, at which time he had 
returned to his light duty work at the Administration Building. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 733) He noted 
an upcoming appointment with three doctors in Iowa City for IPERS early retirement. 
The record also states that claimant signed a HIPAA release so ARNP Ellsworth could 
contact Dr. Nelson with respect to an outpatient treatment referral. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 735) He 
was to remain on light duty work. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 738)  
 
He continued to see Ms. Kivisto, noting that occupational health was working on 
getting him into an outpatient program. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 236-239) He also discussed his 
upcoming IPERS disability evaluation.  
 
There is a note in the records dated June 26, 2023, which indicates that ARNP 
Ellsworth received a call from Rhonda at Scott County, and she was not authorized to 
see claimant that day. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 739) The note states that claimant was only 
authorized to see ARNP Ellsworth once per month since he was seeing Dr. Nelson and 
Ms. Kivisto regularly. As such, claimant’s appointment was rescheduled for July 19, 
2023. Claimant discussed it with Ms. Kivisto on June 27, 2023, noting that he was still 
waiting for occupational health to refer him for outpatient treatment. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 234) 
He also reported he had been anxious and paranoid at work, as it “seems like they’re 
looking for a reason to fire me.”  
 
Claimant had a follow up with Dr. Nelson on June 28, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 89) He 
reported he was doing “pretty good” but work was “terrible.” He said he felt exiled from 
his original department, and felt depression and sadness most days. He denied panic 
but said he gets close to it when he gets “fleeting” suicidal ideations at work. Dr. Nelson 
noted that claimant had responded to intensive treatment in a controlled environment, 
but it was unclear at that time whether he would be able to return to day treatment. (Jt. 
Ex. 2, p. 91) She also noted he was on light duty at the time, so was not in a triggering 
or dangerous environment, and that he was also pursuing outside work in real estate 
and drones. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 92) She encouraged him to work with his therapist in reframing 
and practicing coping skills learned in treatments.  
 
There are several emails between the attorneys regarding the status of 
claimant’s ongoing medical treatment around this time, and the cancelled appointments. 
(Cl. Ex. 12, pp. 116-123) On July 5, 2023, claimant presented to Eagle View Behavioral 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 16 
 
Health for an assessment for outpatient services. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 805) It was concluded 
that while he met the criteria for inpatient treatment, there was not enough criteria for a 
court hold. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 816) As such, he was scheduled to start the outpatient 
services. 
 
Claimant saw Ms. Kivisto the next day, July 6, 2023, at which time he indicated 
he had just met with the sheriff about his therapy and that someone had contacted the 
risk manager. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 240) He reported that he was also told he could start PHP 
the next day at Eagle View, but he was unsure if he would be able to attend due to his 
employer being unwilling to pay for his medical leave. He said it was getting “harder and 
harder” to go to work every day, and that he had been unable to see occupational 
health due to interference from the county risk manager. The note states that claimant 
received a phone call from the sheriff in the middle of the appointment, and was told he 
could finish the appointment but he would have to use personal time, and he was out of 
paid time off. He reported he would rather be “anywhere but here right now,” meaning 
the office. He reported it was “just killing me” and he felt like he was in a trap. He also 
reported he only experienced suicidal ideation while at work, and described it as 
passive but almost daily.  
 
Claimant testified that defendant did not authorize the treatment at Eagle View. 
(Tr., pp. 84-85)  
 
Claimant was seen for his IPERS disability evaluation at University of Iowa 
Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC) in the psychiatry department on July 12, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 11, 
p. 943) He first saw Delwyn Miller, M.D. Claimant discussed his history of depression, 
beginning around his junior year of high school. He denied any suicidal intent in those 
early years. He said that over the past five years his symptoms had gotten worse, 
including worsening suicidal ideation with plans and intent. He noted his PTSD 
diagnosis in 2022, and described the work incidents throughout the year that had put 
him “over the edge” in November of 2022. He indicated that due to his mental health 
issues, he no longer felt capable of doing his job, due to his lack of focus, panic attacks 
while working, and hypervigilance, which significantly worsens while at work, in turn, 
increasing his suicidal ideation. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 944) After completing his evaluation, Dr. 
Miller opined that claimant was unable to perform all duties of his job as a police officer 
due to the severity of symptoms from PTSD and major depressive disorder. (Jt. Ex. 11, 
p. 948)  
 
Claimant was also evaluated by Christopher Iverson, M.D., at UIHC. (Jt. Ex. 11, 
p. 949) After review and examination, Dr. Iverson also concluded that claimant was not 
able to perform all of the duties of Deputy Sheriff due to PTSD. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 952) 
Finally, he saw Claudia Corwin, M.D. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 953) After her examination and 
review, she also concluded that claimant was no longer capable of performing his job 
duties, stating the he did not have “the capacity to perform the emotional and cognitive 
functions of law enforcement work” due to PTSD. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 955) She added that 
she did not expect improvement sufficient to allow for unrestricted resumption of law 
enforcement duties within the next twelve months. 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 17 
 
 
The three doctors from UIHC authored a letter dated July 18, 2023, confirming 
their opinion that claimant was unable to further perform the duties of his position due to 
PTSD. (Jt. Ex. 11, p. 956) They agreed that they did not expect improvement to allow 
for resumption of his duties within the next twelve months.  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Nelson again on July 19, 2023, at which time he said his 
depression was mostly bad while at work but his mood was okay when he was not at 
work. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 94) He noted that he would have his disability decision soon and was 
feeling more hopeful. He was hoping to go into real estate or work with drones.  
 
Claimant saw ARNP Ellsworth on August 2, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 740) Her note 
indicates claimant signed a HIPAA release for her to obtain the July 5 evaluation from 
Eagle View, and contains her referral for the Eagle View PHP program. She also 
recommended claimant keep his upcoming therapy and psychiatry appointments. On 
August 3, 2024, claimant’s attorney emailed defense counsel seeking authorization for 
claimant to go to the Eagle View PHP program, per Ellsworth’s recommendation. (CL. 
Ex. 12, p. 126)  
 
Claimant was granted Special Service disability benefits through IPERS in a 
letter dated August 2, 2023. (Def. Ex. N, p. 66) On August 5, 2023, claimant emailed 
Rhonda Oostenryk, Risk Manager for Scott County, with a copy of the disability benefits 
approval letter he received from IPERS that day. (Def. Ex. D, p. 23) The next day, 
August 6, Rhonda emailed claimant that on behalf of the Sheriff, he was immediately 
released from further duty pursuant to IPERS Special Service Disability Benefits as 
granted. (Def. Ex. D, p. 22) 
 
On August 11, claimant’s attorney again emailed defense counsel regarding 
authorization for claimant to go to the Eagle View outpatient program. (Cl. Ex. 12, pp. 
125-126)  
 
On August 17, 2023, the Social Security Administration denied claimant’s claim 
for disability benefits. (Def. Ex. O, p. 69) The letter indicated he did not qualify for 
benefits because he was not disabled under their rules. The letter explained that while 
his mental health conditions, including PTSD, depressive disorder, and anxiety disorder, 
result in some limitations in his ability to perform work related activities, his condition is 
not severe enough to keep him from working. (Def. Ex. O, p. 72) While unable to 
determine whether claimant could perform any of his past relevant work, the 
administration determined that he could adjust to other work. Claimant appealed the 
decision, and was again denied. (Def. Ex. R, S, T, W) 
 
On August 22, 2023, claimant’s attorney again emailed defense counsel 
regarding the Eagle View program, setting a deadline for August 25 to file a petition for 
alternate medical care. (Cl. Ex. 12, p. 125) That same day, defendant’s attorney wrote 
to ARNP Ellsworth, with a summary of their phone conversation on that date. (Def. Ex. 
P, p. 82) He noted that her last visit with claimant took place on August 2, 2023, and 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 18 
 
she did not have any future appointments scheduled with him. He noted that in the 
August 2 record, Ellsworth referred claimant to the Eagle View PHP program, which is 
an outpatient partial hospitalization program for mental health treatment. The letter 
states: 
 
As we discussed during out phone conference today, it is your expert 
medical opinion that Mr. Bulman does need the referral to Eagle View’s 
PHP program from a mental-health standpoint. Through your treatment of 
Mr. Bulman, you have reviewed some of Mr. Bulman’s past medical and 
mental health records and have therefore become familiar with Mr. 
Bulman’s long-standing, pre-existing mental health problems and issues. 
Given Mr. Bulman’s long-standing, pre-existing mental health problems 
and issues, you cannot state your referral to Eagle View’s PHP program 
and/or Mr. Bulman’s need for the referral are causally related to either Mr. 
Bulman’s work or employment with Scott County as a Sheriff’s Deputy or 
Mr. Bulman’s November 14, 2022 workers’ compensation injury. 
 
(Def. Ex. P, pp. 82-83) 
 
 
ARNP Ellsworth signed the letter on August 24, 2023, indicating her agreement 
that it contained an accurate summary of her conversation with defendant’s attorney on 
August 22, 2023. (Def. Ex. P, p. 83) Defense counsel then emailed the letter to 
claimant’s attorney, and stated that based on Ellsworth’s opinion, Scott County would 
not be authorizing the referral to Eagle View’s PHP program, nor would the County pay 
for any treatment or care at Eagle View “as neither the referral to Eagle View’s PHP 
program nor any treatment or care at Eagle View is causally related to either Mr. 
Bulman’s work or employment with Scott County as a Sheriff’s Deputy or Mr. Bulman’s 
November 14, 2022 workers’ compensation injury.” (Cl. Ex. 12, p. 124)  
 
 
Claimant filed a petition for alternate medical care in each file on August 24, 
2023, seeking authorization for the Eagle View program. (Cl. Ex. 13, pp. 129-134) 
Defendant filed an answer to each petition on August 20, 2023, denying liability, 
specifically disputing whether the referral to Eagle View was causally related to 
claimant’s employment or work injury, based on ARNP Ellsworth’s opinion. (Cl. Ex. 13, 
pp. 135-167) As such, the petitions were dismissed on August 31, 2023. (Cl. Ex. 13, pp. 
168-169) 
 
 
Claimant saw Dr. Nelson on August 24, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 99) He noted that he 
was granted disability and had been busy the last few weeks with real estate and home.  
His depression was overall a little better, and he still had chronic suicidal ideation but 
not as frequent as when he went to work. He had a little more generalized anxiety, 
mainly about his career and stress about that. He continued to see Ms. Kivisto for 
therapy but not EMDR. 3 
                                                                 
3 Claimant testified that he continues to see Ms. Kivisto usually once per week, but additional records 
from her office were not available at the time of hearing. (Tr., pp. 110-111) 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 19 
 
 
 
On August 25, 2023, the parties’ attornies exchanged emails regarding the status 
of claimant’s medical treatment and weekly benefits. (Def. Ex. Q, pp. 91-93) Claimant’s 
attorney requested permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits due to claimant being 
terminated upon his IPERS disability determination. (Def. Ex. Q, p. 92) Defense counsel 
replied noting that claimant had not been placed at maximum medical improvement 
(MMI), and it therefore could not be determined whether the PTSD was permanent, and 
if so the nature and extent of any permanent impairment, and whether that permanent 
impairment is related to claimant’s alleged work injures or his “long-standing, pre-
existing mental health problems and issues.” (Def. Ex. Q, p. 92) As such, the County 
would not be commencing PPD benefits. Claimant’s attorney replied and asked whether 
defendant planned to investigate the issues raised regarding MMI, permanency, and 
causation, and also noted his understanding, based on the answers to the petitions for 
alternate medical care, that defendant would be denying future medical care for 
claimant’s PTSD. (Def. Ex. Q, p. 91) Defense counsel replied that defendant was 
denying Ellsworth’s referral to Eagle View, based on her inability to state it was causally 
related to the alleged work injury. He also stated: 
 
Until Mr. Bulman is placed at MMI, the three issues raised in my below 
email cannot be determined. In other words, they are not ripe for 
investigation and determination until Mr. Bulman is placed at MMI. 
 
(Def. Ex. Q, p. 91) 
 
 
Claimant saw Dr. Nelson on October 4, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 104) At that time, he 
reported he was not doing great and had run out of his prescription for Wellbutrin. 
However, prior to that he was doing good, and having less frequent panic since 
stopping work. He was still having some generalized anxiety about his career.  
 
 
Claimant saw Martin Carpenter, M.D., for an independent psychiatric evaluation 
on October 10, 2023. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 12) Dr. Carpenter reviewed claimant’s extensive past 
medical records and summarized his prior history. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 12-16) He noted that 
despite claimant’s preexisting history, he was able to and continued to be an 
exceptional Deputy Sheriff, winning an award in 2021 for being the top drug recognition 
expert in southeast Iowa. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 13) He also completed his bachelor’s degree in 
2021, graduating magna cum laude.  
 
 
Dr. Carpenter summarized the main three traumatic events claimant experienced 
while working that are at issue in the proceeding. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 13-14) He noted that it 
was not until after the November 14, 2022 Walcott fire that claimant was required to be 
off work for his mental health. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 14) He also noted that his admission to Clive 
Behavioral Health between November 24 and December 1, 2022, was the first time he 
had ever been hospitalized for his mental health, specifically for suicidal ideation. In 
conversation with claimant, he expressed that the “tipping point” for him was the Walcott 
fire in which the 2 year old died. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 17) After that event, he felt he could no 
longer do the job, which led to feelings of panic. He questioned, “if I’m not a cop, what 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 20 
 
am I?” and began to have suicidal thoughts and struggles with panic, depression, and 
flashbacks to the crime scenes. 
 
 
Claimant also expressed to Dr. Carpenter that while some of his coworkers were 
supportive, the two people with “the most control” were terrible. He said that when he 
filed his workers’ compensation claim, “that’s when they got nasty, it’s like a switch got 
flipped,” and that he did not know his last day at work was going to be his last day. (Cl. 
Ex. 2, p. 18) As a result, he did not get a chance to tie up loose ends or get closure or a 
chance to say goodbye. He reported he will never work in law enforcement again, but 
desired to find meaningful work. 
 
 
Dr. Carpenter reviewed claimant’s psychiatric history, as well as his social and 
familial history. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 18-21) On examination, he felt claimant appeared 
moderately depressed with restricted affect. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 22) He provided his findings in 
response to specific questions posed by claimant’s attorney. With respect to claimant’s 
mental health conditions/diagnoses, Dr. Carpenter opined that PTSD was the correct 
diagnosis as it pertained to the work-related mental injury. He noted that the traumas in 
question were severe enough and claimant’s overall function was impaired enough to 
warrant a PTSD diagnosis. Additionally, his symptoms were sufficient to meet DSM-V 
criteria for PTSD. He also found that claimant suffers with preexisting major depressive 
disorder, recurrent, severe without psychosis, and generalized anxiety disorder. He said 
those diagnoses were longstanding, and supported by the record and symptom 
reporting during his examination. 
 
 
Dr. Carpenter opined that the PTSD was causally related to the three work 
events at issue, and said it is more likely than not that all three combined and/or 
contributed to the medical causation resulting in PTSD. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 22-23) He said 
the events were additive and resulted in cumulative trauma, thus worsening the overall 
severity of claimant’s PTSD. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 23)  
 
 
With respect to the preexisting conditions of major depressive disorder and 
generalized anxiety disorder, Dr. Carpenter opined both were exacerbated by the work 
events in question. He noted that he would expect those conditions to return to baseline 
or to the degree of severity that existed prior to the work injury, but that had not yet 
occurred. With respect to MMI, Dr. Carpenter said claimant was not yet at MMI, and that 
he would benefit from a partial hospitalization program like the one at Eagle View or the 
equivalent. He said claimant would also benefit from continued psychotherapy and 
medication management.  
 
With respect to future medical care causally related to the work injuries, Dr. 
Carpenter recommended the completion of a program like Eagle View, along with a 
combination of psychotherapy and medication management related to PTSD, major 
depressive disorder, and generalized anxiety disorder. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 23-24) This would 
include psychotherapy visits every one to two weeks for three years, and medication 
visits every three months for three years. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 24) He noted there is no agreed 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 21 
 
upon treatment frequency or duration within the field of psychiatry, and these 
recommendations were reasonable for allowing the achievement of MMI. 
 
Dr. Carpenter opined that the previous medical care claimant received since 
March 20, 2022, including medical visits, prescriptions, and hospitalizations were 
appropriate and reasonable in keeping with the standard of care. He further noted that 
hospitalization was imperative, and therefore reasonable and beneficial, due to the life-
threatening nature of claimant’s symptoms at the time.  
 
With respect to work restrictions, Dr. Carpenter opined that claimant’s permanent 
restrictions should include no policing activities. He also felt claimant should avoid 
workplaces with large groups of people such as large retail stores or stadiums. He said 
claimant would need time off for appointments, the ability to call his providers during 
work hours, more frequent breaks, and backup coverage as needed. He opined that any 
occupation that requires a high level of social interaction should be restricted because 
of the unpredictable emotional dysregulation that occurs in PTSD. Claimant should be 
allowed to have his service dog with him in the workplace, as he finds it beneficial, and 
he should be allowed to use noise canceling headphones or earplugs as necessary. 
Finally, he should be allowed to sit where he feels most comfortable and/or allowed to 
reposition furniture if needed. 
 
With respect to permanent disability, Dr. Carpenter opined that it is more likely 
than not that claimant’s work-related mental injury will result in some amount of 
permanent disability related specifically to PTSD. (Cl. Ex. 2, pp. 24-25) He noted that 
activities of daily living, social functioning, and concentration, persistence, and pace had 
all been affected by PTSD, which indicate a class 3 impairment. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 25) 
Additionally, impairment in adaptation was illustrated by his inability to adapt to the 
requirements of his role as a police officer, a class 4 impairment. Regarding a specific 
or numerical percentage of permanent disability, Dr. Carpenter stated that he agrees 
with the authors of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth 
Edition, that percent impairment ratings in mental illness/injury should be avoided, and 
do not reflect the true nature of mental injury response and recovery and “imply a 
certainty that does not exist.” As such, he did not provide a specific percentage for a 
permanent impairment rating. 
 
Claimant completed another intake assessment at Eagle View Behavioral Health 
on December 5, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 817) He was found to meet the criteria for the 
partial hospitalization program, and scheduled to begin on December 7. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 
828) He saw Dr. Nelson on December 6, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 109) He reported doing 
“pretty good” other than a few rough days the previous week. On December 7, 2023, 
claimant was admitted to Eagle View Behavioral Health for the partial hospitalization 
program. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 828) He participated in group therapy, and generally reported 
feeling good, taking his medications as prescribed, and sleeping well. (Jt. Ex. 10, pp. 
829-831) He denied suicidal ideations throughout. He graduated from PHP on 
December 22, 2023, with a plan to step down to the intensive outpatient program on 
December 27, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 831) He continued with the outpatient program daily 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 22 
 
until January 19, 2024, at which time he was discharged. (Jt. Ex. 10, pp. 832-932) Upon 
discharge, he reported significant improvements in mood and stability, and felt confident 
with the skills learned to be successful moving forward. (Jt. Ex. 10, p. 932) He 
expressed understanding of the importance of aftercare and agreed to manage his 
mental health by utilizing the resources in place.  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Nelson on January 18, 2024, the day before his discharge from 
the Eagle View program, and reported it had been helpful. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 114) He 
reported his mood was usually good but he had some low moods, he had less frequent 
suicidal ideation, no major irritability or mood swings, and fewer panic episodes. He 
noted he was starting to work and had one client and something in the spring, and 
appeared more optimistic.  
 
The last visit with Dr. Nelson for which a record is available was on March 21, 
2024. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 119) He had completed the Eagle View program and was continuing 
individual therapy with Ms. Kivisto. He was doing better despite a recent unexpected 
death of a former coworker. He reported no recent PTSD triggers. He said work was 
going okay and “will pick up,” showing optimism. He was also anticipating temporary 
stress with his upcoming deposition and workers’ compensation hearing.  
 
On April 23, 2024, claimant’s attorney wrote to Sarah Kivisto, seeking her opinion 
regarding a series of questions. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 30) She was provided with some records, 
including the UIHC evaluation and IPERS disability determination; the letter from 
defense counsel to ARNP Ellsworth that she signed; and Dr. Carpenter’s IME report, 
along with claimant’s attorney’s letter to Dr. Carpenter. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 31) Ms. Kivisto 
agreed that in her opinion, claimant has PTSD, and that the three work events at issue 
significantly contributed (individually and combined/cumulatively) to the medical 
causation for his PTSD. She also agreed that the work events aggravated, exacerbated, 
worsened and/or lit up claimant’s preexisting mental health conditions, including major 
depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 32) She agreed that 
the medical care claimant had received since March 20, 2022 were reasonable and 
beneficial to treat claimant’s work-related mental health conditions, and she agreed it 
would be reasonable and beneficial for him to continue receiving care from both herself 
and Dr. Nelson. Specifically, she agreed it would be reasonable and beneficial for 
claimant to continue to see her weekly for the work-related conditions. Finally, Ms. 
Kivisto agreed that claimant’s work injuries would result in some amount of permanent 
disability, and she agreed with Dr. Carpenter’s opinion as to what permanent restrictions 
were appropriate for claimant. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 33) Ms. Kivisto signed the letter, indicating 
her agreement with the statements therein, on April 25, 2024. 
 
On June 12, 2024, the parties took Dr. Nelson’s deposition. (Def. Ex. GG) She 
made it very clear during her deposition that she did not wish to give opinions regarding 
causation, MMI, or permanency. (Def. Ex. GG, p. 215; Depo. Tr., p. 36) She noted that 
with mental health, there are multiple factors, people present with different symptoms, 
and “you can’t pinpoint one thing.” She testified that she did not want to get involved in 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 23 
 
terms of legal medical matters, stating “I do not want to get involved in that way. I want 
to take care of my patient.” (Def. Ex. GG, p. 219; Depo. Tr., p. 51) 
 
Because she did not wish to be involved with the legal aspect of claimant’s 
mental health conditions, she testified that she had no opinion with respect to causation, 
aggravation, MMI, or permanency of any of claimant’s diagnosed mental health 
conditions. (Def. Ex. GG, pp. 212-213; Depo. Tr., pp. 22-29) She did confirm, however, 
that on March 17, 2022, she did not give claimant a diagnosis of PTSD. (Def. Ex. GG, p. 
215; Depo. Tr., p. 34) She also confirmed that there are specific criteria in the DSM-5 
before PTSD can be diagnosed. (Def. Ex. GG, p. 215; Depo. Tr., p. 37) She agreed that 
the event on March 20, 2022, involving the standoff, was a situation that would qualify 
as a Criteria A stressor under the DSM-5. (Def. Ex. GG, pp. 215-216; Depo. Tr., pp. 37-
38) 
 
Dr. Nelson also testified that the two other events claimant experienced while 
working could also qualify as Criteria A under the DSM-5 for PTSD. (Def. Ex. GG, p. 
217; Depo. Tr., p.42) She confirmed that it is possible for an individual with PTSD to 
have multiple events that caused the PTSD, and that PTSD is a distinct diagnosis from 
depression and anxiety. (Def. Ex. GG, p. 217; Depo. Tr., pp. 42-43) She agreed that 
claimant should be treated by a mental health care provider with specialized training for 
mental health conditions, rather than a general practitioner. (Def. Ex. GG, p. 217; Depo. 
Tr., p. 45) Finally, she noted that the intensive outpatient clinics from which claimant 
previously sought treatment only admit patients if they meet their criteria for admission. 
(Def. Ex. GG, p. 219; Depo. Tr., pp. 50-51) They do not accept anyone who walks in the 
door. (Def. Ex. GG, p. 219; Depo. Tr., p. 51) As such, Dr. Nelson testified that she 
would defer to what the records from those facilities indicate, as they were the providers 
seeing claimant at the times he was admitted.  
 
Claimant testified that he continues to see Ms. Kivisto weekly, and sees Dr. 
Nelson on a regular basis as well. (Tr., pp. 109-110) He has paid for his mental health 
care using his health insurance and his own out of pocket expenses. (Tr., p. 90) He also 
used all of his vacation and sick time, as well as time donated to him by other 
employees, when he was admitted for treatment in California and at Mercy – 300 hours. 
(Tr., p. 87) He testified that defendant did not send him to an independent medical 
evaluation (IME), and he has never refused to see any of the County’s physicians. (Tr., 
p. 89) There is an email from defense counsel to claimant’s attorney dated April 18, 
2024, which indicates defendant wanted to send claimant to an IME with Dr. Scott 
Jennisch at Iowa Psychiatry. (Cl. Ex. 12, p. 128) However, claimant testified he did not 
know who Dr. Jennisch is. (Tr., p. 89) Defendant noted in its brief that the IME with Dr. 
Jennisch was not scheduled because claimant “never reached MMI for the stipulated 
work-related PTSD,” so it would be a “waste of time.” (Def. Brief, p. 23) 
 
With respect to claimant’s current work status, at the time of hearing he testified 
that he is working as a real estate agent, but had no active clients at that time. (Tr., p. 
91) He had closed two transactions to date. He works on commission only. (Cl. Ex. 19; 
Depo. Tr., p. 16) Between receiving his real estate license in April of 2023 and his 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 24 
 
deposition on April 18, 2024, he had made around $4,000.00. (Cl. Ex. 19, Depo. Tr., p. 
17) He also has a license to fly drones, so he started a small business that takes aerial 
photographs and videos. (Tr., p. 92) He said that the jobs are not that frequent, and in 
the first half of 2024, he had made approximately $300.00. From March 25, 2022 
through July 27, 2023, invoices indicate he made $2,235.00 on a total of 7 jobs. (Def. 
Ex. EE, pp. 198-204) That total includes mileage and a few gratuities. 
 
He agreed that any income he brings in from his job as a real estate agent or 
from his drone business can reduce his monthly IPERS benefits once it meets a certain 
threshold. (Tr., p. 103)  
 
Based on all of the evidence in the record, I find that claimant has proven his 
PTSD diagnosis arose out of and in the course of his employment as a result of the 
events that occurred on March 20, 2022, October 30, 2022, and November 14, 2022. I 
further find those events resulted in a material and permanent aggravation of his 
preexisting major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder. Dr. Nelson did 
not provide an opinion regarding causation, but did testify that the specific work events 
claimant experienced could qualify as Criteria A stressors under the DSM-V. I find the 
opinions of Dr. Carpenter and Ms. Kivisto regarding causation to be more persuasive 
than that of ARNP Ellsworth. Dr. Carpenter is a board-certified psychiatrist since 2007, 
and has a great deal of experience through his work at inpatient hospitals, mental health 
clinics, and the VA. (Cl. Ex. 3) He opined that the three work events combined and/or 
contributed to medical causation, resulting in PTSD. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 23) He stated the 
three events were additive, and resulted in cumulative trauma, thus worsening the 
overall severity of his PTSD. Further, he opined that the previously diagnosed 
depression and anxiety were exacerbated by the work events in question. He expected 
those conditions to return to the baseline that existed prior to the work injuries, but 
noted that had not yet occurred at the time of his evaluation.  
 
Ms. Kivisto is a licensed independent social worker and therapist with over 15 
years of experience. (Cl. Ex. 5) She has been treating claimant since 2020, both before 
and after his work injuries, and therefore has perspective on how the work injuries 
impacted his mental health. She opined that the work events caused the claimant’s 
PTSD, and aggravated, exacerbated, worsened, or “lit up” his preexisting depression 
and anxiety. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 32) While not a physician, her opinions are still entitled to 
weight given her credentials and experience treating claimant. 
 
ARNP Ellsworth, to the extent she provided a causation opinion, is not given as 
much weight as Dr. Carpenter and Ms. Kivisto. First, it is questionable whether 
Ellsworth is qualified to provide a causation opinion regarding mental health conditions. 
Her training, education, and experience is not specific to mental health, although she is 
board certified in family medicine. (Def. Ex. P, pp. 85-90) Her specialty is occupational 
health. (Def. Ex. P, p. 87) As such, Dr. Carpenter and Ms. Kivisto are more qualified to 
provide reliable opinions with respect to the causes of claimant’s conditions. 
 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 25 
 
That being said, ARNP Ellsworth did not opine that claimant’s conditions are not 
related to the work incident. Rather, her only opinion in the record stated that given 
claimant’s preexisting “mental health problems and issues,” she could not state that her 
referral to Eagle View was causally related to either his work or employment with Scott 
County, or his November 22, 2022 work injury. (Def. Ex. P, pp. 82-83) She did not 
provide, nor was she asked to provide, any opinions regarding causation of the actual 
diagnosed conditions of PTSD, major depressive disorder, or generalized anxiety 
disorder. She did not provide any opinions as to a material aggravation of claimant’s 
preexisting condition.  
 
There is no evidence in the record that directly rebuts the opinions of Dr. 
Carpenter and Ms. Kivisto. As such, I find that claimant has met his burden to prove his 
diagnosis of PTSD arose out of and in the course of his employment due to the events 
of March 20, 2022, October 20, 2022, and November 14, 2022. Additionally, those 
events resulted in a material and permanent aggravation of his preexisting depression 
and anxiety. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The first issue to determine is whether claimant sustained an injury arising out of 
and in the course of his employment on each of the three dates alleged. Defendant 
stipulated that claimant’s PTSD diagnosis arose out of and in the course of 
employment, but denies each specific date of injury. Defendant also denies claimant’s 
major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder arose out of and in the 
course of employment. Claimant argues that the three work events individually and 
cumulatively caused his PTSD, and resulted in a material aggravation of his preexisting 
depression and anxiety. 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is 
based. A cause is proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it 
need not be the only cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal 
connection is probable rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 
569 N.W.2d 148, 153 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 
156 (Iowa Ct. App. 1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa 
Ct. App. 1996). A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. 
Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing 
Holmes v. Bruce Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 26 
 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense. 
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 908, 76 N.W.2d 756, 760-61 
(1956). If the claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially 
aggravated, accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant 
is entitled to recover. Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 135, 115 N.W.2d 
812, 815 (1962); Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 374-75, 112 
N.W.2d 299, 302 (1961). 
 
Nontraumatically caused mental injuries are compensable under Iowa Code 
section 85.3(1). Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 855. Under Dunlavey, mental injuries caused 
by work-related stress are compensable if, after demonstrating medical causation, the 
employee shows that the mental injury was caused by workplace stress of greater 
magnitude than the day-to-day mental stresses experienced by other workers employed 
in the same or similar jobs, regardless of their employer. Id. at 857. 
 
Both medical and legal causation must be resolved in claimant’s favor before an 
injury arising out of and in the course of the employment can be established. To 
establish medical causation, the employee must show that the stresses and tensions 
arising from the work environment are a proximate cause of the employee’s mental 
difficulties. If the medical causation issue is resolved in favor of the employee, legal 
causation is examined. Under Dunlavey, the claimant must show that the mental injury 
resulted from “workplace stress of greater magnitude than the day-to-day mental 
stresses experienced by other workers employed in the same or similar jobs, regardless 
of their employer.” Id. at 858. 
 
However, in Brown, Iowa Supreme Court formulated a different standard of 
causation when an employee establishes that the mental injury at issue is “based on a 
manifest happening of a sudden traumatic nature from an unexpected cause or unusual 
strain.” Brown v. Quik Trip Corp., 641 N.W. 2d 725, 729 (Iowa 2002). Such a situation 
meets the legal-causation test “irrespective of the absence of similar stress on other 
employees.” Id.  
 
 
The Iowa Supreme Court has even more recently determined that first 
responders can meet the Brown test, and are not met with a higher burden based on 
their high-risk occupation. Tripp v. Scott Emergency Comm. Ctr., 977 N.W.2d 459, 466-
467 (Iowa 2022). The court held that a mental-mental injury sustained by a law 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 27 
 
enforcement officer will be analyzed using an objective standard, or based on what an 
average worker may experience. Id. at 470. The court stated: 
 
When a purely mental injury is traceable to a readily identifiable work 
event, the claimant proves legal causation by meeting the test that we set 
forth in Brown by analyzing the unexpected or unusual nature of the injury-
inducing event without regard to the claimant’s own particular duties. 
 
Id. 
 
 
In this case, defendant does not dispute that claimant’s PTSD arose out of and in 
the course of his employment. However, defendant does dispute each date of injury. 
Defendant also denies that claimant’s depression and anxiety arose out of and in the 
course of employment. Defendant does not offer any alternate dates of injury for the 
PTSD, however. Nor does defendant address whether the work incidents at issue 
materially aggravated, accelerated, worsened or lighted up claimant’s preexisting 
depression and anxiety. 
 
Claimant experienced a readily identifiable work-related event on each of the 
three dates of injury that rises to the level outlined by the Iowa Supreme Court in Brown 
and Tripp. The events were sudden, traumatic, and unexpected or unusual. The first 
event, on March 20, 2022 involved a standoff that ultimately resulted in a suicide, 
placed claimant in a position that was the closest he ever came to shooting someone. 
There were several members of the public nearby, including children, which put them in 
danger. He then witnessed a man take his own life. Following that event, the records 
reflect that claimant began to experience some hypervigilance, intrusive thoughts, and 
flashbacks, consistent with PTSD. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 40) He was later diagnosed with PTSD 
for the first time, and started EMDR therapy. 
 
The second event, on October 30, 2022, involved claimant’s discovery of a man 
who had died by suicide. Claimant had to stay on the extremely gory scene alone for 
three hours. Records again show that claimant’s mental status deteriorated following 
this event, as he told Ms. Kivisto that he could not fight off the idea that someday he 
would reach his breaking point and would also take his own life. (Jt. Ex. 3, pp. 193-194) 
 
The third event involving the Walcott fire on November 14, 2022, was claimant’s 
breaking point, including the following days when claimant had to process the 
photographs of the scene. Shortly after that event, claimant’s mental state deteriorated 
to the point that he could not function, and he admitted himself for inpatient treatment at 
Clive Behavioral Health. Claimant described each of the three events in excruciating 
detail at hearing, and it is clear that the events are burned into his memory. Claimant 
has satisfied the requirements for legal causation for both PTSD and a material 
aggravation of his preexisting anxiety and depression. 
 
For mental injuries that might result from a combination of work and non-work-
related factors, claimant must prove both legal and medical causation. Tripp, 977 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 28 
 
N.W.2d at 467. Dr. Carpenter opined that claimant’s previously diagnosed conditions of 
major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder were exacerbated by the 
work events in question. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 23) Ms. Kivisto, who treated claimant both before 
and after the alleged work injuries, agreed that the events aggravated his preexisting 
depression and anxiety. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 32)4 Dr. Nelson remained neutral with respect to 
causation, as she did not want to get involved in legal matters. (Def. Ex. GG, p. 219; 
Depo. Tr., p. 51) 
 
ARNP Ellsworth, who is not a mental health practitioner but specializes in 
occupational medicine, could not say whether her referral to the Eagle View PHP 
program was related to claimant’s employment or the alleged work injuries, given his 
preexisting mental health conditions. (Def. Ex. P, pp. 82-87) Defendant did not obtain 
any other opinion regarding causation. There is no medical opinion in the record to 
indicate that claimant’s preexisting depression and anxiety was not materially 
aggravated by the work injuries. As such, I find that claimant has met his burden to 
prove medical causation with respect to his preexisting depression and anxiety. 
 
The next issue to determine is whether claimant is entitled to any temporary 
disability benefits. Both Iowa Code section 85.33(1) and section 85.34(1) provide that 
temporary benefits, whether temporary total disability (TTD) or healing period (HP), are 
to be paid until the employee has returned to work, has reached MMI, or is medically 
capable of returning to employment substantially similar to the employment in which the 
employee was engaged at the time of the injury, whichever occurs first. 
Claimant returned to work with no restrictions after both the first and second 
dates of injury, so no temporary disability benefits are claimed or owed under those 
dates. However, following the November 14, 2022 injury, claimant was taken off work. 
He is seeking temporary disability benefits from November 24, 2022 to December 1, 
2022 (Clive hospitalization); January 7, 2023 to April 21, 2023 (Acera in-patient 
treatment in California); and from August 7, 2023 to January 19, 2024 (last date worked 
through last day of Eagle View program). (See Hearing Report; Cl. Ex. 14, p. 176) As 
claimant was taken off work due to his work-related mental health injuries, temporary 
disability benefits are owed for those time periods. 
 
The next issue is whether claimant has reached MMI, and if so, whether the 
injuries are the cause of any permanent partial disability. MMI refers to stabilization of 
the workers’ condition or a finding that the condition is not likely to abate in the future 
despite medical treatment. Dunlap v. Action Warehouse, 824 N.W.2d 545, 557 (Iowa Ct. 
App. 2012) Stabilization of the employee’s condition is the event that allows a physician 
to make the determination that a particular medical condition is permanent. Id. at 556 
(quoting Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning. v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 200 (Iowa 
2010)  
                                                                 
4 Defendant argues Ms. Kivisto’s opinion should be disregarded as she is not a medical doctor. However, 
given that she is a mental health practitioner who has been treating claimant since 2020, her opinion is 
valuable and considered with her credentials in mind. 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 29 
 
The Iowa Supreme Court clarified the issue of maximum medical improvement, 
or medically indicated significant improvement, in Pitzer v. Rowley Interstate, 507 
N.W.2d 389, 391-392 (Iowa 1993). The Court held:   
[T]he stability of condition referred to in Larson’s treatise is a stability in 
industrial disability. Consequently, an anticipated improvement in 
continuing pain or depression, if medically indicated, may extend the 
length of the healing period if a substantial change in industrial disability is 
also expected to result. If, however, it is not likely that further treatment of 
continuing pain, however soothing to the claimant, will decrease the extent 
of permanent industrial disability, then continued pain management should 
not prolong the healing period. 
 
 
 
The only opinion regarding MMI is from Dr. Carpenter. At the time of his 
evaluation, he did not believe claimant had reached MMI. (CL. Ex. 2, p. 23) He thought 
that the Eagle View program would help claimant to achieve MMI, along with continuing 
the combination of psychotherapy and medication management. (CL. Ex. 2, pp. 23-24) 
He noted that there is no agreed upon frequency or duration within the field of 
psychiatry, but based on his training, education, and experience, he proposed the 
treatment continue for at least three years. 
 
 
Claimant argues that he reached MMI after he completed his stay at Eagle View 
on January 19, 2024. (Cl. Brief, p. 23) He testified that the treatment there helped him. 
(Tr., pp. 89-90) He believes his condition has stabilized and does not anticipate 
substantial changes moving forward. He agrees that he will continue to need 
medication, therapy, and psychiatric visits into the future, and has ongoing 
appointments scheduled. (Cl. Brief, p. 23; Tr., p. 110) 
 
 
Defendant argues that claimant’s ongoing treatment means he has not reached 
MMI. (Def. Brief, pp. 4-6) Under Iowa law, anticipated improvement in continuing pain or 
depression, if medically indicated, may extend the length of the healing period if a 
substantial change in industrial disability is also expected to result. Pitzer v. Rowley 
Interstate, 507 N.W.2d 389, 392 (Iowa 1993) If however, it is not likely that continued 
treatment will decrease the extent of permanent disability, then continued treatment 
should not prolong the healing period. Id. 
 
 
In this case, as most cases involving mental health injuries, it is difficult to 
determine whether claimant has reached MMI. While Dr. Carpenter did not believe 
claimant had reached MMI at the time of his examination on October 10, 2023, claimant 
has since undergone inpatient treatment at Eagle View, as well as additional treatment 
with Ms. Kivisto and Dr. Nelson, which has been helpful. Dr. Carpenter also opined that 
claimant’s injury would more likely than not result in permanent disability, and provided 
his opinions regarding the levels of impairment claimant has sustained with respect to 
his activities of daily living; social functioning; concentration, persistence, and pace; and 
adaptation. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 25) Ms. Kivisto also opined that claimant’s work injuries would 
result in some amount of permanent disability. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 33) 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 30 
 
 
 
Perhaps most persuasive on the issue of MMI, however, is the fact that the 
medical providers consistently agree that claimant is permanently restricted from 
working as a law enforcement officer. This includes the physicians at UIHC, who 
determined claimant cannot return to law enforcement work due to his PTSD. (Jt. Ex. 
11, p. 956) Dr. Carpenter provided some additional permanent restrictions, and Ms. 
Kivisto agreed with his recommendations. The imposition of permanent restrictions 
indicates these providers do not believe significant improvement will result from 
additional treatment such that claimant will be able to resume working as a law 
enforcement officer. As such, based on all of the evidence in the record, I find that 
claimant reached MMI upon his discharge from Eagle View on January 19, 2024. 
 
 
Because I found claimant has reached MMI, the next issue to determine is 
whether his injuries caused any permanent disability, and if so, the nature and extent of 
that disability. The medical evidence supports the finding that claimant sustained 
permanent disability as a result of the work injuries. There is no evidence to the 
contrary. As such, the nature and extent of claimant’s permanent disability must be 
determined. 
 
 
 
A mental health impairment is an impairment of the body as a whole. Woods v. 
Accident Fund Ins. Co. of Am., File No. 5057998 (Arb. Jan. 17, 2018) As such, it is 
compensated under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). That section provides, in part: 
If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or 
would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the 
employee received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment 
resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the employee’s earning 
capacity. 
 
Defendant argues that claimant was offered continued work for which he would 
have continued to receive greater wages and earning than at the time of the alleged 
work incidents, but he voluntarily sought and obtained IPERS disability retirement, 
which was the reason for his termination from employment. As such, defendant argues 
that claimant’s permanent disability should be based solely on his functional impairment 
under the AMA Guides.  
 
 
Just before claimant was relieved of his duties, he was working under light duty 
restrictions per ARNP Ellsworth. (Jt. Ex. 7, p. 740) The three doctors at UIHC who 
performed his IPERS evaluation unanimously determined he was no longer capable of 
performing law enforcement work. (Jt. Ex. 11) Upon receipt of that information, the 
employer did not offer claimant work for which he would receive the same or greater 
salary, wages, or earnings that he received at the time of injury; rather, he was released 
from further duty effective immediately. (Def. Ex. D, p. 22) Since that time, claimant has 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 31 
 
started working as a real estate agent, but at the time of hearing he had completed only 
two sales and did not have any active clients. His earnings from his real estate job and 
his drone business are meager compared to the salary he was making as a deputy 
sheriff. Claimant is therefore entitled to be compensated for permanent partial disability 
based on industrial disability. 
 
Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 258 N.W. 
899, 902 (Iowa 1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the Legislature intended the 
term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning capacity and not a mere 
'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of the total physical and 
mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963); Barton 
v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660, 663 (1961). 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was 40 years old. He is a high school graduate 
and has a bachelor’s degree. Much of his prior work experience is in law enforcement. 
However, since he is no longer able to work in law enforcement, he took the initiative to 
obtain his real estate license. While he has not made much income in that career, he 
testified that he enjoys the work. He also has a hobby, flying drones, that he has turned 
into a small business. Again, he does not make much money with this business, but he 
enjoys it and uses it as a coping mechanism. 
 
 
Prior to the work injuries, claimant never missed work, and was able to perform 
all of his work duties with no restrictions. He was never hospitalized for his preexisting 
mental health conditions. He now has permanent restrictions that prevent him from 
returning to law enforcement, and Dr. Carpenter also recommended he avoid large 
groups of people, be allowed to take frequent breaks, call his mental health providers 
during work, and be provided with backup coverage as needed. He recommended 
against jobs that require a high level of social interaction, and recommended he be 
allowed to bring his service animal with him to the workplace. Finally, he said claimant 
should be allowed to use noise-cancelling devices as needed, and to reposition furniture 
so he feels most comfortable.  
 
 
Dr. Carpenter also placed claimant’s functional impairment in class three to four, 
equating to a moderate to marked functional impairment. See Clark v. Arconic, Inc., File 
No. 5061553.01, p. 6 (App. June 28, 2022). Based on all of the factors of industrial 
disability, I find claimant has sustained 50 percent industrial disability. He is therefore 
entitled to 250 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits. Benefits shall commence 
January 20, 2024, the day after temporary benefits ended. 
 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 32 
 
Claimant has also alleged entitlement to penalty benefits under Iowa Code 
section 10A.315(4), for defendant’s denial of weekly benefits. 5 Defendant argues that 
claimant has only claimed penalty for failure to pay PPD benefits, and any claim of 
penalty for any reason other than failure to pay PPD should be estopped, as claimant 
did not disclose any other basis for his penalty claim prior to hearing. Defendant further 
argues that claimant is not entitled to penalty for its failure to pay PPD benefits, because 
claimant has not reached MMI, and therefore no PPD benefits are owed. 
 
With respect to the argument that claimant can only claim penalty benefits 
against failure to pay PPD benefits, I find that defendant was on notice of claimant’s 
penalty claims since the petitions were filed. Claimant’s answers to interrogatories also 
provided that he was seeking penalty for the unreasonable denial of PPD benefits from 
August 7, 2023 to the present. (Cl. Ex. 14, p. 180) Whether benefits owing from August 
7, 2023 were ultimately classified as permanent disability benefits or temporary 
disability benefits is immaterial; defendant was on notice that claimant would be 
claiming penalty benefits for all payments denied since August 7, 2023. Therefore, I find 
that the penalty claim may proceed on all benefits denied after that date. 
 
Iowa Code section 10A.315(4) provides: 
 
a. If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs 
without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or 
insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits, the workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or chapter 85, 
85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, 
delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. 
b. The workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits under 
this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following facts: 
(1) The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in payment, or 
termination in benefits. 
(2) The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or probable cause or 
excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits. 
c. In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or excuse 
under paragraph “b,” an excuse shall satisfy all of the following criteria: 
                                                                 
5 Although Iowa Code § 86.13 was in effect on the date of these injuries, the Iowa Code editor moved this 
statutory section to Iowa Code § 10A.315 effective July 1, 2023.  No substantive modifications were made 
to the statute by the legislature. Any reference in this decision to section 86.13 occurs in quotations from 
decisions filed prior to July 1, 2023. Citations to Iowa Code § 86.13 refer to the penalty statute currently 
found at Iowa Code § 10A.315. 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 33 
 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable investigation and 
evaluation by the employer or insurance carrier into whether benefits were 
owed to the employee. 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and evaluation were the 
actual basis upon which the employer or insurance carrier 
contemporaneously relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate 
benefits. 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously conveyed the 
basis for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits to the 
employee at the time of the denial, delay, or termination of benefits. 
In Pettengill v. American Blue Ribbon Holdings, 875 N.W.2d 740, 747 (Iowa Ct 
App. 2015), the Iowa Court of Appeals held that Iowa Code section 10A.315(4) “creates 
a mandatory timeline for the employer to follow in showing it had a ‘reasonable or 
probable cause or excuse’ for the termination of benefits.” The Pettengill Court 
explained that timeline: 
First, the employer's excuse for the termination must have been preceded 
by an investigation. Id.; § 86.13(4)(c)(1). Second, the results of the 
investigation were “the actual basis ... contemporaneously ” relied on by 
the employer in terminating the benefits. Third, the employer 
“contemporaneously conveyed the basis for the ... termination of benefits 
to the employee at the time of the ... termination.”  Id. § 86.13(4)(c)(3) 
Pettengill, 875 N.W.2d at 747. 
“Defendant has the burden to show compliance with this statutory provision in 
order to avoid the mandatory assessment of a penalty.” Id. at 745. To carry defendant’s 
burden of proof: 
 
The law requires proof of a prompt investigation and that factual basis be 
provided to the injured worker at the time of the denial, delay, or 
termination of benefits. Herein, defendant must show a timely investigation 
. . . and that there was a timely communication to claimant of the reasons 
for the denial. 
 
Id.  “In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or excuse under 
paragraph ‘b,’ an excuse shall satisfy the three criteria listed in paragraph ‘c.’”  Id. at 
747. 
 
Claimant argues that the first requirement has been met, as defendant has 
denied both temporary and permanent disability benefits. As such, it is defendant’s 
burden to demonstrate the denial was reasonable. Claimant argues defendant cannot 
meet this burden legally or factually. Claimant first contends that defendant’s reliance on 
ARNP Ellsworth’s opinion to deny benefits was not reasonable for several reasons. 
First, claimant argues that ARNP Ellsworth is not qualified to give opinions related to 
mental health issues, as she does not have the training, education, or experience. 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 34 
 
Additionally, she simply “signed-off” on the letter from defense counsel, without 
providing any additional comments or explanation.  
 
Second, claimant takes issue with the letter itself, as there is no indication of 
what medical records were reviewed or what type of conversation occurred between 
Ellsworth and defense counsel; there is no indication Ellsworth considered the proper 
legal standards for causation and aggravations of preexisting conditions; she only 
considered the November 14, 2022 event, and failed to consider the prior events as 
possible causes of an aggravation of claimant’s preexisting conditions or PTSD; and the 
letter refers to “mental health problems and issues,” which is extremely broad, as 
depression, anxiety, and PTSD are all distinct diagnoses. 
 
Claimant also argues that after the denial of benefits, defendant failed in its 
continuing duty to investigate and reevaluate his claim for workers’ compensation 
benefits. Claimant argues that defendant did not provide any testimony or other 
evidence to indicate it reevaluated its denial of benefits at several key times, including 
after receiving medical records documenting the diagnosis of PTSD; after receiving 
claimant’s answers to interrogatories describing the events of each date of injury; after 
taking claimant’s deposition; after receiving Dr. Carpenter’s IME report; or after 
receiving Ms. Kivisto’s opinions.  
 
Finally, claimant argues that defendant failed to properly investigate the claim by 
sending claimant to an IME with a board-certified psychiatrist, especially after receiving 
Dr. Carpenter’s report. Additionally, claimant argues that the failure to investigate is 
demonstrated by defendant’s ongoing denial of each date of injury, while simultaneously 
admitting liability for the PTSD. Up to the date of hearing, defendant denied each date 
of injury as “unknown,” which claimant argues is a “patently unreasonable” position 
given the undisputed events that occurred on each date. Claimant argues that 
defendant did not investigate the underlying events or reevaluate the denial of the date 
of injury after interviewing other witnesses. 
 
 
Defendant has not provided any evidence of investigation after the letter signed 
by ARNP Ellsworth on August 24, 2023. Defendant relies on its assertion that claimant 
has not reached MMI, and therefore no PPD benefits are owed. 
 
 
Defendants in workers’ compensation cases have an affirmative duty to conduct 
a reasonable investigation into all aspects of a workers’ compensation claim. McIlravy v. 
North River Ins. Co., 653 N.W.2d 323, 331 (Iowa 2002); see also Squealer Feeds v. 
Pickering, 530 N.W.2d 678, 683 (Iowa 1995) (abrogated on other grounds); Boylan v. 
American Motorists Ins. Co., 489 N.W.2d 742, 743 (Iowa 1992). The Iowa Court of 
Appeals has held that a defendant’s denial of a workers’ compensation claim is not 
conclusive, due to the continuing duty to investigate after the denial is communicated as 
additional information becomes available. Martin v. General Mills, File No. 5015640 
(Remand Dec., Oct. 28, 2010) (citing Hawkeye Wood Shavings, Inc. v. Parrish, No. 4-
492 / 03-1352, Court of Appeals (Iowa December 8, 2004); Quaker Oats Co. v. Owens, 
No. 1-645 / 00-1720 Court of Appeals, (Iowa March 13, 2002); Weitz Co. v. Johnson, 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 35 
 
No. 9-844 / 09-0020, Court of Appeals (Iowa January 22, 2010); Thielen v. Aetna 
Casualty, No. 1-760 / 00-1075, Court of Appeals (Iowa January 15, 2003); United 
Technologies Corp. v. Bahmler, No. 2-257 / 01-1512, Court of Appeals (Iowa February 
28, 2003); Goodman v. Snap-on Tools Corp., No. 4-291 / 03-0414, Court of Appeals 
(Iowa September 9, 2004); Wilian Holdings Construction Products, Inc. v. Rice, No. 9-
550 / 08-1964, Court of Appeals (Iowa September 17, 2009); Williams v. KW Products, 
Inc., No. 0-136 / 09-1449, Court of Appeals (Iowa April 21, 2010); Zimmer v. Travelers 
Ins. Co., 454 F.Supp. 839, 844 (S.D. Iowa 2006). 
 
 
The first problem with defendant’s argument is that it did not undertake any 
investigation into whether claimant’s preexisting depression and anxiety were materially 
aggravated by the work injuries, such that benefits may be owed. Regardless of her 
questionable qualifications to opine with respect to mental health diagnoses, there is 
nothing in the letter to ARNP Ellsworth that indicates defendant inquired into whether 
the work incidents could have caused a material aggravation of his preexisting 
conditions. The duty to investigate includes investigating causation, even in the absence 
of a causation opinion from claimant. Saltern v. HNI Corp., File No. 5037327 (App. Oct. 
14, 2014) (citing Iowa Code 86.13(4)(c)(1); Jenson v. Cummins Filtration-Lake Mills, 
File Nos. 5032401-5032402 (App. September 25, 2012)) 
 
Additionally, defendant did not take any steps to investigate whether claimant 
has reached MMI. In fact, the record is devoid of evidence that defendant did anything 
to manage claimant’s case once it secured a signature from ARNP Ellsworth confirming 
she could not say whether her referral to Eagle View was causally related to claimant’s 
work or his November 14, 2022 workers’ compensation injury. Defendant has not paid 
any weekly benefits, temporary or permanent, despite claimant being taken off work and 
eventually terminated due to his IPERS disability. The only treatment defendant offered 
was with ARNP Ellsworth, which ended after the August 24 letter. There was no 
investigation as to claimant’s MMI status after he attended Eagle View on his own, 
despite Dr. Carpenter saying that program would be helpful in him reaching MMI. 
 
 
It may have been reasonable for defendant to deny PPD benefits on August 25, 
2023, as claimant had not yet reached MMI. However, the complete failure to 
investigate whether he eventually reached MMI and sustained permanent impairment 
was unreasonable. Likewise, the failure to investigate whether claimant’s preexisting 
conditions were materially aggravated by the work incidents was unreasonable. 
Defendant did not meet its burden to establish a reasonable investigation into whether 
claimant’s preexisting conditions were materially aggravated by the work incidents, nor 
to establish any ongoing investigation upon receipt of additional information. As such, 
defendant has not established a reasonable basis or probable cause or excuse for the 
denial of benefits. Therefore, claimant is entitled to penalty benefits. 
 
 
Benefits subject to penalty include all benefits awarded from August 7, 2023, as 
that is the date claimant provided in his answer to interrogatory 21. (Cl. Ex. 14, p. 180) I 
awarded temporary disability benefits from August 7, 2023 to January 19, 2024, 
followed by 250 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits to commence January 20, 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 36 
 
2024. Due to the severity of defendant’s unreasonable conduct, including the failure to 
pay any benefits whatsoever on an accepted claim and the failure to investigate 
causation, MMI, and permanency, a penalty of approximately 50 percent is appropriate. 
About 60 weeks have passed between August 7, 2023 and the date of this decision. 
The parties stipulated to the weekly benefit rate of $966.79, meaning roughly 
$58,007.00 of benefits have been unreasonably denied. As such, a penalty of 
$29,000.00 is appropriate. 
 
 
Claimant is seeking alternate medical care. Defendant has not authorized any 
treatment for claimant since his last appointment with ARNP Ellsworth on August 2, 
2023, despite having accepted the PTSD as work related. All medical providers agree 
that claimant should continue seeing Dr. Nelson and Ms. Kivisto on a regular basis. As 
such, claimant is entitled to alternate medical care. Defendant shall authorize and pay 
for all causally related, reasonable mental health care provided by Dr. Nelson and Ms. 
Kivisto, related to claimant’s PTSD, major depressive disorder, and generalized anxiety 
disorder. 
 
Claimant seeks medical expenses and reimbursement for out-of-pocket medical 
expenses, found in claimant’s exhibit 16. Claimant is not entitled to reimbursement for 
medical bills unless claimant shows that they were paid from his own funds. See Caylor 
v. Employers Mutual Casualty Co., 337 N.W.2d 890 (Iowa Ct. App. 1983). Otherwise, 
claimant is entitled only to an order directing the responsible defendants to make such 
payments directly to the provider. See Krohn v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463 (Iowa 1988). 
Where medical payments are made from a plan to which the employer did not 
contribute, the claimant is entitled to a direct payment. Midwest Ambulance Service v. 
Ruud, 754 N.W.2d 860, 867-68 (Iowa 2008) (“We therefore hold that the commissioner 
did not err in ordering direct payment to the claimant for past medical expenses paid 
through insurance coverage obtained by the claimant independent of any employer 
contribution.”) See also: Carl A. Nelson & Co. v. Sloan, 873 N.W.2d 552 (Iowa Ct. App. 
2015) (Table) 2015 WL 7574232 15-0323. 
 
Claimant has proven that the medical treatment he has received has been 
reasonable and beneficial. As such, defendant is responsible for all causally related 
medical expenses, including those submitted in exhibit 16. Defendant shall reimburse 
claimant directly for his out-of-pocket expenses, and make any outstanding payments to 
the providers. 
The final issues to determine are whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement 
of his independent psychiatric evaluation with Dr. Carpenter under Iowa Code section 
85.39, and taxation of costs. Iowa Code section 85.39(2) states, in relevant part: 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and 
upon delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its 
insurance carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 37 
 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, 
and reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for the 
examination.  
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has noted that the Iowa 
Supreme Court adopted a strict and literal interpretation of Iowa Code section 85.39 in 
Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015) 
(hereinafter “DART”). See Cortez v. Tyson Fresh Meats. Inc., File No. 5044716 (Appeal 
December 2015). If an injured worker wants to be reimbursed for the expenses 
associated with a disability evaluation by a physician selected by the worker, the 
process established by the legislature must be followed. This process permits the 
employer, who must pay the benefits, to make the initial arrangements for the 
evaluation and only allows the employee to obtain an independent evaluation at the 
employer’s expense if dissatisfied with the evaluation arranged by the employer. DART, 
867 N.W.2d at 847 (citing Iowa Code § 85.39). This includes an employer-chosen 
physician’s opinion that there was no causation, as such an opinion is tantamount to a 
zero percent impairment rating. Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 966 N.W. 2d. 
326 (Iowa Ct. App., 2021). 
 
ARNP Ellsworth provided an opinion that the employer used as a basis to deny 
benefits, essentially making it a no-causation opinion. Dr. Carpenter’s IME occurred 
after Ellsworth provided her opinion. As such, claimant is entitled to reimbursement of 
Dr. Carpenter IME under Iowa Code section 85.39. The total amount of Dr. Carpenter’s 
bill is $5,500.00. (Cl. Ex. 17, p. 229) 
 
 
Under Iowa Administrative Rule 876-4.33, costs are taxed at the discretion of the 
commissioner. Claimant has submitted as costs the filing fee and certified mail charge, 
Dr. Carpenter’s IME bill, the deposition transcripts of claimant and Dr. Nelson, and the 
hearing transcript. The IME bill was awarded under section 85.39. The remaining items 
are allowable costs, and as claimant was successful in his claim, I use my discretion to 
award costs. Defendant shall reimburse claimant for the items listed as costs in 
claimant’s exhibit 18, p. 230, excluding the IME bill, which was awarded above. 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
All benefits shall be paid at the stipulated weekly benefit rate of nine hundred 
sixty-six and 79/100 dollars ($966.79). 
 
 
Defendant shall pay claimant temporary total disability/healing period benefits 
from November 23, 2022 to December 1, 2022; January 7, 2023 to April 21, 2023; and 
August 7, 2023 to January 19, 2024. 
 
Defendant shall pay claimant two hundred fifty (250) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits, commencing January 20, 2024. 
 

BULMAN V. SCOTT COUNTY 
Page 38 
 
 
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with interest 
at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the 
federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two 
percent.  
 
Defendant shall pay penalty benefits in the amount of twenty-nine thousand and 
no/100 dollars ($29,000.00). 
 
Defendant shall authorize and pay for all causally related and reasonable mental 
health care provided by Dr. Mi Nelson and Ms. Sara Kivisto, related to claimant’s PTSD, 
major depressive disorder, and generalized anxiety disorder. 
 
 
Defendant is responsible for medical expenses and reimbursement of claimant’s 
out-of-pocket expenses as outlined above, found in claimant’s exhibit 16. 
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant for Dr. Carpenter’s IME in the amount of five 
thousand five hundred and no/100 dollars ($5,500.00), pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.39. 
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant’s costs, as outlined above. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
 
Signed and filed this ___24th ___ day of March, 2025. 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Andrew Bribriesco (via WCES) 
Troy Howell (via WCES) 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days from the date 
above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ 
Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Workers’ Compensation 
Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the 
following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des 
Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the 
date of the decision. The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or 
legal holiday. 
