Case Number: 1652235.01
Case Title:  TURNER, DONALD R V. NCI BUILDING SYSTEMS
Doc Type:    Decision - Court of Appeals
Source:      Turner - Court of Appeals Decision.PDF
========================================================================

IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF IOWA 
 
No. 23-1003 
Filed January 9, 2025 
 
 
DONALD TURNER, 
 
Petitioner/Cross Respondent-Appellant/Cross-Appellee, 
 
vs. 
 
NCI BUILDING SYSTEMS and LIBERTY MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY, 
 
Respondents/Cross Petitioners-Appellees/Cross-Appellants. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Polk County, Jeanie Vaudt, Judge. 
 
A worker appeals, and an employer cross-appeals, the district court’s denial 
of their petition and cross-petition for judicial review of the workers’ compensation 
commissioner’s ruling.  AFFIRMED ON APPEAL AND CROSS-APPEAL.  
 
 
Thomas M. Wertz and Mindi M. Vervaecke of Wertz Law Firm, P.C., Cedar 
Rapids, for appellants. 
 
Christopher S. Spencer and Stephen W. Spencer of Peddicord Wharton, 
LLP, West Des Moines, for appellees. 
 
 
Heard by Schumacher, P.J., and Ahlers and Langholz, JJ.
1 of 17
ELECTRONICALLY FILED            JAN 09, 2025            CLERK OF SUPREME COURT
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Jan-09  14:52:07     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

 
2
LANGHOLZ, Judge. 
 
After suffering serious injuries from a thirty-foot fall onto a concrete floor at 
work, Donald Turner was awarded permanent partial disability benefits by the 
workers’ compensation commissioner.  Neither Turner nor his employer, NCI 
Building Systems, was completely satisfied with the commissioner’s decision.  So 
they both petitioned for judicial review.  
 
NCI seeks reversal of the commissioner’s decision that the work injury 
caused Turner’s mental-health condition, arguing the decision is unsupported by 
substantial evidence and based in part on a medical report that Turner submitted 
after the hearing.  In contrast, Turner challenges the commissioner’s finding that 
the mental-health condition is not permanent and contends that we should find that 
it is—and thus increase his permanent disability award—or remand to the 
commissioner to award healing-period benefits that he did not originally request. 
 
Separate from the mental-health-condition issues, NCI also seeks reversal 
of the commissioner’s finding that Turner’s physical injuries resulted in an 
unscheduled industrial disability rather than scheduled injuries, despite NCI’s 
contrary admission.  And NCI argues that even if it is an industrial disability, the 
evidence does not support the commissioner’s forty percent award. 
 
The district court affirmed the commissioner, and both parties again appeal.  
But we agree that the evidentiary ruling was not an abuse of discretion, all the 
challenged 
findings 
are 
supported by 
substantial evidence, 
and 
the 
commissioner’s decision is not otherwise unreasonable, arbitrary, capricious, 
irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable on any issue properly preserved for our 
review.  We thus affirm on both the appeal and cross-appeal. 
2 of 17

 
3
I. 
Background Facts and Proceedings 
 
Turner was employed by NCI as a full-time maintenance technician.  At 
work in August 2018, Turner used a scissor lift to perform maintenance on a crane 
roughly thirty feet in the air.  The crane moved, knocking over the scissor lift and 
crashing Turner to the concrete floor below.  Turner was severely injured, suffering 
a vertebral compression fracture, several rib fractures, a mildly displaced right 
shoulder blade fracture, a fractured right tibia (lower leg), a fractured left calcaneus 
(heel) and multiple fractures in his right foot and ankle.  He was air-flighted to the 
University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, where he was hospitalized for twenty-two 
days.  He had multiple surgeries.  And even after his release, his continued 
treatment was extensive.   
 
Eleven months after his injury, Turner returned to his maintenance position 
with NCI.  His pay and job requirements stayed the same.  But many work activities 
were painful, and Turner took breaks as he needed to relieve his constant pain. 
 
Turner worked until January 2020, when NCI offered him a voluntary 
furlough.  He did not return from the furlough until March, then worked one month 
before the COVID-19 pandemic shut down NCI’s operations and he was 
furloughed again.  He remained furloughed until his position was downsized and 
cut in September.  Turner received severance pay as a result, and he filed for 
disability benefits shortly after.   
 
After his employment with NCI ended, Turner began telling his doctors that 
he was suffering from mental-health issues.  One doctor’s notes from November 
reported that he was “quite down and demoralized” and was “having significant 
discomfort” that affected “the quality of his life.”  Another noted that his “mood has 
3 of 17

 
4
been [a]ffected by the pain and being let go by his work.”  And Turner was 
diagnosed with situational depression and prescribed medication to treat it.  Turner 
believes that his mental-health condition stems from the pain suffered from the 
work injury and is proximately caused by the injury. 
 
This proceeding started when Turner petitioned for workers’ compensation 
benefits against NCI and its insurer, Liberty Mutual Insurance Company.1  The 
claim was heard by a deputy commissioner at a video hearing in May 2021.  At the 
hearing, Turner asked to hold the record open for the submission of two additional 
reports—a rebuttal report by his expert witness and an evaluation by a pain 
psychologist at an appointment scheduled to take place days after the video 
hearing.  The deputy commissioner agreed to hold the record open for the rebuttal 
report but not for the pain psychologist’s evaluation.  Turner still submitted the pain 
psychologist’s evaluation with a renewed motion to admit it. 
 
In a February 2022 decision, the deputy commissioner found that Turner 
proved “permanent impairment in the bilateral lower extremities, left shoulder, and 
thoracic spine” caused by the thirty-foot fall at work.  And reasoning that this was 
an unscheduled injury compensated as an industrial disability, the deputy 
commissioner found that Turner proved a forty percent loss of earning capacity as 
a result of the work injury.  The deputy commissioner denied Turner’s renewed 
request to admit the pain psychologist’s evaluation—accepting it only as an offer 
 
1 Because the interests of NCI and its insurer are fully aligned in this appeal and 
the underlying workers’ compensation proceeding, for simplicity we do not 
distinguish between them and refer to either or both as NCI throughout this opinion. 
4 of 17

 
5
of proof—and rejected Turner’s argument that his mental-health condition 
stemmed from the work injury.2 
 
Turner unsuccessfully sought rehearing before the deputy commissioner.  
And then both Turner and NCI appealed the decision to the workers’ compensation 
commissioner.  The commissioner reversed the deputy commissioner’s decision 
in part and affirmed it in part.  The commissioner agreed with Turner that the record 
should have been held open to admit the pain psychologist’s evaluation.  And 
conducting an extensive de novo review of all the evidence, the commissioner 
found that Turner had proved his mental-health condition was caused by the work 
injury.  Even so, the commissioner found that Turner had not proved that the 
mental-health condition was permanent and thus concluded that “no additional 
industrial disability benefits should be awarded at this time.”  The commissioner 
also rejected NCI’s challenges to the forty percent industrial disability award 
without additional analysis. 
 
Turner petitioned—and NCI cross-petitioned—for judicial review of the 
commissioner’s decision under Iowa Code chapter 17A (2022).  The parties made 
essentially the same arguments they do here.  And the district court rejected them 
all, affirming the commissioner’s decision in its entirety in a thorough twenty-two-
page ruling.  So both parties again appeal.   
 
II. 
Mental-Health Condition  
A judicial review proceeding is appellate in nature—in the district court too.  
See Black v. Univ. of Iowa, 362 N.W.2d 459, 462–63 (Iowa 1985).  So on appeal, 
 
2 The decision also resolved several other disputes that are not at issue on appeal. 
5 of 17

 
6
we apply the same statutory standards of review of the agency action as the district 
court.  See Carreras v. Iowa Dep’t of Transp., 977 N.W.2d 438, 444 (Iowa 2022).  
A court “shall reverse” an agency action if the petitioner shows the action 
was “[b]ased upon a determination of fact clearly vested by a provision of law in 
the discretion of the agency that is not supported by substantial evidence in the 
record before the court when that record is viewed as a whole.”  Iowa Code 
§ 17A.19(10)(f).  On a challenge to an agency’s “application of law to fact,” we will 
reverse only when the action is “[b]ased upon an irrational, illogical, or wholly 
unjustifiable application.”  Id. § 17A.19(10)(m).  And reversal is also warranted if 
the petitioner shows the agency’s decision is “otherwise unreasonable, arbitrary, 
capricious, or an abuse of discretion.”  Id. § 17A.19(10)(n). 
Challenging agency action on any of these bases—rather than an error of 
law—is a heavy lift.  See McComas-Lacina Constr. v. Drake, No. 15-0922, 2016 
WL 2744948, at *1 (Iowa Ct. App. May 11, 2016) (“A case reversing final agency 
action on the ground the agency’s action is unsupported by substantial evidence 
or is irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable is the Bigfoot of the legal 
community—an urban legend, rumored to exist but never confirmed.”).  “It is the 
commissioner’s duty as the trier of fact to determine the credibility of the witnesses, 
weigh the evidence, and decide the facts in issue.”  Arndt v. City of Le Claire, 728 
N.W.2d 389, 394–95 (Iowa 2007).  So the fight on factual matters and judgment 
calls is fought mainly before the agency—not a court.  See Sellers v. Emp’t Appeal 
Bd., 531 N.W.2d 645, 646 (Iowa Ct. App. 1995). 
Evidence is substantial if it “would be deemed sufficient by a neutral, 
detached, and reasonable person, to establish the fact at issue when the 
6 of 17

 
7
consequences resulting from the establishment of that fact are understood to be 
serious and of great importance.”  Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f)(1).  “Evidence is not 
insubstantial just because it could lead reasonable minds to different conclusions.”  
Archer Daniels Midland v. Williams, 3 N.W.3d 231, 234 (Iowa Ct. App. 2023).  We 
do not ask “whether the evidence supports a different finding; rather, our task is to 
determine whether substantial evidence, viewing the record as a whole, supports 
the findings actually made.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 
839, 845 (Iowa 2011).  And “evidence may be substantial even though we may 
have drawn a different conclusion as fact finder.”  Id. 
 
Admissibility of the Pain Psychologist’s Evaluation.  Before considering the 
substantive challenges to the commissioner’s decision on Turner’s mental-health 
condition, we must first address NCI’s claim that the decision was based on 
improperly admitted evidence.  Turner asked for the record to be held open so he 
could introduce a pain psychologist’s evaluation from an appointment scheduled 
just after the hearing in the case.  The deputy commissioner declined to leave the 
record open to allow admission, reasoning that the evidence would be cumulative, 
prejudicial to NCI, and delay the decision-making process.  But the commissioner 
disagreed and admitted the report.  The commissioner reasoned that the report 
was not cumulative and that NCI—rather than Turner—was responsible for the 
delay because NCI had refused authorization when Turner had scheduled the 
appointment five months earlier and resisted Turner’s application for alternate care 
seeking authorization for the appointment before relenting and authorizing the 
appointment only shortly before the hearing. 
7 of 17

 
8
 
We review the commissioner’s decision on whether to permit admission of 
untimely evidence under its rules for abuse of discretion.  See Hagen v. Serta/Nat’l 
Bedding Co., 1 N.W.3d 1, 4–5 (Iowa 2024); see also Haynes v. Second Inj. Fund, 
547 N.W.2d 11, 14 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (reviewing decision whether to leave the 
record open for more evidence for abuse of discretion).  Deference is particularly 
appropriate on such decisions “because the commissioner is statutorily required 
to ‘[a]dopt and enforce rules necessary to implement’ Iowa’s workers’ 
compensation laws.”  Hagen, 1 N.W.3d at 4 (quoting Iowa Code § 86.8(1)(a) 
(2021))3 (alteration in original).  So we apply a “lenient standard,” viewing the 
agency record with an eye to “uphold, rather than defeat, the agency’s decision” 
unless the decision is “clearly against reason and evidence.”  Id. at 5–6 (cleaned 
up).  
 
The commissioner’s decision to admit the report was not clearly against 
reason and evidence.  The record supports the commissioner’s finding that NCI 
caused the delay in submitting the report by refusing to authorize the scheduling 
of the appointment until just before the hearing and it was not unreasonable for the 
court to factor that into his decision.  It matters not that the commissioner might 
well have chosen to exercise his discretion to exclude the report, “because the 
commissioner has the ultimate responsibility for deciding cases in an expeditious 
and timely manner, and we should not infringe upon a decision that is well within 
his prerogative.”  Id. at 7 (cleaned up).   
 
3 Effective July 1, 2023, section 86.8 was transferred to section 10A.310 without 
making any changes to its text as part of a government reorganization statute.  See 
2023 Iowa Acts, ch. 19, § 1477(1)(h). 
 
8 of 17

 
9
 
NCI contends that the commissioner’s decision violated an administrative 
rule providing that “[n]o evidence shall be taken after the hearing.”  Iowa Admin 
Code r. 876-4.31.  But this rule is not implicated when a party merely seeks to hold 
the hearing record open for the submission of evidence as Turner sought to do 
here and the commissioner ultimately agreed should have been allowed.  When 
the record is left open, the evidence is essentially still taken during the hearing—
not after.  NCI has pointed us to no contrary authority and the practice of leaving 
the record open appears unremarkable in the cases.  See, e.g., Monsanto v. 
Delgado, No. 16-0660, 2017 WL 510949, at *1 n.1 (Iowa Ct. App. Feb. 8, 2017) 
(noting favorably decision to leave the record open sixty days); Hagen, 1 N.W.3d 
at 6 (noting that the commissioner had acknowledged that deputies often kept the 
record open rather than excluding evidence).  Indeed, when the deputy 
commissioner was considering Turner’s request, NCI did not argue that the 
administrative rule deprived it of authority to do so.4  The report’s admission was 
not an abuse of discretion. 
 
Causation of the Mental-Health Condition.  NCI also argues that, even if the 
report was properly admitted, substantial evidence in the record as a whole does 
not support the commissioner’s finding that Turner’s mental-health condition was 
caused by his August 2018 work injury.  Turner’s mental-health condition is 
compensable only if he shows it “arose out of and in the course of his employment.”  
Dunlavey v. Econ. Fire & Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 849 (Iowa 1995); see also 
Iowa Code § 85.3(1) (“Every employer . . . shall provide, secure, and pay 
 
4 And the deputy commissioner did hold the record open for the submission of 
other evidence after the live video hearing—a decision not challenged by NCI now.  
9 of 17

 
10 
compensation according to the provisions of this chapter for any and all personal 
injuries sustained by an employee arising out of and in the course of the 
employment.”).  “Medical causation is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Pease, 807 N.W.2d at 845 (cleaned up).  And “whether to accept or 
reject an expert opinion is within the peculiar province of the commissioner.”  Id. 
(cleaned up). 
 
NCI points to its expert’s opinion—and other evidence suggesting—that 
Turner’s mental-health condition was caused by issues other than the work injury.  
And NCI is not wrong that one could reach that conclusion from the evidence—
indeed the deputy commissioner did.  But Turner presented an expert opinion that 
his mental-health condition was caused by the work injury.  That expert diagnosed 
Turner with “adjustment disorder”—just as NCI’s expert did—and the 
commissioner found “no evidence claimant was diagnosed with, or treated for, an 
adjustment disorder prior to the work injury.”  Turner’s expert also explained that 
Turner’s “delay of onset of psychiatric symptoms is to be expected” because the 
disorder is caused by “the work-related injury and all the fallout from it, so it took 
some time for him to attempt to live his life again with demonstrably increased 
difficulty for the mental health aspect to blossom.”    
 
So the commissioner was essentially “confronted with a classic ‘battle of the 
experts.’”  Id. at 850.  The commissioner carefully weighed the evidence in its 
decision and then concluded he found Turner’s expert’s “opinion more persuasive 
than [NCI’s expert’s] opinion.”  Given our deferential standard of review, we “are 
not at liberty to accept contradictory opinions of other experts in order to reject the 
finding of the commissioner.”  Id. (cleaned up).  Substantial evidence supports the 
10 of 17

 
11 
commissioner’s finding that Turner’s mental-health condition was caused by the 
work injury.  So we affirm on NCI’s challenge to this finding. 
 
Permanency of the Mental-Health Condition.  On the flip side, Turner makes 
his own substantial-evidence challenge to the commissioner’s finding that he failed 
to prove that his mental-health condition is permanent.5  See Broadlawns Med. 
Ctr. v. Sanders, 792 N.W.2d 302, 306 (Iowa 2010) (“Injured employees are entitled 
to compensation ‘for permanent disabilities.’” (quoting Iowa Code § 85.34)).  He 
contends that this finding should be reversed and the case should be remanded to 
the commissioner to consider an increase in the level of industrial disability.  But 
Turner faces just as steep a climb as NCI does in fighting this factual dispute here 
on judicial review.  
 
In making this finding, the commissioner relied mainly on the report of 
Turner’s expert, who opined that if Turner’s “stressor (i.e., the work-related injury 
and all [its] various components, such as chronic pain) is not resolved, the 
Adjustment Disorder will be permanent.”  The commissioner reasoned that his 
expert “has not opined [Turner’s] adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and 
depressed mood is permanent” and that “[n]o physician or psychologist has opined 
claimant’s mental health condition is permanent.”  Indeed, Turner’s expert 
reiterated elsewhere in the report, “it remains to be seen how much impairment will 
 
5 Turner also includes a stray reference in a heading for this argument that the 
decision “is unreasonable, arbitrary, capricious, [and] an abuse of discretion.” 
(Capitalization omitted).  But his argument focuses on the lack of substantial 
evidence.  We do the same because failing to flesh out arguments on the other 
grounds waives them.  See Iowa R. App. P. 6.903(2)(a)(8)(3). 
11 of 17

 
12 
be permanent” because Turner’s “mental health condition (i.e., his Adjustment 
Disorder) is currently untreated.” 
 
Turner has not pointed to contrary expert evidence that his mental-health 
condition was permanent at the time of the hearing.  He mostly attacks the 
commissioner’s interpretation of his expert’s equivocation about permanency as 
hyper-technical.  But we do not get to weigh the evidence anew.  And it matters 
not if the commissioner could have also found that the condition was permanent.  
See Pease, 807 N.W.2d at 845.  Substantial evidence supports the decision that 
the commissioner did make.  And we thus affirm Turner’s challenge to the 
commissioner’s finding that he failed to prove his mental-health condition is 
permanent.  
 
Alternative Benefits.  Turner alternatively urges us to award healing-period 
benefits until the mental-health condition is properly treated.6  But NCI correctly 
argues that this claim is not properly preserved.  Turner did not seek such benefits 
before the deputy commissioner, choosing only to argue for an increased level of 
industrial disability based on a permanent mental-health disability.  When the 
deputy commissioner rejected that argument—finding he had not proved his 
mental-health condition was caused by the injury at all—he kept all his eggs in that 
same basket and did not argue for any healing-period benefits in his request for 
rehearing to the deputy or his appeal to the commissioner.   
 
6 Turner does not argue to us—nor did he ever before the agency—that the 
commissioner’s decision to award any permanent disability benefits was 
premature and thus should be remanded in its entirety for a new decision only after 
it is ripe.  See Bell Bros. Heating & Air Condition v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 199–
202 (Iowa 2010).  
12 of 17

 
13 
 
To be sure, Turner did summarily bring up the issue in his motion for 
rehearing by the commissioner.  But doing so then was too late for two reasons.  
First, raising a new issue at this late stage was contrary to the agency rule.  See 
Iowa Admin. Code r. 876-4.28(7) (“An issue will not be considered on appeal if the 
issue could have been, but was not, presented to the deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner.”); see also Boehme v. Fareway Stores, Inc., 762 
N.W.2d 142, 146 (2009) (applying rule 4.28(7) when considering error-
preservation on judicial review but finding error preserved because the rule only 
required raising an issue to the deputy—not a decision from the deputy).  Because 
Turner did not present his claim for healing-period benefits to the deputy 
commissioner, the commissioner could not consider the issue for the first time at 
rehearing.  See Iowa Admin. Code r. 876-4.28(7). 
 
And second, even outside of workers’ compensation cases, judicial “review 
is generally limited to questions raised at or before the hearing held by the agency.”  
Soo Line R. Co. v. Iowa Dep’t of Transp., 521 N.W.2d 685, 691 (Iowa 1994).  And 
Turner has not shown his rehearing motion fits into the “limited exceptions” where 
that motion can preserve the issue.  See id.  He could have raised the issue sooner.  
Given the factual nature, this is not a case where a motion for rehearing would 
have been the first opportunity to raise the issue.  See id. (citing Off. of Consumer 
Advocate v. Iowa State Com. Comm’n, 465 N.W.2d 280, 283 (Iowa 1991)).  And 
considering such a brand new fact-specific issue at that late stage would have 
unfairly prejudiced NCI.  See id. (citing Peterson v. Iowa Dep’t of Transp., 508 
N.W.2d 689, 692 (Iowa 1993)).  So we will not reverse the agency for failing to 
13 of 17

 
14 
award benefits that it did not consider because Turner failed to request them at a 
proper time—waiting instead until the end of a two-year administrative process. 
 
III.  
Industrial Disability 
 
NCI also makes two challenges to the commissioner’s forty percent 
permanent-partial-disability award.  First, it contends that Turner’s injuries should 
be compensated as scheduled-member injuries rather than as an unscheduled 
industrial disability.  Compare Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(a)–(u) (providing 
compensation for scheduled-member injuries), with id. § 85.34(2)(v) (providing for 
unscheduled industrial disability); see also Chavez v. MS Tech. LLC, 972 N.W.2d 
662, 666–67 (Iowa 2022) (discussing the difference and explaining that workers 
typically receive less compensation for scheduled-member injuries than industrial 
disabilities).  But this argument fails out of the gate because NCI gave a legally 
binding admission that “Turner sustained industrial disability from his 8/01/18 work 
injury.” 
 
This admission was made pursuant to a request under Iowa Rule of Civil 
Procedure 1.510, which applies to proceedings before the workers’ compensation 
commissioner.  See Iowa Admin. Code r. 876-4.35.  And so under Rule 1.511, it 
was “conclusively established in the pending action unless the [workers’ 
compensation commissioner] on motion permits withdrawal or amendment of the 
admission.”  Iowa R. Civ. P. 1.511; see also Williams v. KW Prods., Inc., No. 09-
1449, 2010 WL 1579521, at *3–4 (Iowa Ct. App. Apr. 10, 2010) (relying on 
admission in workers’ compensation to conclude that as of the date of the 
admissions, “there was no longer an issue as to” the admitted matter even though 
14 of 17

 
15 
employer sent a supplemental denial because the employer never got “an agency 
ruling permitting the withdrawal or amendment of the admission”). 
 
The commissioner never granted NCI permission to withdraw or amend the 
admission.  And it would have been prejudicial to do so as NCI belatedly requested 
in its post-hearing brief with no justification beyond its new assessment of the 
evidence already submitted at the hearing.  See Allied Gas & Chem. Co. v. 
Federated Mut. Ins., 332 N.W.2d 877, 880 (Iowa 1983) (recognizing “prejudice 
where a party is suddenly required to prove matters otherwise admitted”).  
Because Turner’s industrial disability was conclusively established by the 
admission, it necessarily follows that substantial evidence supports the 
commissioner’s finding. 
 
Second, NCI argues that the amount of industrial disability award is 
excessive and should be reduced because the commissioner’s finding of forty 
percent loss of earning capacity is not supported by substantial evidence.  NCI 
focuses on the fact that Turner returned to work with no restrictions in arguing that 
Turner has shown “no loss in earning capacity.”  But while this and other evidence 
NCI points to might support its view, that is not the question before us.  See Pease, 
807 N.W.2d at 845.  We ask only if the evidence would support the commissioner’s 
finding.  See id.  The deputy commissioner carefully weighed the competing 
medical evidence, Turner’s testimony about his current pain and the difficulties he 
had during the short period when he had returned to work, Turner’s failure to 
search for alternative work, and the lack of vocational expert opinion to reach his 
decision that Turner proved a forty percent loss of future earning capacity.  In doing 
so, the deputy commissioner agreed with NCI in part by rejecting Turner’s 
15 of 17

 
16 
argument that he was totally disabled.  And the commissioner agreed with this 
decision.  We cannot say that this finding is unsupported by substantial evidence.  
So we affirm the commissioner’s finding of forty percent industrial disability as well. 
 
AFFIRMED ON APPEAL AND CROSS-APPEAL. 
16 of 17

State of Iowa Courts
Case Number
Case Title
23-1003
Turner v. NCI Building Systems
Electronically signed on 2025-01-09 08:26:17
17 of 17
