Case Number: 23009197.01
Case Title:  BLAKE, SAMANTHA V. THE HON COMPANY, LLC/2ND INJ-FUND
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Blake Samantha-23009197.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
SAMANTHA BLAKE, 
No. 23009197.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
THE HON COMPANY, 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
HEADNOTE NOS.: 1804, 1806 
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
 
Defendants. 
I. 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Samantha Blake seeks workers’ compensation benefits from self-insured 
employer The HON Company (HON) and the Second Injury Fund of Iowa (Fund). The 
undersigned presided over an arbitration hearing on February 20, 2025. Blake 
participated personally and through attorney Sejla Numic. HON participated by and 
through attorney Edward J. Rose. The Fund participated by and through Assistant 
Attorney General Meredith C. Cooney. 
II. 
ISSUES 
Under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.19(3)(f) (2023), the parties jointly 
submitted a hearing report defining the claims, defenses, and issues submitted to the 
presiding deputy commissioner. The hearing report was approved and entered into the 
record via an order because it is a correct representation of the disputed issues and 
stipulations in this case. The parties identified the following disputed issues in the 
hearing report: 
1) What is the nature and extent of permanent disability, if any, caused by the 
alleged injury? 
2) If Blake is entitled to workers’ compensation, what is the weekly rate? 
3) Is Blake entitled to recover the cost of an independent medical examination 
(IME)? 
4) Is Blake entitled to alternate care? 
5) What is the credit, if any, to which the Fund is entitled? 
6) If Blake is entitled to Fund benefits, what is the commencement date? 
7) Is Blake entitled to taxation of the costs against the defendants? 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2026-Jan-26  12:06:06     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
III. 
STIPULATIONS 
 
In the hearing report, the parties entered into the following stipulations: 
1) An employer-employee relationship existed between Blake and HON at the 
time of the alleged injury. 
2) Blake sustained an injury on August 9, 2023, which arose out of and in the 
course of her employment with HON. 
3) The alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery, but Blake’s entitlement to temporary or healing period benefits is 
no longer in dispute. 
4) The alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
5) The commencement date for permanency benefits, if any are awarded, is 
September 11, 2024. 
6) At the time of the stipulated injury: 
a) Blake’s gross earnings were $845.00 per week. 
b) Blake was single. 
c) Blake was entitled to two exemptions. 
7) Prior to hearing, HON paid to Blake 12 weeks of compensation in the form of 
permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits at the rate of $561.69 per week. 
8) Blake sustained a prior qualifying loss to her right upper extremity on July 24, 
2019. 
9) Blake sustained a compensable loss to her left upper extremity on August 9, 
2023. 
The parties’ stipulations in the hearing report are accepted and incorporated into 
this arbitration decision. The parties are bound by their stipulations. This decision 
contains no discussion of any factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations 
except as necessary for clarity with respect to disputed factual and legal issues. 
IV. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The evidentiary record in this case consists of the following:  
▪ Joint Exhibits JE1 through JE10; 
▪ Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 11;  
▪ Fund’s Exhibits AA through EE; and 
▪ Hearing testimony by Blake.  

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
After careful consideration of the evidence and the parties’ post-hearing briefs, the 
undersigned enters the following findings of fact.  
A .  
B l a k e ’s  B a c k g r o u n d  
Blake was 38 years of age at the time of hearing. (Hearing Transcript, page 12) 
She resided in Muscatine, Iowa. (Hr’g Tr. p. 12) Blake had been a resident of Muscatine 
for about 20 years. (Hr’g Tr. p. 12) 
In 2005, Blake graduated from Louisa Muscatine Schools in Letts, Iowa. 
(Claimant’s Exhibit 4, page 41) She took online courses through Kaplan University in 
accounting, but did not finish the program. (Ex. 4, p. 41) Blake has no postsecondary 
degree or certificate. (Ex. 4, p. 41) 
Blake’s first job was working as a cashier at a gas station in Grandview, Iowa. 
(Ex. 4, p. 42) After Blake’s family moved, Economart hired her as a cashier. (Ex. 4, p. 
42) Her next job was with Petro and More as a cashier/stocker. (Ex. 4, p. 42) Then she 
worked as a drive-thru cashier for Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC) and, after that, 
McDonald’s in a similar role. (Ex. 4, p. 43) 
After Blake graduated from high school, Allsteel hired her as a panel plant work 
cell operator. (Ex. 4, p. 43) She had a baby and the hours at Allsteel were incompatible 
with her family life, so she quit and started working for Walmart as a cashier. (Ex. 4, p. 
43) Blake quit her job at Walmart and took a cashier position with Fastbreak. (Ex. 4, p. 
43) Next, she worked for Casey’s as a pizza cook. (Ex. 4, p. 44) She then took a job as 
a cashier at Wendy’s. (Ex. 4, p. 43) 
In 2011, HON hired Blake as an assembler. (Ex. 4, p. 44; Ex. 6) At $20.62, her 
hourly wage with HON was more than double than what she had earned in her various 
jobs between leaving Allsteel and HON. (Ex. 4, pp. 42–44) Blake worked for HON until 
her discharge on October 4, 2024, because it was unable to accommodate the 
permanent work restrictions doctors prescribed her because of the work injuries to her 
arms detailed below. (Ex. 4, p. 47) 
B .  
A p r i l  11 ,  2 0 1 7  L o s s  t o  L e f t  H a n d  &  Wr i s t  
On November 17, 2021, Blake filed with the Commissioner a petition in 
arbitration seeking workers’ compensation benefits from HON and the Fund, alleging an 
April 11, 2017 injury to her left hand and wrist as the first qualifying loss for Fund 
benefits and a July 24, 2019 work injury as the second qualifying loss for purposes of 
Fund benefits. The agency assigned the case Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner No. 19004576.01. The case did not go to hearing. 
In the 2017, the General Assembly enacted legislation that included amendments 
to section 85.45. See 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23, §§ 16–17, 24(2). Before the 2017 
amendments, an injured employee had the right to apply to the Commissioner for a full 
commutation, a respondent had the right to oppose that commutation, and the 
Commissioner had the authority to order the commutation over the objection of the 
respondent after a hearing on the merits. See Thornton v. Am. Interstate Ins. Co., 897 
N.W.2d 445, 467–68 (Iowa 2017) (discussing, in the context of a bad-faith claim, full 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
commutation under Iowa Code § 85.45 before the 2017 amendments). After enactment 
of the 2017 amendments, however, section 85.45(1) now states, “Future payments of 
compensation may be commuted to a present worth lump sum payment only upon 
application of a party to the [C]ommissioner and upon written consent of all parties to 
the proposed commutation . . . .” 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23, § 16 (codified at Iowa Code 
§ 85.45(1)) (emphasis added). After the 2017 amendments, all other parties must agree 
to the injured employee’s proposed commutation, a requirement that effectively gives 
them veto authority over a proposed commutation and makes commutations no different 
than other types of settlements, which are agreed upon by the parties. 
Blake applied for a full commutation of PPD benefits under Iowa Code section 
85.45. The Fund expressly gave written consent to the degree of disability set forth in 
Blake’s application and to the Commissioner granting the requested commutation. The 
application also included an addendum regarding Blake’s first and second qualifying 
losses for Fund benefits.  
The parties filed an “Addendum to Full Commutation” as part of the documents 
submitted to the Commissioner for consideration in approving or denying full 
commutation. In the Addendum, the parties agreed the Fund was entitled to a credit for 
the disability to Blake’s left upper extremity from 2017. The parties agreed Blake had 
sustained a two percent functional impairment to her left upper extremity which equaled 
five weeks of benefits. Their agreement was supported by Dr. Bansal’s October 18, 
2022 IME report, which was also included in the documents submitted in support of the 
full commutation.  
On November 21, 2022, the Commissioner issued an order granting the parties’ 
agreed-upon full commutation in No. 19004576.01. The approved full commutation was 
not limited to the left upper extremity. It also covered permanent partial disability (PPD) 
for industrial disability after the second qualifying loss Blake sustained in the form of a 
work injury on July 24, 2019. 
C .  
J u l y  2 4 ,  2 0 1 9  Wo r k  I n j u r y  t o  R i g h t  A r m  &  H a n d  
The parties stipulated that Blake sustained a prior qualifying loss to her right 
upper extremity on July 24, 2019. (Hr’g Rpt. § 10(a)) But they dispute the extent of 
functional loss. (Hr’g Rpt. § 10(b)) The record establishes the following facts regarding 
Blake’s prior qualifying loss. 
In mid-2019, Blake developed pain, tingling, and numbness in her right hand. 
(Ex. JE1; Ex. JE3, p. 6) She underwent an electromyography (EMG) of her right arm, 
which showed carpal tunnel syndrome. (Ex. JE2, pp. 4–5) Blake underwent three 
surgeries: 
▪ On October 11, 2019, right carpal tunnel release, (Ex. JE3, pp. 12–13); 
▪ On June 9, 2020, right ulnar nerve decompression/transposition surgery, (Ex. 
JE3, pp. 14–15); and 
▪ On December 7, 2020, Right ulnar nerve decompression/transposition 
surgery at the elbow and wrist, (Ex. JE3, pp. 16–18). 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
Before giving Blake permanent work restrictions, Dr. Buckwalter requested a 
functional capacity evaluation (FCE). Casey Creger, PT, of Athletico PT performed an 
FCE on May 4, 2021. (Ex. JE4, pp. 24–33) Creger deemed the FCE consistent. (Ex. 
JE4, p. 24) Creger opined Blake was physically able to return to her job with HON of 
Level 2 Assembler within the following restrictions: 
▪ Occasionally lifting from floor to waist up to 40 pounds; 
▪ Continuously lifting from 12 inches above the ground to waist up to 40 
pounds; 
▪ Occasionally lifting from waist height to shoulder height up to 35 pounds; 
▪ Push with 100 pounds on a sled with a horizontal force of 49 pounds for 10 
feet; 
▪ Occasionally carry with both arms up to 40 pounds for 5 feet. (Ex. JE4, p. 33)  
Dr. Buckwalter assigned Blake these activity restrictions. (Ex. JE3, p. 23) He 
found her at MMI effective July 13, 2021. (Ex. JE3, pp. 19–23) Using the Guides, Dr. 
Buckwalter assigned Blake a 24 percent permanent impairment rating to her right upper 
extremity. (Ex. JE3, p. 23)  
On November 17, 2021, Blake filed with the Commissioner a petition in 
arbitration seeking workers’ compensation benefits from HON and the Fund, alleging 
this 2019 work injury was the cause of a second qualifying loss for purposes of Fund 
benefits. The agency assigned the case Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
No. 19004576.01. The case did not go to hearing. 
Blake entered into an agreement for settlement with HON, which the 
Commissioner issued an order approving on November 14, 2022. Under the agreement, 
the parties agreed that the July 24, 2019 work injury to Blake’s right upper extremity 
caused her to sustain a 27 percent loss of use to that body part. Based on this 
determination of functional disability, HON paid to Blake 67.5 weeks of compensation in 
the form of PPD benefits under Iowa Code section 85.3(2)(m). 
The Addendum the parties submitted as part of the application for full 
commutation states that the parties agreed the Fund is responsible for benefits under 
Iowa Code section 85.64. With respect to the 2019 work injury, the parties agreed the 
Fund was entitled to credits of 65 weeks (26 percent) and 12.5 weeks (5 percent) to her 
right upper extremity caused by her July 24, 2019 work injury at HON. As with the 
impairment to Blake’s left upper extremity, this was based on Dr. Bansal’s October 18, 
2022 IME report. The parties calculated the Fund was entitled to a total credit equaling 
82.5 weeks.  
On the question of lost earning capacity caused by Blake’s two qualifying losses, 
the parties agreed that Blake sustained a 38.114 percent industrial disability. This 
entitled her to 190.57 weeks of Fund benefits, minus the agreed-upon credit, for a 
payment equaling 108.07 weeks of PPD benefits. The application identified January 23, 
2023, as the commencement date for Fund benefits. The Commissioner’s November 
21, 2022 order approving the full commutation adopted the parties’ agreements 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
regarding Blake’s industrial disability, the credits to which the Fund was entitled, and the 
commencement date for Fund benefits. 
D .  
A u g u s t  9 ,  2 0 2 3  W o r k  I n j u r y  t o  L e f t  A r m  
Blake sustained a work injury to her left arm on August 9, 2023. (Hr’g Rpt. § 2; 
Hr’g Tr. p. 15) She developed worsening symptoms of pain and numbness in her left 
hand. (Hr’g Tr. p. 16; Ex. JE5, pp. 34–35) Blake reported her injury to HON, which 
accepted liability and arranged care at Concentra Medical Centers in Davenport. (Hr’g 
Tr. p. 16; Ex. JE5, p. 34) At Concentra, Moses Kim, M.D., diagnosed Blake with left 
carpal tunnel syndrome and tenosynovitis of the left thumb. (Ex. JE5, p. 37) 
On December 19, 2023, Suleman Hussain, M.D., performed surgery on Blake’s 
left arm that included:  
▪ Revision carpal tunnel release; 
▪ Revision neurolysis of median nerve; and 
▪ Ulnar nerve neurolysis at the elbow. (Ex. JE8, p. 98) 
Blake underwent an FCE on August 16, 2024. (Ex. JE4, p. 33.1) Based on the 
results, Gregory Schroeder, PT, DPT, assigned the following permanent work 
restrictions: 
▪ Occasionally lifting floor to waist up to 40 pounds; 
▪ Occasionally lifting 12” to waist up to 40 pounds; 
▪ Occasionally lifting waist to shoulder height up to 34 pounds; 
▪ Occasionally lifting overhead up to 26 pounds; 
▪ Occasionally carrying up to 40 pounds with both arms; 
▪ Occasionally pushing or pulling horizontally up to 49.2 pounds of force; and 
▪ Frequently reaching forward with the left arm. (Ex. JE4, p. 33.2) 
Dr. Hussain adopted these permanent work restrictions with the addition of frequently 
reaching overhead unilaterally with her left arm. (Ex. JE6, p. 89) 
Claimant’s counsel arranged for Blake to undergo a second FCE, with WorkWell 
by Daryl Short, DPT, on July 9, 2024. (Ex. JE10) Short found “Blake gave consistent 
effort with all test items, and demonstrated consistent performance. In my professional 
opinion, she was fully cooperative and her overall functional performance results are a 
valid representation of her safe maximum and residual functional capacity.” (Ex. JE10, 
pp. 115–16) Short concluded Blake’s capabilities to be “in the mid medium category of 
physical demand, up to 35 pounds on an occasional basis at waist level. It is 
recommended that she limit grasping, twisting, squeezing, and/or pinching with her 
hands bilaterally to up to 50% of the work day.” (Ex. JE 10, p. 116) 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
E .  
J a n u a r y  1 3 ,  2 0 2 5  I M E  R e p o r t  b y  D r.  B a n s a l  
Claimant’s counsel also set up an IME with Sunil Bansal, M.D., on November 19, 
2024. (Ex. 2, p. 5) Dr. Bansal reviewed medical records relating to Blake’s care, 
performed an in-person examination, and authored a report as part of the IME. (Ex. 2, 
pp. 5–30) The records review included, but was not limited to, the IME report he issued 
in 2022 after Blake’s work injury to her right arm. (Ex. 2, p. 19) Dr. Bansal issued an 
IME report dated January 13, 2025. (Ex. 2) 
With respect to Blake’s left upper extremity, Dr. Bansal’s diagnoses are: 
Recurrent left carpal tunnel syndrome, status post carpal tunnel release 
and already with a history of a revision carpal tunnel release, with cubital 
tunnel syndrome and ulnar nerve neuritis. 
Status post left revision open carpal tunnel release with autograft fat 
interposition graft, harvest of the fat graft from the left medial elbow, 
revision neurolysis of the median nerve, left ulnar nerve neurolysis at the 
elbow, cubital tunnel release (December 29, 2023). 
(Ex. 2, p. 23) 
On examination of Blake’s left wrist and thumb, Dr. Bansal noted tenderness to 
palpation of the volar aspect of the wrist and the base of the thumb. (Ex. 2, p. 22) He 
noted a positive Tinel’s sign and Phalen’s sign. (Ex. 2, p. 22) The Finkelstein’s test was 
negative. (Ex. 2, p. 22) He observed full range of motion of the wrist and thumb. (Ex. 2, 
p. 22) Dr. Bansal also noted, “There is a loss of two-point sensory discrimination over 
the thumb and index finger (12 mm), the long finger (10 mm), and the ring and small 
fingers (12 mm).” (Ex. 2, p. 22) 
Dr. Bansal noted on examination of Blake’s left elbow “mild tenderness to 
palpation of the medial epicondylar region.” (Ex. 2, p. 22) He observed full range of 
motion, positive Tinel’s sign at the elbow, and positive elbow flexion test at 8 seconds. 
(Ex. 2, p. 22) Dr. Bansal noted weakness with fifth digit adduction/abduction. (Ex. 2, p. 
22) 
Dr. Bansal used a dynamometer to obtain the following measurements of grip 
strength: 
▪ Right: 10 kg, 11 kg, and 10 kg; and 
 
▪ Left: 14 kg, 16, and 13 kg. (Ex. 2, p. 23) 
Dr. Bansal described Blake’s condition at the time of the in-person examination 
thusly: 
Blake continues to have significant numbness of her left hand, involving all 
of her fingers to varying degrees. Her left hand grip strength is also 
significantly weakened.  

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
She has significant functional limitations with both of her hands. She 
cannot lift a gallon of milk with either hand, and is limited to half-gallon 
weights, or approximately five pounds. She has marked difficulty with 
lifting and holding objects, and has to support her forearms in order to 
manipulate most objects. Her symptoms worsen with any prolonged elbow 
flexion. She has also developed clawing of her fingers, and has to use her 
opposite hand to straighten them back out. The clawing is particularly 
problematic when she is driving or performing activities requiring 
sustained grip. She frequently drops objects, and has particular difficulty 
with tasks requiring sustained grip or precision handling. 
Her symptoms impair her daily activities, and she has had to modify the 
way she does even routine tasks. Her symptoms also impact her sleep. 
She wakes frequently throughout the night, and has to change her position 
to try to ease her symptoms. She is still prescribed gabapentin for pain 
management. 
(Ex. 2, p. 24) 
On the question of permanent impairment to Blake’s left wrist and thumb, Dr. 
Bansal opines: 
With reference to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, specifically Tables 16-10, and 16-15, she 
qualifies for the following impairment values based on her digital sensory 
deficits. 
Severity of sensory deficit is 20% for the first digit, 20% for the 
second digit, and 20% for the third digit. 
Severity of motor deficit is 0%. 
Maximum upper extremity impairment due to sensory deficit of the 
median nerve below the mid forearm involving the radial and ulnar 
palmar digital nerves of the index and long fingers is 9%, and the 
thumb is 18%. 
Multiplied together: (20% x 18%) + (20% x 9%) + (10% x 9%) = 6% upper 
extremity impairment. 
(Ex. 2, pp. 26–27) 
Dr. Bansal used Tables 16-10 and 16-15 of the Guides to opine on the extent of 
permanent impairment Blake sustained to her left elbow based on her motor and 
sensory deficits as follows: 
Left ulnar nerve component (cubital tunnel syndrome) 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
Severity of sensory deficit is 20% 
Severity of motor deficit is 10% 
Upper extremity impairment due to sensory deficit of the median nerve 
above the mid forearm involving the ulnar nerve is 7% 
Upper extremity impairment due to the ulnar nerve above the mid forearm 
involving the motor nerve is 46% 
Multiplied together: (20% x 7%) + (10% x 46%) = 1.4% + 4.6% = 6% 
upper extremity impairment 
(Ex. 2, p. 27) 
 
In response to claimant’s counsel’s question regarding permanent work 
restrictions, Dr. Bansal agreed with Short’s from the July 9, 2024 FCE. (Ex. 2, p. 28) Dr. 
Bansal assigned additional restrictions as follows: 
Furthermore, given Ms. Blake’s extensive medical record and documented 
cumulative trauma, specific handling restrictions should be implemented in 
addition to her lifting limits from the FCE. Her job duties required constant 
manipulation of materials including gripping power tools, performing 
repetitive stapling, and assembling chair components, which directly 
contributed to her multiple upper extremity conditions. Dr. Mann 
documented in April 2018 that power tool use needed to be limited to no 
more than four hours per day with no more than two consecutive hours, 
due to the significant problems these activities caused. This was further 
supported by Dr. Lawler’s observation in October 2018 that while power 
tools weren’t officially part of her job description, she often needed to use 
them up to 12 hours per day in peak seasons. 
The progression of her conditions culminated in December 2023 surgery 
which revealed extensive nerve involvement requiring both median nerve 
neurolysis with fat grafting and cubital tunnel release. The July 2024 FCE 
specifically noted decreased functional strength and endurance of bilateral 
wrists/thumbs, recommending limitations on grasping, twisting, squeezing, 
and pinching to 50% of the workday. Given her documented history of 
symptom exacerbation with repetitive activities and the extensive surgical 
findings, detailed handling restrictions should include: 
Limiting repetitive gripping and pinching activities to no more than 30 
minutes continuously with 15-minute breaks between periods of such 
activity 
No use of vibratory tools or power tools for more than 2 hours total per 
day, with no more than 30 minutes consecutively 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 10 
 
Alternating tasks requiring fine finger manipulation with gross motor 
activities every hour, such as keyboarding. 
(Ex. 2, pp. 28–29) 
In response to a question about recommendations for future care, Dr. Bansal 
opined that additional surgery was not recommended. (Ex. 2, p. 29) But he opined that 
“ongoing medical management should include prescription medications targeting her 
neuropathic pain symptoms, such as continued use of gabapentin and nortriptyline.” 
(Ex. 2, p. 29) He further advocated for maintaining a home exercise program “focusing 
on nerve gliding techniques, tendon mobility exercises, and grip strengthening within 
her restrictions.” (Ex. 2, p. 29) He also opined, “Periodic corticosteroid injections may be 
considered for acute symptom flares, particularly if she develops increased thumb 
tenosynovitis symptoms.” (Ex. 2, p. 29) Lastly, Dr. Bansal stated she should continue 
the use of splinting during sleep and activities as needed to manage her symptoms. (Ex. 
2, p. 29) 
F .  
J a n u a r y  1 4 ,  2 0 2 5  Vo c a t i o n a l  R e p o r t  b y  P h i l  D a v i s ,  
M . S .  
Claimant’s counsel retained Davis to perform a vocational opinion with regard to 
the effect of Blake’s first and second qualifying losses in this case on Blake’s 
employability. (Ex. 3, p. 33) Davis reviewed Blake’s medical records from care, including 
her FCEs from April 13, 2021; May 4, 2021; and July 9, 2024; and Dr. Bansal’s January 
13, 2025 IME report. (Ex. 3, p. 33) He also reviewed Blake’s answers to interrogatories, 
the Assembler II job description at HON, the first report of injury, Blake’s high school 
transcripts, the transcript of Blake’s deposition in this case, and Blake’s Social Security 
statement. (Ex. 3, p. 33) Davis also conducted a phone interview with Blake on January 
13, 2025. (Ex. 3, p. 33) 
Davis authored a vocational report dated January 14, 2025. (Ex. 3, p. 33) The 
report details Blake’s social, educational, vocational, and medical histories. (Ex. 3, pp. 
34–36) Davis also answered questions posed by claimant’s counsel. (Ex. 3, pp. 37–40) 
Among them was one that addressed Blake’s work restrictions, in response to which 
Davis discussed those in the FCEs listed above and Dr. Bansal’s IME report of January 
13, 2025. (Ex. 3, pp. 37–38)  
With respect to the question of whether Blake is physically capable of returning to 
any of her past jobs, Davis opined: 
Provided for review are the Department of Labor’s Definitions for Strength 
Capacities’ Physical Demand Levels: 
Sedentary – 10 pounds maximum lifting. Occasional lifting/carrying 
of small articles. Occasional walk[ing] or stand[ing] may be 
required. 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 11 
 
Light – 20 pounds maximum lifting with frequent lift/carry up to 10 
pounds. A job is light if less lifting is involved but significant 
walking/standing is done or if done mostly sitting but requires 
push[ing]\pull[ing] on arm or leg controls. 
Medium – 50 pounds of maximum lifting with frequent 
lift[ing]/carry[ing] of up to 25 pounds. 
Heavy – 100 pounds of maximum lifting with frequent 
lift[ing]/carry[ing] of up to 50 pounds. 
Very Heavy – Over 100 pounds with frequent lift[ing]/carry[ing] over 
50 pounds. 
No, Ms. Blake’s restrictions were then compared to her past employment 
activities. Information from the Dictionary of Occupational Titles, as well as 
her job description for her position as an Assembler II were reviewed. 
Based upon this information, I would opine Ms. Blake’s past employment 
activities, as described, required the ability to physically perform work 
falling within the medium to heavy worker classification. When taking into 
consideration the restrictions provided by the valid FCE’s and Dr. Bansal, 
Ms. Blake’s current physical strength capabilities would fall within a 
limited aspects of the medium physical demand level with material 
handling activities. 
However, when you take into consideration the additional non[-]material 
handling restrictions, to include: (7/9/24 FCE) “Due to her decreased 
functional strength and endurance of her bilateral grip strength, limit 
grasping, twisting, squeezing and/or pinching with her hands bilaterally up 
to 50% of the workday.” (Dr. Bansal IME Report 11/19/24 (report dated 
1/13/25) “Limiting repetitive gripping and pinching activities to no more 
than 30 minutes continuously with 15-minute breaks between periods of 
such activities . . . no use of vibratory tools or power tools for more than 
two hours total per day, with no more than 30 minutes consecutively . . . 
alternating tasks requiring fine finger manipulation with gross motor 
activities every hour, such as keyboarding.” 
Taking into consideration these additional non[-]material handling 
restrictions, would more clearly place Ms. Blake’s restrictions within a 
limited aspect of the sedentary physical demand level. 
(Ex. 3, pp. 37–38) 
In response to an inquiry from claimant’s counsel regarding Blake’s educational 
history and ability to be retrained Davis answered, “Academic records indicate that Ms. 
Blake potentially has the academic abilities to retrain. However when taking into 
consideration the restrictions as identified by Dr. Bansal regarding keyboarding 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 12 
 
activities, as well as her self-report of limited computer knowledge/skills, I would opine 
that Ms. Blake’s ability to be successful at retraining may be difficult.” (Ex. 3, p. 39) 
Davis further opined that based on her work restrictions from the July 9, 2024 
FCE and Dr. Bansal’s January 13, 2025 IME report, she is “incapable” of returning to 
her past jobs as an Assembler II with HON, cashier, or fast-food worker. He also 
provided, “Taking into consideration her permanent restrictions, age, educational 
background, and work history[,] I would opine that she has lost access to 100% of her 
past occupations.” Davis concluded: 
Vocational research notes that greater than 89% of all occupations within 
the U.S. Labor Market and Economy require the full use and range of 
motion of the upper extremities to include gripping, grasping, pinching, 
and other fine motor skills, in the performance of job tasks. Therefore, I 
would opine that she has lost access to greater than 90% of all 
occupations within the U.S. Labor Market and Economy. 
(Ex. 3, p. 39) 
G .  
J a n u a r y  2 1 ,  2 0 2 5  Vo c a t i o n a l  R e p o r t  b y  J e s s i c a  
M i l l e r,  M A ,  C R C ,  C E A S  I  
Counsel for the Fund arranged for an analysis of Blake’s employability by Jessica 
Miller, MA, CRC, CEAS I. (Ex. BB) As part of Miller’s analysis, she reviewed Dr. 
Bansal’s October 18, 2022 IME report, Blake’s answers to interrogatories propounded 
by the Fund, HON’s responses to Blake’s requests for admissions, and Dr. Hussein’s 
September 11, 2024 patient status report. (Ex. BB, p. 3) There is no indication Miller 
reviewed or considered Dr. Bansal’s January 13, 2025 IME report. (Ex. BB) She 
conducted a Zoom interview of Blake on January 8, 2025. (Ex. BB, p. 3) 
Miller issued a report with her opinions dated January 21, 2025. (Ex. BB, p. 3) 
The report includes a summary of Blake’s education and employment history. (Ex. BB, 
pp. 3–5) It also summarizes Blake’s self-directed job search as including jobs in retail, 
hotels, and clerical office type work. (Ex. BB, p. 5) Miller noted, “Blake stated that she 
reads descriptions of job postings and confirms her abilities are applicable before 
applying. However, she said she also applies even when restrictions do not fit due to 
hoping to discuss accommodations in interviews.” (Ex. BB, p. 5)  
Miller completed labor research in Muscatine, Iowa, and its surrounding area. 
(Ex. BB, p. 7) She identified ten jobs as possibilities for Blake. (Ex. BB, pp. 7–10) Only 
one of those jobs was located in Muscatine, and it was a seasonal cashier position at 
the municipal aquatic center. (Ex. BB, pp. 7–10) The job is not available outside of the 
pool season in Iowa, which typically lasts from approximately Memorial Day to Labor 
Day. 
 
 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 13 
 
Miller opined in the report: 
This consultant notes that Ms. Blake’s interview brought a few 
discrepancies to light regarding her abilities and active job search. Ms. 
Blake stated she does not have proficient computer or typing skills, yet 
she utilized computers for her education and is applying for clerical office 
type work. She reported that she is unable to clean her own house but is 
applying for cleaning roles. She reported that she reads the job posting 
descriptions and confirms her qualifications match before applying, yet 
she also said she applies for jobs even when physical demands do not 
match up with her abilities, in hopes of discussing accommodations in 
interviews. Ms. Blake applied for a Hy-Vee online shopper position and 
received an interview, of which did not result in employment due to her 
restrictions. Per the Hy-Vee Aisles Online Shopper job description, the 
physical demands are as follows, “Visual requirements include ability to 
see detail at near range with or without correction. Must be physically able 
to perform medium work: occasionally lifting or carrying objects of no more 
than 50 pounds, with frequent standing, walking, and lifting/carrying of 
objects of no more than 25 pounds. Must be able to perform the following 
physical activities: stooping, kneeling, reaching, handling, grasping, 
feeling, talking, hearing and repetitive motions.” Ms. Blake also 
interviewed for a school cook position; however, Ms. Blake told this 
consultant that cutting and stirring exacerbates her pain. This consultant 
recalls that Ms. Blake’s understanding of her own capabilities do not align 
with the physical demands of either job she interviewed for described 
above. These inconsistencies do not show a good faith effort regarding 
Ms. Blake’s independent job search. 
(Ex. BB, p. 11) 
The undersigned finds Miller’s opinion unpersuasive. It is not evidence of bad 
faith for a worker with a disability to apply for jobs with descriptions outside their 
abilities. Under the federal Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA), a “qualified individual 
with a disability” is defined as someone who can perform the essential functions of a job 
with or without reasonable accommodations. And discussions of reasonable 
accommodations are put off until after the employer has offered a job candidate the 
position. Therefore, it makes perfect sense that someone like Blake, with permanent 
work restrictions, would apply for jobs with duties outside those restrictions, with an eye 
toward exploring reasonable accommodations after a potential job offer.  
Blake’s credible description of what activities exacerbate her symptoms means 
she will have a difficult time finding a job that does not cause her some level of 
discomfort. It therefore makes sense for her to participate in the hiring process to get 
more information in an effort to better assess how much worse the job duties might 
make her symptoms on a daily basis. This is not evidence of bad faith. 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 14 
 
Further, it is contradictory for Miller to find Blake’s decisions to apply for office 
work despite the fact that her own computer skills are lacking in one paragraph only to 
note that some of the positions Miller identified based on labor market research “may 
require computer skills beyond Ms. Blake’s current skill level” in the next. (Ex. BB, p. 11) 
Questioning whether Blake is searching for a job in good faith for applying for office jobs 
and then identifying office jobs among those identified as potential fits for her 
undermines the persuasiveness of Miller’s opinion.  
 
Lastly, Blake’s good faith is further evidenced by her reaction to Miller’s report. 
Blake did not focus on Miller’s criticism of her job search. Instead, she focused on the 
jobs Miller suggested she pursue.  
Blake attempted to apply for all ten of the jobs Miller suggested even though 
Miller did not provide her with information about how she could apply for any of the jobs. 
(Hr’g Tr. pp. 30–31) Blake performed online research with the help of her daughter and 
contacted each of the employer’s identified in Miller’s list of potential jobs in an attempt 
to learn how to apply for the open positions. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 30–31) None of the ten 
employers responded to Blake’s inquiries. (Hr’g Tr. p. 31) This undermines the 
persuasiveness of Miller’s opinion regarding Blake’s employability.  
Moreover, Miller did not consider the most recent medical evidence reflecting 
Blake’s functional capacity. There is an insufficient basis in the record from which to 
conclude Miller considered the question of Blake’s access to the competitive labor 
market in the context of her work restrictions from the July 9, 2024 FCE report and Dr. 
Bansal’s January 13, 2025 IME report. Miller makes no reference to either the July 9, 
2024 FCE report or Dr. Bansal’s IME report in her vocational report. And there is no 
discussion of the substance of either the July 9, 2024 FCE report or Dr. Bansal’s 
January 13, 2025 IME report in her vocational report. This undermines the 
persuasiveness of Miller’s vocational report, especially in contrast with that of Davis, 
which includes extensive discussion of Blake’s work restrictions based on the July 9, 
2024 FCE report and Dr. Bansal’s January 13, 2025 IME report. 
H .  
B l a k e ’s  C o n d i t i o n  a t  t h e  Ti m e  o f  H e a r i n g  
Blake credibly described her ongoing symptoms during her hearing testimony. 
She described how the care she had received up to the date of hearing had provided 
little relief of her symptoms. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 17, 23) Blake continued to experience daily, 
constant pain as well as numbness, tingling, swelling, and the locking up of her hands 
and fingers. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 19, 24) She experiences good and bad days, but even her 
relatively good days cause her to experience constant pain she rates at eight on a scale 
of zero to ten. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 42–43) On bad days, Blake is irritable and short-tempered 
because of the pain. (Hr’g Tr. p. 43) 
Everyday tasks are a challenge for Blake because they cause her to experience 
greater pain, swelling, and her hands and fingers to lock up. (Hr’g Tr. p. 41) These tasks 
include cooking, cleaning, using utensils, laundry, caring for her child, and shopping for 
groceries. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 41–42, 47–48) Driving also exacerbates her symptoms, meaning 
she can only drive short distances and does not travel alone because she needs 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 15 
 
someone to help manipulate her hands if they lock up. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 42, 53) Blake 
applied for disability benefits from the federal Social Security Administration before the 
date of hearing because of her injuries and ongoing symptoms but had not received a 
determination. (Hr’g Tr. pp. 52–53) 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The parties stipulated Blake sustained the work injury from which this case stems 
on August 9, 2023. (Hr’g Rpt. § 2) The editions of the Iowa Code and Iowa 
Administrative Code in effect at the time of the work injury govern in cases before the 
Commissioner. See Stiles v. Annett Holdings, Inc., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 
5064673, 2020 WL 6037539, at *2 (App., Oct. 2, 2020). Therefore, the 2023 editions of 
the Iowa Code and Iowa Administrative Code govern in this case. See Iowa Code, Vol. 
I, p. iii (2023) (“This 2023 Iowa Code includes all enactments with a January 1, 2023, or 
earlier effective date from the 2022 Regular and Extraordinary Sessions of the Eighty-
ninth Iowa General Assembly and includes enactments from prior sessions that were 
effective on or before that date.”); see also Iowa Administrative Code chapter 876 (July 
26, 2023). Because the General Assembly enacted legislation transferring Iowa Code 
chapter 86 to sections 10A.303 through 10A.333 during the 2023 session and the 
transfer took effect on July 1, 2023, before the stipulated injury date, this decision will 
reference applicable provisions of sections 10A.303 through 10A.333 and not chapter 
86. See Iowa Code §§ 2B.12, 3.7; see also 2023 Iowa Acts ch. 19, § 1477. 
A .  
D i s a b i l i t y  B e n e f i t s  
Workers’ compensation is “a creature of statute.” Darrow v. Quaker Oats Co., 
570 N.W.2d 649, 652 (Iowa 1997). This means an injured employee’s “right to workers' 
compensation is purely statutory.” Downs v. A & H Const., Ltd., 481 N.W.2d 520, 527 
(Iowa 1992).  And “it is the legislature’s prerogative to fix the conditions under which the 
act’s benefits may be obtained.” Darrow, 570 N.W.2d at 652. 
The Iowa Supreme Court has held: 
The legislature enacted the workers' compensation statute primarily for the 
benefit of the worker and the worker's dependents. Therefore, we apply 
the statute broadly and liberally in keeping with the humanitarian objective 
of the statute. We will not defeat the statute's beneficent purpose by 
reading something into it that is not there, or by a narrow and strained 
construction. 
Gregory v. Second Injury Fund of Iowa, 777 N.W.2d 395, 399 (Iowa 2010) (quoting 
Holstein Elec. v. Breyfogle, 756 N.W.2d 812, 815–16 (Iowa 2008) (citations omitted)).  
“Although the workers' compensation statute is to be liberally construed in favor 
of the worker, the statute is not to be expanded by reading something into it that is not 
there.” Downs v. A & H Const., Ltd., 481 N.W.2d 520, 527 (Iowa 1992) (citing Cedar 
Rapids Community School Dist. v. Cady, 278 N.W.2d 298 (Iowa 1979)). “To determine 
legislative intent, we look to the language chosen by the legislature and not what the 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 16 
 
legislature might have said.” Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, 
(Iowa 2016) (citing Schadendorf v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 757 N.W.2d 330, 337 (Iowa 
2008)). The “broad purpose of workers’ compensation” is “to award compensation 
(apart from medical benefits), not for the injury itself, but the disability produced by a 
physical injury.” Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, (Iowa 
2010) (citing 4 Arthur Larson & Lex K. Larson, Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Law 
§ 80.02, at 80–2 (2009)).  
In 2017, the legislature amended the IWCA to change how permanent 
impairment is determined for workers’ compensation purposes by amending Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2). See 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23, § 9. In cases under the IWCA involving 
injuries on or after July 1, 2017,  
when determining functional disability and not loss of earning capacity, the 
extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be determined 
solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, 
published by the American medical association, as adopted by the 
workers’ compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. 
Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not be utilized in determining loss 
or percentage of permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” 
through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity. 
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(x).  
After the 2017 amendments, section 85.34(2)(x) mandates use of the Guides as 
adopted by the Commissioner under the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Iowa Code 
chapter 17A (IAPA). The Commissioner has adopted the Fifth Edition of the Guides for 
use in determining permanent impairment in cases before the agency under Iowa 
Administrative Code rule 876—2.4. Therefore, the Fifth Edition of the Guides apply in 
this case, including terminology as defined for purposes of the Guides. See Klein v. 
Whirlpool Corp., Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 1656402.03, 2024 WL 3696768, at 
*2 (App. Jul. 30, 2024) (holding the Guides “were specifically incorporated by statute 
and administrative rule”); see also Koeller v. Cardinal Logistics Mgmt. Corp., No. 25-
0172, 2025 WL 3471237, at *12 (Iowa Ct. App. Dec. 3, 2025) (Langholz, dissenting). 
The Guides continues to define impairment as “a loss, loss of use, or 
derangement of any body part, organ system, or organ function.” 
This definition of impairment is retained in this edition. A medical 
impairment can develop from an illness or injury. An impairment is 
considered permanent when it has reached maximal medical 
improvement (MMI), meaning it is well stabilized and unlikely to change 
substantially in the next year with or without medical treatment. The term 
impairment in the Guides refers to permanent impairment, which is the 
focus of the Guides. 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 17 
 
An impairment can be manifested objectively, for example, by a fracture, 
and/or subjectively, through fatigue and pain. Although the Guides 
emphasizes objective assessment, subjective symptoms are included 
within the diagnostic criteria. According to the Guides, determining 
whether an injury or illness results in permanent impairment requires a 
medical assessment performed by a physician. An impairment may lead to 
functional limitations or the inability to perform the activities of daily living. 
American Medical Association, Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, p. 2 
(5th ed., 2001) (bold-face and italics in original) (hereinafter Guides). 
The Guides further provide: 
In evaluating impairment, the Guides considers both anatomic and 
functional loss. Some chapters place a greater emphasis on either 
anatomic or functional loss, depending upon common practice in that 
specialty. Anatomic loss refers to damage to the organ system or body 
structure, while functional loss refers to a change in function for the organ 
or body system. An example of an anatomic deviation is development of 
heart enlargement; functional loss includes a loss in ejection fraction or 
the ability of the heart to pump adequately. Anatomic loss receives greater 
emphasis in the musculoskeletal system, as in measurements such as 
range of motion.  Functional considerations receive greater emphasis in 
the mental and behavioral section. 
Id. at 4 (italics in original).  
Moreover, the Guides expressly state: 
Impairment percentages or ratings developed by medical specialists are 
consensus-derived estimates that reflect the severity of the medical 
condition and the degree to which the impairment decreases an 
individual’s ability to perform common activities of daily living (ADL), 
excluding work. Impairment ratings were designed to reflect functional 
limitations and not disability. The whole person impairment 
percentages listed in the Guides estimate the impact of the impairment 
on the individual’s overall ability to perform activities of daily living, 
excluding work, as listed in Table 1-2. 
Id. at 4 (bold-face and italics in original).  
Table 1-2, entitled “Activities of Daily Living Commonly Measured in Activities of 
Daily Living (ADL) and Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL) Scales,” from Page 
4 of the Guides, is recreated below. 
 
 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 18 
 
Activity 
Example 
Self-care, personal hygiene 
Urinating, defecating, 
brushing teeth, combing 
hair, bathing, dressing 
oneself, eating 
Communication 
Writing, typing, seeing, 
hearing, speaking 
Physical activity 
Standing, sitting, reclining, 
walking, climbing stairs 
Sensory function 
Hearing, seeing, tactile 
feeling, tasting, smelling 
Nonspecialized hand 
activities 
Grasping, lifting, tactile, 
discrimination 
Travel 
Riding, driving, flying 
Sexual function 
Orgasm, ejaculation, 
lubrication, erection 
Sleep 
Restful, nocturnal sleep 
pattern 
The Guides further explain their approach to impairment in pertinent part: 
The medical judgment used to determine the original impairment 
percentages could not account for the diversity or complexity of work but 
could account for daily activities common to most people. Work is not 
included in the clinical judgment for impairment percentages for several 
reasons: (1) work involves many simple and complex activities; (2) work is 
highly individualized, making generalizations inaccurate; (3) impairment 
percentages are unchanged for stable conditions, but work and 
occupations change; and (4) impairments interact with such other factors 
as the worker’s age, education, and prior work experience to determine 
the extent of work disability. For example, an individual who receives a 
30% whole person impairment due to pericardial heart disease is 
considered from a clinical standpoint to have a 30% reduction in general 
functioning as represented by a decrease in the ability to perform activities 
of daily living. For individuals who work in sedentary jobs, there may be no 
decline in their work ability although their overall functioning is decreased. 
Thus, a 30% impairment rating does not correspond to a 30% reduction in 
work capability. Similarly, a manual laborer with this 30% impairment 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 19 
 
rating due to pericardial disease may be completely unable to do his or 
her regular job and, thus, may have a 100% work disability. 
As a result, impairment ratings are not intended for use as direct 
determinants of work disability. When a physician is asked to evaluate 
work-related disability, it is appropriate for a physician knowledgeable 
about the work activities of the patient to discuss the specific activities the 
worker can and cannot do, given the permanent impairment. 
Id. at 5. “The Guides impairment ratings reflect the severity and limitations of the 
organ/body system impairment and resulting functional limitations.” Id. at p. 9 (bold-
face in original). 
The Guides use “impairment” and “disability” as two distinct terms, each with its 
own meaning. While “impairment” encompasses ADLs and excludes work, 
The Guides continues to define disability as an alteration of an 
individual’s capacity to meet personal, social, or occupational 
demands or statutory or regulatory requirements because of an 
impairment. An individual can have a disability in performing a specific 
work activity but not have a disability in any other social role. Physicians 
have the education and training to evaluate a person’s health status and 
determine the presence or absence of an impairment. If the physician has 
the expertise and is well acquainted with the individual’s activities and 
needs, the physician may also express an opinion about the presence or 
absence of a specific disability. For example, an occupational medicine 
physician who understands the job requirements in a particular workplace 
can provide insights on how the impairment could contribute to a 
workplace disability. 
Id. at p. 8 (bold-face in original). 
The Guides further elaborate on impairment versus disability. Under the Guides, 
“The impairment evaluation . . . is only one aspect of disability determination.” Id. 
The Guides is not intended to be used for direct estimates of work 
disability. Impairment percentages derived according to the Guides criteria 
do not measure work disability. Therefore, it is inappropriate to use the 
Guides’ criteria or ratings to make direct estimates of work disability. 
Id., at p. 9. 
By inserting the word “impairment” into the IWCA for the first time, deciding not to 
add a corresponding definition for purposes of the statute, and mandating that the 
extent of impairment caused by a work injury be determined in accordance with the 
Guides, the legislature necessarily incorporated the meaning of that term as set forth in 
the Guides. Impairment is “a loss, loss of use or derangement of any body part, organ 
system, or organ function.” Id., at p. 2 (internal emphasis omitted). However, 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 20 
 
“Impairment percentages derived according to the Guides criteria do not measure work 
disability.” Id. at 9.  
And with respect to determining the extent of permanent disability under the Act, 
the Guides make clear that “[t]he impairment evaluation . . . is only one aspect of 
disability determination.” Id. at 8. After using the Guides to determine permanent 
impairment, the agency must then consider the evidentiary record as a whole to 
determine the extent of permanent disability—“alteration of an individual's capacity to 
meet personal, social, or occupational demands or statutory or regulatory requirements 
because of an impairment,” id.—and entitlement to permanency benefits. 
1 .  
P P D  B e n e f i t s  
The parties have stipulated that Blake sustained a work injury on August 9, 2023. 
(Hr’g Rpt. § 2) They have further stipulated, “The disability is a scheduled member 
disability to the left upper extremity.” (Id., § 5(b)). While they also have identified as in 
dispute the question of whether “[t]he disability is an industrial disability,” (id., § 5(c)), 
based on their post-hearing briefs, the parties appear to agree that the disability caused 
by the August 9, 2023 injury to the left upper extremity is limited to functional disability 
to the arm and not a “disability other than those described or referred to in paragraph ‘a’ 
through ‘u’ that must be compensated based on lost earning capacity.” Iowa Code 
§ 85.34(2)(v).  
An employer covered by the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act (IWCA) must 
“provide, secure, and pay compensation according to the provisions of this chapter for 
any and all personal injuries sustained by an employee arising out of and in the course 
of the employment, and in such cases, the employer shall be relieved from other liability 
for recovery of damages or other compensation for such personal injury.” Iowa Code 
§ 85.3(1). Iowa Code section 85.34(2) governs compensation for permanent partial 
disabilities that result from work injuries and provides in pertinent part: 
For all cases of permanent partial disability compensation shall be paid as 
follows: 
**** 
m.  The loss of two-thirds of that part of an arm between the shoulder joint 
and the elbow joint shall equal the loss of an arm and the compensation 
therefor shall be weekly compensation during two hundred fifty weeks. 
 
In this case, Dr. Hussain assigned Blake a 10 percent permanent impairment to 
the left upper extremity. Dr. Bansal assigned a 6 percent permanent functional 
impairment for carpal tunnel syndrome and the same for her cubital tunnel syndrome. 
Before the stipulated August 9, 2023 work injury, Dr. Bansal opined Blake had 
sustained a 2 percent functional impairment to her left upper extremity—the August 11, 
2017 loss to her left arm that constituted Blake’s first qualifying loss in Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner No. 19004576.01, which was adopted as part of the full 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 21 
 
commutation of Blake’s Fund claim approved by the Commissioner on November 21, 
2022.  
Iowa Code section 85.34(7) states: 
Successive disabilities. An employer is liable for compensating only that 
portion of an employee’s disability that arises out of and in the course of 
the employee’s employment with the employer and that relates to the 
injury that serves as the basis for the employee’s claim for compensation 
under chapter 10A, subchapter III, this chapter, or chapter 85A or 85B. An 
employer is not liable for compensating an employee’s preexisting 
disability that arose out of and in the course of employment from a prior 
injury with the employer, to the extent that the employee’s preexisting 
disability has already been compensated under chapter 10A, subchapter 
II, this chapter, or chapter 85A or 85B. An employer is not liable for 
compensating an employee’s preexisting disability that arose out of and in 
the course of employment with a different employer or from causes 
unrelated to employment. 
Under this provision of the IWCA, HON is responsible for compensating Blake for 
only that portion of her permanent disability caused by the August 9, 2023 work injury. 
HON “is not liable for compensating [her] preexisting disability that arose out of and in 
the course of employment with a different employer or from causes unrelated to 
employment.” Iowa Code § 85.34(7). Therefore, the 2 percent functional impairment for 
left carpal tunnel syndrome from April 11, 2017, must be subtracted from the 6 percent 
functional impairment Dr. Bansal assigned after the August 9, 2023 work injury. This 
leaves 4 percent. Adding that percentage to Dr. Bansal’s 6 percent functional 
impairment for the cubital tunnel syndrome gives us 10 percent, the same as Dr. 
Hussain’s evaluation.  
Therefore, the weight of the evidence establishes Blake sustained a 10 percent 
functional impairment to her left upper extremity caused by the stipulated August 9, 
2023 work injury. Multiplying 10 percent by 250 weeks under section 85.34(2)(m) equals 
25 weeks. HON is responsible for paying Blake 25 weeks of PPD benefits. 
Under Iowa Code section 85.34(2), an employer must commence payment of 
PPD benefits when the injured worker reaches MMI from the work injury. Blake reached 
MMI for the stipulated work injury on September 11, 2024. That is the commencement 
date of the PPD benefits stemming from the stipulated work injury for which HON is 
liable. 
2 .  
F u n d  B e n e f i t s  
Iowa Code section 85.64(1) provides: 
If an employee who has previously lost, or lost the use of, one hand, one 
arm, one foot, one leg, or one eye, becomes permanently disabled by a 
compensable injury which has resulted in the loss of or loss of use of 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 22 
 
another such member or organ, the employer shall be liable only for the 
degree of disability which would have resulted from the latter injury if there 
had been no preexisting disability. In addition to such compensation, and 
after the expiration of the full period provided by law for the payments of 
compensation by the employer, the employee shall be paid out of the 
second injury fund created by this subchapter the remainder of such 
compensation as would be payable for the degree of permanent disability 
involved after first deducting from the remainder the compensable value of 
the previously lost member or organ. 
Here, the record shows that Blake sustained a loss to her right arm caused by a 
July 24, 2019 work injury. That loss also happens to be the second qualifying loss for 
purposes of Fund benefits in Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner No. 
19004576.01, in which the commissioner approved an agreement for settlement 
between Blake and HON in which the parties agreed that the July 24, 2019 work injury 
to Blake’s right upper extremity caused her to sustain a 27 percent loss of use to that 
body part. HON paid to Blake 67.5 weeks of compensation in the form of PPD benefits 
under Iowa Code section 85.3(2)(m). The record shows Blake sustained a first 
qualifying loss to her right arm of 27 percent under section 85.64(1). 
As found above, the parties stipulated Blake sustained a work injury to her left 
upper extremity on August 9, 2023. That injury resulted in a 10 percent functional 
impairment. This constitutes a second qualifying loss under section 85.64(1). 
In Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Strable, the claimant sought Fund benefits 
stemming from the first qualifying loss of bilateral carpal tunnel injuries and a second 
qualifying loss in the form of an ankle injury that caused sequelae to her hip, lower back, 
and mental health which meant the initial scheduled-member injury spilled over into the 
whole body. 14 N.W.3d 742, 743 (Iowa 2024). One of the issues in Strable was how the 
Fund’s “liability is calculated and when its payments commence if the second qualifying 
injury extends beyond the qualifying member.” Id. at 749. In this context, the court held, 
“the Fund is liable for the incremental increase in [the claimant’s] disability associated 
with the combined effect of both enumerated injuries as compared to the disability 
associated only with the second qualifying injury, for which the employer is liable. When 
. . . the second qualifying injury extends beyond the enumerated member, the Fund 
should get a credit for the full amount of the employer’s liability for the second qualifying 
injury.” Id.  
Thus, the Strable holding is focused on how to calculate the Fund’s liability when 
the second qualifying loss results in one or more sequelae spilling over into the body as 
a whole. See id. This is perhaps why neither Blake nor the Fund cites to Strable in their 
briefs. Unlike the qualifying losses in that case, each of the losses Blake sustained is 
limited to an upper extremity.  Despite the factual differences between Strable and this 
case, the court’s reasoning provides the step-by-step framework for determining Fund 
liability and when the Fund’s payments commence: 
1) Assess the claimant’s permanent disability considering both qualifying 
injuries;  

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 23 
 
2) Subtract the number of weeks representing the first qualifying loss; and 
3) Subtract the discrete permanent disability associated with the second 
qualifying loss. See id.; see also Delaney v. Second Injury Fund of Iowa, 6 
N.W.3d 714, 722 (Iowa 2024); Gregory v. Second Injury Fund of Iowa, 777 
N.W.2d 395, 400 (Iowa 2010); Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. George, 737 
N.W.2d 141, 147 (Iowa 2007). 
a .  
D i s a b i l i t y  F r o m  B o t h  Q u a l i f y i n g  L o s s e s  
The starting point is to determine the permanent disability caused by both 
qualifying losses. Id. Blake argues that she is permanently and totally disabled because 
of the cumulative effect of her two qualifying losses. The Fund disputes this, arguing 
that, despite HON terminating Blake because she could no longer perform the essential 
functions of her job as an Assembler II because of the combined work restrictions from 
both injuries, her lost earning capacity does not exceed the amount paid in PPD 
benefits paid pursuant to the full commutation in No. 19004576.01. 
The Iowa Supreme Court has held the factors used to evaluate industrial 
disability under section 85.34(2)(v) are also used to determine whether a work injury 
has caused permanent total disability under section 85.34(3). See Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. 
v. Caselman, 657 N.W.2d 493, 495 (Iowa 2003) (quoting Guyton v. Irving Jensen Co., 
373 N.W.2d 101, 103 (Iowa 1985)). The extent of an injured employee's industrial 
disability is based on consideration of the following factors: functional disability, age, 
education, qualifications, work experience, inability to engage in similar employment, 
earnings before and after the injury, motivation to work, personal characteristics, and 
the employer's inability to accommodate the injured employee's functional limitations. 
See Neal v. Annett Holdings, Inc., 814 N.W.2d 512, 526 (Iowa 2012); IBP, Inc. v. Al-
Gharib, 604 N.W.2d 621, 632-33 (Iowa 2000); E.N.T. Assoc. v. Collentine, 525 N.W.2d 
827, 830 (Iowa 1994); Ehlinger v. State, 237 N.W.2d 784, 792 (Iowa 1976). 
The Iowa Supreme Court has quoted the commissioner with approval for the 
principle that under the IWCA, “‘[t]otal disability does not mean a state of absolute 
helplessness.”’ Caselman, 657 N.W.2d at 501 (quoting Al-Gharib, 604 N.W.2d at 633). 
“Such disability occurs when the injury wholly disables the employee from performing 
work that the employee's experience, training, intelligence, and physical capacities 
would otherwise permit the employee to perform.” Al-Gharib, 604 N.W.2d at 633 (citing 
Diederich v. Tri-City Ry., 219 Iowa 587, 593-94, 258 N.W. 899, 902 (1935)). A finding 
that the claimant could perform some work despite claimant's physical and educational 
limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total disability. See Chamberlin v. 
Ralston Purina, Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 661698 (App. Oct. 1987); Eastman 
v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Indust. Comm’r Rpt. 134 (App. May 1982). “Simply 
put, the question is this: Are there jobs in the community that the employee can do for 
which the employee can realistically compete?” Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Shank, 
516 N.W.2d 808, 815 (Iowa 1994) (citing Guyton v. Irving Jensen Co., 373 N.W.2d 101, 
103, 104 (Iowa 1985)). 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 24 
 
Blake was 38 years of age at the time of hearing. There is no indication in the 
record she intended to retire before reaching her mid-60s. Before the work injuries, 
Blake had a long working life ahead of her. 
Blake has sustained a functional impairment of 65 weeks (26 percent) and 12.5 
weeks (5 percent) to her right upper extremity caused by the July 24, 2019 work injury  
and one of 10 percent to her left upper extremity. The Fund is not responsible for the 
functional disability caused by either loss. Nonetheless, it is a factor that must be 
considered when determining the extent of permanent disability. 
Dr. Bansal assigned work restrictions necessitated by Blake’s right upper 
extremity injury in 2019 that the parties adopted for purposes of the full commutation in 
Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner No. 19004576.01. And neither party 
disputes their validity in this case. Further, the weight of the evidence shows that the 
permanent work restrictions assigned by Dr. Bansal in his 2025 IME report are more 
persuasive in this case as they accurately reflect the valid FCE she underwent as well 
as her ongoing symptoms. 
Blake received good grades in high school and took some accounting classes. 
But that was over a decade ago. Since then, she has started a family and worked 
manual labor jobs. In addition, the work injuries have permanently hindered her ability to 
type and use a computer, which creates a hurdle for retraining as postsecondary 
education and training, like so much of contemporary American life, has become 
intertwined with using a computer. This makes Blake’s ability to succeed at retraining 
questionable at best. 
 Blake has worked in jobs that require manual labor since high school. All of 
these positions require using one’s hands to handle materials (e.g., goods, food, parts, 
tools, money). The evidence overwhelmingly demonstrates that Blake’s current 
permanent work restrictions and physical state prevent her from returning to any of the 
positions she held before HON terminated her employment. 
That termination also informs the analysis of the extent of Blake’s permanent 
disability.  
Another important factor in the consideration of permanent and total 
disability cases is the employer's ability to retain the injured worker with an 
offer of suitable work. The refusal or inability of the employer to return a 
claimant to work in any capacity is, by itself, significant evidence of a lack 
of employability. Clinton v. All-American Homes, File No. 5032603 (App. 
April 17, 2013); Western v. Putco Inc., File Nos. 5005190 /5005191 (App. 
July 29, 2005); Pierson v. O'Bryan Brothers, File No. 951206 (App. Jan. 
20, 1995); Meeks v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., File No. 876894 (App. 
Jan. 22, 1993); see also Larson, Workers' Compensation Law, Section 
57.61, pps. 10-164.90-95; Sunbeam Corp. v. Bates, 271 Ark 385, 609 
S.W.2d 102 (1980); Army & Air Force Exchange Service v. Neuman, 278 
F.Supp. 865 (W.D. La 1967); Leonardo v. Uncas Manufacturing Co., 77 
R.I. 245, 75 A.2d 188 (1950). An employer knows the demands that are 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 25 
 
placed on its workforce. Its determination that the worker is too disabled 
for it to employ is entitled to considerable weight. If the employer in whose 
employ the disability occurred is unwilling or unable to accommodate the 
disability, there is no reason to expect some other employer to have more 
incentive to do so. 
McNitt v. Nordstrom, Inc., Rehearing Decision Re Demeanor, Iowa Workers’ Comp. 
Comm’r No. 5065697, 2020 WL 4342758, at *3 (Jul. 20, 2020) (aff’d and adopted as 
final agency decision, 2020 WL 4747495 (App. Aug. 7, 2020)). 
HON was able to accommodate Blake’s permanent work restrictions resulting 
from the July 24, 2019 work injury to her right upper extremity. Blake was able to return 
to her position of Assembler II, where she worked until the stipulated August 9, 2023 
work injury to her left upper extremity. After Blake received permanent work restrictions 
necessitated by that injury, HON determined that it could no accommodate her 
combined work restrictions and discharged her without finding another position within 
those restrictions.  
HON’s decision to discharge Blake because of her permanent work restrictions is 
given substantial weight. It demonstrates that the combined effect of her two qualifying 
losses in this case is significantly more limiting on Blake’s earning capacity than the 
work restrictions after her July 24, 2019 work injury. This is further reinforced by Blake’s 
credible testimony regarding her ongoing symptoms and complaints, which limit her in a 
wide variety of ADL. 
Blake is motivated to work. She has performed a good faith job search since her 
termination by HON. Blake has participated in some interviews but has not received a 
job offer—she compellingly testified she thought it was because of her permanent work 
restrictions. Moreover, Blake responded to Miller’s vocational report by following up with 
each of the listed putative employers only to have no luck in even getting a call back. 
This makes Davis’s opinion on Blake’s access to the labor market most compelling. 
Blake has satisfied her burden of proof on the question of permanent disability. 
The weight of the evidence shows that the two qualifying losses in this case have 
caused her to sustain permanent and total disability. The Fund is therefore responsible 
for paying Blake benefits for her PTD under section 85.64(1).  
b .  
N u m b e r  o f  We e k s  R e p r e s e n t i n g  F i r s t  Q u a l i f y i n g  
L o s s  
As discussed in greater detail above, the record shows that Blake sustained a 
loss to her right arm caused by a July 24, 2019 work injury. In Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner No. 19004576.01, the Commissioner approved an 
agreement for settlement between Blake and HON in which the parties agreed that the 
July 24, 2019 work injury to Blake’s right upper extremity caused her to sustain a 27 
percent loss of use to that body part for which HON paid 67.5 weeks of compensation in 
the form of PPD benefits under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(m). The record shows 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 26 
 
Blake sustained a first qualifying loss to her right arm of 27 percent under section 
85.64(1).  
That loss also happened to be the second qualifying loss for purposes of Fund 
benefits in Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner No. 19004576.01. The 
Commissioner approved a full commutation of Blake’s Fund benefits after the parties 
agreed she sustained a first qualifying loss on April 11, 2017 of 2 percent and industrial 
disability of 38.114 percent. This entitled her to 190.57 weeks of Fund benefits, minus 
an agreed-upon credit of 82 weeks, for a payment equaling 108.07 weeks of PPD 
benefits for lost earning capacity as “the remainder of such compensation as would be 
payable for the degree of permanent disability involved” from the first and second 
qualifying losses under section 85.64(1). 
The Fund argues that under section 85.64(1), it is entitled to a credit for the 
entirety of the disability benefits it paid to Blake for the lost earning capacity she 
sustained from the August 11, 2017 and July 24, 2019 qualifying losses. For the 
reasons discussed below, the text of section 85.64(1) does not support the Fund’s 
position.  
The term “disability” covers all types set forth in the IWCA: temporary disability 
under section 85.33; permanent partial disability (PPD) under section 85.34(2); and 
permanent total disability (PTD) under section 85.34(3). PPD under section 85.34(2) 
takes two forms: functional and lost earning capacity. See Anderson, 4 N.W.3d at 682–
83. Section 85.34(2) provides for PPD to be paid for the “[f]or the loss of . . .” a body 
part listed in paragraphs “a” through “u,” which has long been interpreted to be limited to 
the functional disability caused by a work injury. Id. “Loss of the use of a scheduled 
member is equivalent to the loss of that member.” Floyd v. Quaker Oats, 646 N.W.2d 
105, 109 (Iowa 2002) (citing Moses v. Nat’l Union C.M. Co., 194 Iowa 819, 822, 184 
N.W. 746, 747 (1921)).  
And under section 85.34(2)(v) PPD “other than those described or referred to in 
paragraphs ‘a’ through ‘u’” is compensated based on “the number of weeks in relation to 
five hundred weeks as the reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the 
disability bears in relation to the earning capacity that the employee possessed when 
the injury occurred.” Such unscheduled disability is to the body as a whole. Floyd, 646 
N.W.2d at 109. Iowa has long used the industrial disability framework for the 
determination of lost earning capacity. See Anderson, 4 N.W.3d at 682–83.   
The legislature drafted the Second Injury Compensation Act to state “an 
employee who has previously lost, or lost the use of, one hand, one arm, one foot, one 
leg, or one eye” becomes eligible for Fund benefits after the employee “becomes 
permanently disabled by a compensable injury which has resulted in the loss of or loss 
of use of another such member or organ.” See 1945 Iowa Acts ch. 81, § 2 (now codified 
at Iowa Code § 85.64(1)). The legislature thus employed language to define the 
contours of Fund benefits that is reflective of the “loss of” an enumerated body part 
structure and language of the statutory schedule, which the Iowa Supreme Court had 
interpreted for over 20 years to mean functional disability at the time of its enactment. 
Floyd, 646 N.W.2d at 109 (citing Moses, 194 Iowa at 822, 184 N.W. at 747). And while 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 27 
 
the legislature has amended the statute since 1945 to liberalize it, see 1951 Iowa Acts 
ch. 59, § 6, it has not seen fit to change the language defining what qualifies as a first 
qualifying loss in the approximately 80 years since its enactment. Compare 1945 Iowa 
Acts ch. 81, § 2, with Iowa Code § 85.64(1). 
Moreover, section 85.64(1) contains the “previously lost, or lost the use of one 
hand, one arm, one foot, one leg, or one eye” language describing the first qualifying 
loss in the first sentence, which is echoed later in the statute, with the text dictating that 
an employee shall receive Fund benefits “after first deducting from the remainder the 
compensable value of the previously lost member or organ.” Iowa Code § 85.64(1) 
(emphasis added). There is no reference to “lost earning capacity,” “industrial disability,” 
or similar language in the statute. Id. The legislature’s decision to codify the language it 
did without including any reference to lost earning capacity is telling because it has 
demonstrated that it knows how to use language to describe lost earning capacity in a 
workers’ compensation statute when it intends to do so: Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) 
provides for PPD benefits based on “the reduction in the employee’s earning capacity 
caused by the disability bears in relation to the earning capacity that the employee 
possessed when the injury occurred.” The choice to explicitly follow the language 
“previously lost, or lost the use of one hand, one arm, one foot, one leg, or one eye” in 
the first sentence followed by “previously lost member or organ” in the second sentence 
description of the deduction—with no mention of “lost earning capacity” or “industrial 
disability”—strongly supports reading the statute to limit the deduction to the functional 
disability to the qualifying body part, not industrial disability. See Chandler v. Iowa Dep’t 
of Corr., 17 N.W.3d 645, 648 (Iowa 2025). 
The use of “disability” in section 85.64(1) provides additional reinforcement to this 
reading. The legislature chose to codify “degree of disability which would have resulted 
from the latter injury if there had been no preexisting disability” when defining the 
bounds of the employer’s liability in Fund cases and describes the Fund’s liability as 
“the remainder of such compensation as would be payable for the degree of permanent 
disability involved.” Iowa Code § 85.64(1) (emphasis added). Had the legislature 
intended the first qualifying loss deduction under the statute to be for more than the 
functional loss of a listed body part, it would have used “degree of permanent disability” 
or “degree of disability” when describing the first qualifying loss instead of “previously 
lost, or lost the use of, one hand, one arm, one foot, one leg, or one eye” and 
“previously lost member or organ.” 
This interpretation is further supported by Iowa Supreme Court precedent. In 
Braden, the court held, “where both injuries are scheduled, that is, neither is itself an 
injury to the body as a whole, the Fund is liable for the entire amount of the industrial 
disability minus the two scheduled amounts.” Braden, 459 N.W.2d at 471. And in 
Gregory, the first qualifying loss was to the hand with injuries extending to the body as a 
whole, making the disability to the whole body and industrial in nature, and for which the 
parties entered into a settlement. 777 N.W.2d at 396–97, 400. The court reasoned “the 
fact that the physical impairment of Gregory's left hand was presumably considered by 
the parties when they negotiated a compromise special case settlement of Gregory's 
claim for the 2000 injury will not impede the calculation of the Fund's credit for the 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 28 
 
compensable value of the partial loss of that enumerated member (two percent).” Id. at 
400. Thus, unlike in Strable, where the employer’s liability for “the degree of disability 
which would have resulted from the latter injury if there had been no preexisting 
disability” under section 85.64(1) was held to include the lost earning capacity caused 
by the sequelae that spilled over into the whole body, 14 N.W.3d at 749–50, Gregory 
holds that “the compensable value of the previously lost member or organ” that is 
deducted as the Fund’s credit for a first qualifying loss is based on the functional 
disability to the scheduled member, not the lost earning capacity for which the claimant 
was compensated since the injury caused a loss to the whole body in addition to the 
scheduled member, 777 N.W.2d at 400. 
For these reasons, the second step under Strable of subtracting the number of 
weeks representing the first qualifying loss references the functional loss of a qualifying 
body part or organ, not lost earning capacity. In Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner No. 19004576.01, HON and Blake entered into an agreement for 
settlement identifying that amount as 27 percent functional impairment or 67.5 weeks of 
PPD benefits. But the Fund is not bound by the settlement between Blake and HON 
because it was not a party to it. See Strable, 14 N.W.3d at 749 (citing Gregory v. 
Second Injury Fund of Iowa, 777 N.W.2d 395, 400 (Iowa 2010), and Delaney v. Second 
Injury Fund of Iowa, 6 N.W.3d 714, 718 (Iowa 2024)). Therefore, the full commutation in 
that case controls because it includes the agreement between Blake and HON that she 
sustained a loss or loss of use of her right arm equivalent to 65 weeks (26 percent) and 
12.5 weeks (5 percent) caused by the July 24, 2019 work injury.  
Iowa Code section 85.64(1) requires the agency to determine “the compensable 
value of the previously lost member or organ.” The statutory text expressly confines this 
determination to the functional disability the claimant sustained to the lost member or 
organ. In this case, Blake’s previous loss to her right arm is the equivalent of 38.5 
weeks of PPD benefits for functional disability under the terms of the full commutation in 
No. 19004576.01.  
c .  
D i s c r e t e  D i s a b i l i t y  A s s o c i a t e d  W i t h  S e c o n d  
Q u a l i f y i n g  L o s s  
“[T]he Second Injury Fund’s obligation cannot be assessed until the employer’s 
liability is fixed.” Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467, 473 (Iowa 1990). “[T]he employer shall be 
liable only for the degree of disability which would have resulted from the latter injury if 
there had been no preexisting disability.” Iowa Code § 85.64(1). The employer’s liability 
extends to all types of disability caused by the second qualifying loss.  
As found above, Blake has become “permanently disabled by a compensable 
injury which has resulted in the loss of or loss of use of” her left arm. Id. The parties 
stipulated Blake sustained a work injury to her left upper extremity on August 9, 2023. 
The weight of the evidence establishes Blake sustained a 10 percent functional 
impairment resulting from the stipulated August 9, 2023 work injury. HON is responsible 
for paying to Blake 25 weeks of PPD benefits under section 85.34(2)(m). 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 29 
 
d .  
E n t i t l e m e n t  t o  F u n d  B e n e f i t s  
The Fund contends it is entitled to apportionment of any permanency benefits to 
which Blake is entitled under Iowa Code section 85.34(7). Alternatively, they argue 
section 85.64(2) entitles the Fund to a credit against any such benefits. The 
undersigned finds these arguments unpersuasive.  
The Fund argues that it is entitled to apportionment under Iowa Code section 
85.34(7) because it previously paid industrial disability benefits to Blake under the full 
commutation in No. 19004576.01. But the plain language of the text does not apply to 
the Fund, only the employer. The legislature codified the following in 2017: 
Successive disabilities. An employer is liable for compensating only that 
portion of an employee’s disability that arises out of and in the course of 
the employee’s employment with the employer and that relates to the 
injury that serves as the basis for the employee’s claim for compensation 
under chapter 10A, subchapter III, this chapter, or chapter 85A or 85B. An 
employer is not liable for compensating an employee’s preexisting 
disability that arose out of and in the course of employment from a prior 
injury with the employer, to the extent that the employee’s preexisting 
disability has already been compensated under chapter 10A, subchapter 
II, this chapter, or chapter 85A or 85B. An employer is not liable for 
compensating an employee’s preexisting disability that arose out of and in 
the course of employment with a different employer or from causes 
unrelated to employment. 
Iowa Code § 85.34(7).  
The statute uses “An employer . . .” to start each of its three sentences. Id. The 
statutory text contains no reference to the Fund. See id. It is a long-standing principle of 
statutory construction that “[a] statute’s meaning ‘is expressed by omission as well as by 
inclusion, and the express mention of one thing implies the exclusion of others not so 
mentioned.’” Chandler, 17 N.W.3d at 648. Applying this principle to section 85.34(7), the 
inclusion of only “employer” in the codified text implies the exclusion of the Fund, which 
is not so mentioned. Therefore, the Fund is not entitled to apportionment under section 
85.34(7). 
In the alternative, the Fund asserts that it is entitled to a credit under Iowa Code 
section 85.64(2), which provides: 
Any benefits received by any such employee, or to which the employee 
may be entitled, by reason of such increased disability from any state or 
federal fund or agency, to which the employee has not directly contributed, 
shall be regarded as a credit to any award made against the second injury 
fund. 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 30 
 
The Fund’s position hinges on whether “[a]ny benefits received by any such employee 
. . . by reason of such increased disability” includes previously paid industrial disability 
benefits as part of an earlier Fund claim. The text cannot be stretched in such a way. 
Initially, the legislature enacted what is now section 85.64 as two paragraphs 
without subsection numbering. See 1945 In 2014, the legislature passed an act “relating 
to nonsubstantive code corrections” that added the subsection numbering to section 
85.64 without making any substantive changes. 2014 Iowa Acts ch. 1026, § 18. 
Therefore, the natural reading of subsection 2 is in reference to subsection 1.  
Doing so makes clear the “such increased disability” language in subsection 2 is 
plainly in reference to the cumulative increased disability resulting from the first and 
second qualifying losses described in subsection 1 and for which the Fund was created 
to pay benefits. As the court held in Strable, “Section 85.64 . . . creates the Fund to 
cover the difference in the employee’s total resulting disability . . . .” 14 N.W.3d at 744; 
see also Harry W. Dahl, The Iowa Second Injury Fund—Time for Change, 39 Drake 
L.Rev. 101, 108 (1989) (“The employer pays only for an injury which occurs while the 
worker is in his employment, and the fund pays the balance of benefits allowed for the 
combined effect of the first disability and the second injury.”). 
Further, subsection 2 describes a “credit to any award made against the second 
injury fund” of benefits for the “increased disability” caused by the first and second 
qualifying losses described in subsection 1. Iowa Code § 85.64. If the Fund receives a 
credit under subsection 2 for the increased disability described in subsection 1, the 
Fund would receive a credit for 100 percent of the disability the Fund is required to pay 
benefits for under subsection 1. Such an interpretation would effectively read subsection 
1 out of the IWCA, a result that would be counter to the presumption that the legislature, 
in enacting section 85.64, intended the entire statute to be effective. See Iowa Code 
§ 4.4(2). Therefore, the undersigned is not persuaded by the Fund’s argument 
regarding how subsections 1 and 2 of section 85.64 interact. 
The injured employee in Strable did not sustain a permanent and total disability 
from the two qualifying losses. This meant the court had no reason to consider the 
interplay between Iowa Code section 85.34(3) and 85.64(1) in that case. Therefore, the 
analysis here must diverge from that in Strable and apply agency precedent on this 
question. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(3) governs permanent total disability (PTD). Section 
85.34(3)(a) directs that weekly PTD benefits are “payable until the employee is no 
longer permanently and totally disabled.” And section 85.34(3)(b) provides: 
Such compensation shall be in addition to the benefits provided in 
sections 85.27 and 85.28. No compensation shall be payable under this 
subsection for any injury for which compensation is payable under 
subsection 2 of this section. In the event compensation has been paid to 
any person under any provision of this chapter, chapter 85A, or chapter 
85B for an injury producing a permanent disability, any such amounts so 
paid shall be deducted from the total amount of compensation payable for 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 31 
 
permanent total disability. An employee shall not receive compensation for 
permanent partial disability if the employee is receiving compensation for 
permanent total disability. 
A claimant must sustain functional disability under the statutory schedule in Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2) to a body part listed in section 85.64(1) in order to establish 
second qualifying loss as part of a viable claim for Fund benefits. See Second Inj. Fund 
of Iowa v. George, 737 N.W.2d 141, 146 (Iowa 2007). A claimant is entitled to PPD 
benefits for industrial disability under section 85.34(2)(v) that is the combined result of 
the two qualifying losses under section 85.64(1). See Second Inj. Fund of Iowa v. 
Shank, 516 N.W.2d 808, 813 (Iowa 1994). And if the two qualifying losses cause 
permanent total disability, then section 85.34(3) applies. See id. at 814–15. Therefore, 
section 85.34(3)(b) governs in cases involving successive Fund claims where the 
second qualifying loss in the first claim—for which the claimant receives payment of 
Fund benefits for lost earning capacity under section 85.34(2)(v)—constitutes the first 
qualifying loss in the second claim—for which the claimant is again entitled to payment 
of Fund benefits, this time for PTD under section 85.34(3). 
In such cases, agency precedent holds that all PPD benefits paid for the first and 
second qualifying losses “are considered in lieu of” the PTD benefits the Fund must pay. 
Buser v. Second Inj. Fund of Iowa, Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r No. 5021259, 2012 
WL 12960656, at *1 (App. Jul. 18, 2012); see also Rakanovic v. Tyson Foods, Inc. & 
Second Inj. Fund of Iowa, Iowa Workers’ Comp. Comm’r Nos. 5055533 & 5055534, 
2019 WL 1512724, at *9–*10 (App. Mar. 29, 2019). The Fund is therefore entitled to a 
credit for the number of weeks equaling the total amount of PPD benefits paid for both 
qualifying losses. Id.; see also Rakanovic, 2019 WL 1512724, at *10. Under agency 
precedent, the combined credit is applied from the date on which the claimant reached 
MMI from the work injury causing the second qualifying loss. See id.; see also 
Rakanovic, 2019 WL 1512724, at *10. The payment of Fund benefits for PTD 
commences after the final week of the combined credit for PPD benefits. See id.; see 
also Rakanovic, 2019 WL 1512724, at *10. 
Applying this rule here: The 25 weeks of PPD benefits for which HON is liable for 
the second qualifying loss is combined with the 190.57 weeks of PPD benefits the Fund 
agreed to pay under the full commutation to which the parties agreed in No. 
19004576.01. Adding 25 and 190.57 together equals 215.57 weeks. Under agency 
caselaw, the commencement date of Fund benefits in this case is 215.57 weeks from 
September 11, 2024, the date on which Blake reached MMI from the work injury that 
caused the second qualifying loss. See id.; see also Rakanovic, 2019 WL 1512724, at 
*10. This makes the commencement date of Fund benefits for Blake’s PTD October 29, 
2028. 
3 .  
R a t e  
The parties stipulated Blake’s gross earnings on the stipulated injury date were 
$845.00 per week. They also stipulated she was single and entitled to two exemptions 
at the time. Based on the parties’ stipulations and the applicable ratebook spreadsheet 
issued by the agency, Blake’s workers’ compensation rate is $561.69 dollars per week. 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 32 
 
B .  
A l t e r n a t e  C a r e  
For all compensable injuries under Iowa Code chapter 85 or 85A, the employer 
must “furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, 
physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies therefor 
and shall allow reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for such 
services.” Iowa Code § 85.27(1). Here, the evidentiary record shows HON has fulfilled 
its duty under section 85.27. The parties identified alternate care in the hearing report 
as a disputed issue and Blake argued in her post-hearing brief for the authorization of 
the additional care recommended by Dr. Bansal in his 2025 IME report, but there is an 
insufficient basis in the record from which to conclude Blake notified HON of her 
dissatisfaction with the lack of care for her ongoing symptoms, as required under 
section 85.27(4), so her request for alternate care is denied at this time. 
C .  
I M E  
Iowa Code section 85.39 governs examinations of injured employees to 
determine the extent of permanent impairment or disability caused by a work injury. 
Under subsection 1, the employer has the right to have a doctor of the employer’s 
choice examine the employee that the employee must attend or risk disqualification of 
benefits for the period of refusal. Id. An opinion on causation or the extent of disability 
by a doctor retained by the employer triggers the injured employee's right to an IME 
under subsection 2. See Mid American Const. LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838, 847–48 
(Iowa 2024). 
“In subsection 2, the legislature leveled the playing field between the employer 
and the employee.” Id. at 848. “The statutory process balances the competing interests 
of the employer and employee and permits the employee to obtain an independent 
medical examination at the employer's expense.” Des Moines Area Reg'l Transit Auth. 
v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 844 (Iowa 2015). Subsection 2 entitles the employee to 
receive an examination if the employee believes the evaluation made by the employer's 
physician was too low. Id. at 844. The employee's own examination “is known as an 
IME because the examination is independent of the examination done by the physician 
selected by the employer.” Id. at 843–44. 
Subsection 2 further provides, “A determination of the reasonableness of a fee 
for an examination . . . shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider 
to perform an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is conducted.” 
Under the Iowa Supreme Court's holding in Sandlin, “The reasonableness of the fees 
will be analyzed based on what physicians in that area typically charge to perform the 
impairment rating examination—which may include ‘the costs of reviewing medical 
records, conducting a physical examination, opining on causation, assessing permanent 
impairment, assigning restrictions, and addressing further treatment recommendations.”’ 
2 N.W.3d at 851-52 (quoting Turner v. NCI Bldg. Sys., Inc., Iowa Workers' Comp. 
Comm'r No. 1652235.01, 2022 WL 1787301, at *26 (Feb. 24, 2022)). 
The court further held that this analysis under the statute “effectively necessitates 
fact-finding by the commissioner on the fees typically charged in the local area where 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 33 
 
the examination is performed. Parties may offer evidence of the fees typically charged 
in that locality to support or challenge the fee charged in a particular case.” Id. at 849. 
The court concluded “many IMEs come before the agency, which allows the 
[commissioner] to use agency experience and expertise to conclude that [the 
physician's] charges are in line with those of an occupational medicine doctor with a 
practice in the . . . [local] area performing an evaluation of permanent impairment in 
accordance with the [AMA] Guides.” Id. (quoting Nguyen v. Hy-Vee, Inc., Iowa Workers' 
Comp. Comm'r No. 21003118.03, 2023 WL 7128682, at *32 (Arb. Oct. 20, 2023)). 
The introductory chapter of the Guides states the following with respect to the 
process it details for evaluating permanent impairment or disability: 
Generally, the physician evaluates all available information and provides 
as comprehensive a medical picture of the patient as possible, addressing 
the components listed in the Report of Medical Evaluation form discussed 
in Chapter 2. A complete impairment evaluation provides valuable 
information beyond an impairment percentage, and it includes a 
discussion about the person's abilities and limitations, including the ability 
to perform common activities listed in Table 1-2. Combining the medical 
and nonmedical information, and including detailed information about 
essential work activities, if requested, is a basis for improved 
understanding of the degree to which the impairment may affect the 
individual's work ability. 
Guides, § 1.12, p. 15. 
Chapter 2, “Practical Application of the Guides,” provides the following with 
respect to the examiners' roles and responsibilities: 
Full and complete reporting provides the best opportunity for physicians to 
explain health status and consequences to patients, other medical 
professionals, and other interested parties such as claims examiners and 
attorneys. Thorough documentation of medical findings and their impact 
will also ensure that reporting is fair and consistent and that individuals 
have the information needed to pursue any benefits to which they are 
entitled. 
Id., § 2.3, p. 18. Moreover, the Guides state, “A clear, accurate, and complete report is 
essential to support a rating of permanent impairment.” Id., § 2.6, p. 21. 
To that end, the Guides lay out a list of elements that “should be included in all 
impairment evaluation reports.” Id. (emphasis in original). The first is a narrative history 
of medical condition(s) consisting of 
the onset and course of the condition, symptoms, findings on previous 
examination(s), treatments, and responses to treatment, including adverse 
effects. Include information that may be relevant to onset, such as an 
occupational exposure or injury. Historical information should refer to any 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 34 
 
relevant investigations. Include a detailed list of prior evaluations in the 
clinical data section. 
Id., § 2.6a.1, p. 21. 
In addition, the Guides direct a physician to “[a]ssess current clinical status, 
including current symptoms, review of symptoms, physical examination, and a list of 
contemplated treatment, rehabilitation, and any anticipated reevaluation.” Id., § 2.6a.3, 
p. 21. They also direct inclusion of discussion of diagnostic study results and 
outstanding pertinent diagnostic studies, whether the injured employee is at MMI, and 
diagnoses and impairments. Id., §§ 2.6a.2-2.6a.7, pp. 21-22. Moreover, the Guides 
state a report should discuss impairment rating criteria, prognosis, residual function, and 
limitations; calculation of the impairment rating; and discussion of how the impairment 
rating was calculated. Id., §§ 2.6a.8, 2.6b, 2.6c. p. 22. 
The Guides also state that other elements may be included in an impairment 
evaluation that include “a work history with detailed, chronological description of work 
activities, specific type and duration of work performed, materials used in the workplace, 
any temporal associations with the medical condition and work, frequency, intensity and 
duration of exposure and activities, and any protective measures” as well as “discussion 
of causation and apportionment.” Id., §§ 2.6a.2, 2.6a.7, pp. 21-22. As discussed above, 
an Iowa Court of Appeals panel has opined that causation is effectively a zero percent 
impairment rating and therefore opinions on causation are reimbursable and the agency 
has followed this holding. 
The Guides provide a “Sample Report for Permanent Medical Impairment” for 
physicians to follow to help ensure they adhere to the process in the Guides. Id., pp. 23-
24. The sample includes a section entitled “Identifiers” with information about the injured 
employee and examination. Id., p. 23. The next section is entitled, “Introduction,” and 
consists of, “Purpose (impairment or IME evaluation, personal injury, workers' 
compensation) and procedures (who performed the exam, patient consent, location of 
examination).” Id. Following that is the “Narrative history,” which includes, “Chief 
complaints, history of injury or illness, occupational history, past medical history, family 
history, social history, [and] review of symptoms.” Id. After that is the section entitled, 
“Medical record review,” which is described as, “Chronology of medical evaluation, 
diagnostic studies, and treatment for the injury or illness.” Id. 
Next is a section detailing the physician's physical examination. Id. After that, a 
section discussing diagnostic studies. Id., p. 24. Then the section, ““Diagnoses and 
Impairments,” with the note, “If requested, discuss work relatedness, causation, 
apportionment, restrictions, accommodations, assistive devices.” Id. 
The report then has a section entitled, “Impairment Rating Criteria,” which 
includes, “MMI residual function, limitations of activities of daily living, [and] prognosis.” 
Id. This is followed by the “Impairment Rating and Rationale,” which includes the body 
part or system being rated, the chapter number of the Guides used, the table number of 
the Guides used, the percentage impairment of the whole person, and “[d]iscussion of 
rationale of impairment rating and any possible inconsistencies in the examination.” Id. 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 35 
 
The report template concludes with a section entitled, “Recommendations,” 
which is for, “Further diagnostic or therapeutic follow-up care.” Id. Then there is a 
section labeled, “Work ability, work restrictions.” Id. This final section includes the 
explanatory note, “If requested, review abilities and limitations in reference to essential 
job activities.” Id. 
Unsurprisingly, every section of the “Sample Report for Permanent Medical 
Impairment” in the Guides is relevant to the determination of permanent disability or 
impairment in workers' compensation cases before the agency. As discussed above, 
the rationale for directing a physician to write a report contained in the Guides is 
accurate: 
Full and complete reporting provides the best opportunity for physicians to 
explain health status and consequences to patients, other medical 
professionals, and other interested parties such as claims examiners and 
attorneys. Thorough documentation of medical findings and their impact 
will also ensure that reporting is fair and consistent and that individuals 
have the information needed to pursue any benefits to which they are 
entitled. 
Id., § 2.3, p. 18. “A clear, accurate, and complete report is essential to support a rating 
of permanent impairment.” Id., § 2.6, p. 21. 
The Guides reflect what agency experience and expertise reinforces: The IME 
report is important in the determination of an employee's entitlement to workers' 
compensation benefits, especially in contested cases before the agency. The AMA has 
established criteria in the Guides so that doctors are providing the information injured 
workers, employers, insurance carriers, and tribunals such as the agency need to 
equitably determine an individual's entitlement to workers' compensation benefits based 
on the injury they sustained and the disability the injury has caused. Presumably, this is 
why the legislature mandated use of the Guides when determining permanent 
impairment. Consequently, this mandate cannot be ignored when determining what is 
reimbursable as a reasonable cost under section 85.39(2). The costs that stem from a 
physician following the Guides in accordance with the requirement in section 85.34(2)(x) 
when performing an IME under section 85.39(2) are therefore reasonable. 
Here, Blake obtained an IME from Dr. Bansal regarding both the stipulated work 
injury of August 9, 2023, and the work injury to her right arm on July 24, 2019. A review 
of Dr. Bansal’s 2025 IME report indicates the majority of the examination and report was 
devoted to the August 9, 2023 work injury, its care, and its impact on her functional 
capacity. Nonetheless, some of the IME was devoted to the earlier injury for purposes of 
Fund benefits, and HON is not liable for that portion of Dr. Bansal’s work. A reduction of 
40 percent of Dr. Bansal’s fee for the IME that resulted in his 2025 IME report is 
therefore appropriate. 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 36 
 
VI. 
ORDER 
Based on the above findings of fact and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) HON shall pay to Blake 25 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits at 
the rate of five hundred sixty-one and 69/100 dollars ($561.69) per week from 
the commencement date of September 11, 2024, subject to the stipulated 
credit. 
2) The Fund shall pay to Blake weekly benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.64 for the duration of the permanent and total disability, commencing on 
October 29, 2028. 
3) The defendants shall pay any accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
4) The defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein 
as set forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
5) The defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by Iowa 
Administrative Code rule 876—3.1(2). 
6) HON shall pay to Blake the amount equal to 60 percent of the reasonable 
fees relating to Dr. Bansal’s 2024 IME that resulted in the 2025 IME report. 
7) HON shall pay to Blake one hundred and 00/100 dollars ($100.00) for the 
cost of the filing fee. 
Signed and filed this 26th day of January, 2026. 
 
 
 
BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
Served via the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES): 
Sejla Numic, Attorney for Claimant 
Eric J. Loney, Attorney for Claimant 
Edward J. Rose, Attorney for HON 
Meredith C. Cooney, Attorney for the Fund 
 
 
 
 

BLAKE V. THE HON COMPANY/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 37 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
