Case Number: 1662388.02
Case Title:  BARBER JR, VICTOR V. HYPRO, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Barber Victor-1662388.02M.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
VICTOR BARBER, JR., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                    File No. 1662388.02 
HYPRO, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                 ALTERNATE MEDICAL 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                      CARE DECISION 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ARGENT/WEST BEND MUTUAL 
  : 
INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :                 HEAD NOTE NO:  2701 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
This is a contested case proceeding under Iowa Code chapters 85 and 17A.  
Claimant, Victor Barber, Jr., invokes the expedited procedure of rule 876 IAC 4.48.  
Claimant appeared personally and through his attorney, Charles Showalter.  
Defendants appeared through their attorney, Nathan McConkey. 
The alternate medical care claim came on for hearing on September 30, 2020.  
The proceedings were digitally recorded.  That recording constitutes the official record 
of this proceeding.  Pursuant to the Commissioner’s February 16, 2015 Order, the 
undersigned has been delegated authority to issue a final agency decision in this 
alternate medical care proceeding.  Therefore, this ruling is designated final agency 
action, and any appeal of the decision would be to the Iowa District Court pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 17A. 
The evidentiary record consists of claimant’s exhibits 1-3, consisting of nine 
pages. Defendants introduced exhibit A, which consists of four pages.  No witnesses 
were called to testify.  However, counsel offered cogent, well-articulated arguments on 
behalf of their clients, which were beneficial to the undersigned.  Counsel also both filed 
insightful hearing briefs prior to the commencement of the hearing.  
ISSUE 
The issue presented for resolution is whether the claimant is entitled to alternate 
medical care.  Claimant seeks an order compelling defendants to authorize and pay for 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Sep-30  14:16:07     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BARBER V. HYPRO, INC. 
Page 2 
a functional capacity evaluation ordered by his authorized treating surgeon, Rene F. 
Recinos, M.D.   
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned having considered all the evidence in the record finds: 
Most of the facts related to this alternate medical care proceeding are not 
significantly disputed.  All parties concur that Dr. Recinos is an authorized treating 
physician for claimant’s left arm injury.  All parties concur that Dr. Recinos 
recommended a functional capacity evaluation.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 1) 
The main factual dispute between the parties is whether the recommended 
functional capacity evaluation is for purposes of medical treatment or solely for 
purposes of rendering a permanent impairment rating.  Claimant contends that the 
recommendation made by Dr. Recinos for a functional capacity evaluation should be 
authorized because he is the authorized medical provider.  Claimant further contends 
that the functional capacity evaluation is for purposes of treatment to establish 
necessary permanent physical restrictions resulting from the injury.   
Defendants contend that the functional capacity evaluation is not medically 
necessary in this circumstance, that the functional capacity evaluation is solely for 
purposes of rendering a permanent impairment rating, and that the functional capacity 
evaluation is not for purposes of any ongoing treatment. Defendants further contend 
that a functional capacity evaluation is an unreasonable, unnecessary and irrelevant 
expense and test because the results cannot be used to assess claimant’s permanent 
functional impairment under a statutory change that occurred in 2017. 
Mr. Barber no longer works for this employer.  He now works for Menards driving 
a forklift and lifting bags of mulch and rocks.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, page 1)  Claimant is 
working without medical restrictions for Menards, but Dr. Recinos’ records indicate that 
claimant continues to report persistent and daily pain in the left wrist with activity and 
grip weakness as well.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 1)  Dr. Recinos’ evaluation on July 15, 
2020 also demonstrated some edema in the left wrist as well as pain with certain 
testing.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 2) 
Prior to July 15, 2020, Dr. Recinos released Mr. Barber to return to work without 
a weight lifting limitation and only imposed limitations of claimant’s use of a screw gun 
or torque type tools with the left hand.  However, at his re-evaluation on July 15, 2020, 
Dr. Recinos noted claimant’s ongoing symptoms and examination findings stating, “I 
told him that it is likely that he will have to have some degree of lifting restrictions and 
further activity restrictions.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 2)  Dr. Recinos further indicates: 
We discussed treatment options and I recommended a functional capacity 
evaluation test to determine what his capabilities and limitations are.  As of 
right now I will not change his restrictions[,] however[,] I told him that I 

BARBER V. HYPRO, INC. 
Page 3 
would like to get the FCE before I issue a formal impairment rating, 
because I need that information in order to determine whether or not he 
has permanent activity restrictions that I will place him under. 
(Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 3) 
Claimant interprets Dr. Recinos’ recommendation as a treatment 
recommendation to establish permanent work restrictions.  Defendants assert that the 
functional capacity evaluation is simply requested as part of the impairment evaluation.  
Claimant responds to this argument, noting that Dr. Recinos already obtained an 
occupational therapy evaluation to document claimant’s grip strength, range of motion, 
and sensation of the left hand.  (Claimant’s Ex. 3)  Therefore, claimant urges that the 
functional capacity evaluation is not for purposes of rendering the impairment rating but 
necessary and required to complete Dr. Recinos’ treatment and establish permanent 
work restrictions. 
I find that Dr. Recinos’ recommendation to obtain a functional capacity evaluation 
is not made for purposes of determining permanent impairment or permanent disability.  
Rather, Dr. Recinos is recommending the functional capacity evaluation as a diagnostic 
test to assist in setting reasonable and safe permanent work restrictions for the 
claimant.  The recommendation for the functional capacity evaluation is not driven by or 
necessarily even related to the underlying arbitration proceeding or the determination of 
permanent impairment.  Instead, it is recommended in response to the July 15, 2020, 
examination findings of edema, as well as reports of ongoing pain and strength issues 
by Mr. Barber.  
Accordingly, I find the functional capacity evaluation recommended by Dr. 
Recinos in this case to be a form of medical treatment.  A physician’s attempts to 
identify reasonable physical limitations following an injury are a reasonable treatment 
option.  It is certainly reasonable that a physician attempt to prevent further injury after a 
work injury has occurred.  Obtaining a functional capacity evaluation provides at least 
some objective basis for determining work restrictions moving forward.  Given 
claimant’s ongoing symptoms after Dr. Recinos’ initial release to return to work, I find 
the recommendation for a functional capacity evaluation to be reasonable, necessary, 
and appropriate under the circumstances. 
REASONING AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
At the commencement of hearing, the undersigned inquired about defendants’ 
answer and their admissions of liability.  Defendants admit liability for a left upper 
extremity injury in this case.  Claimant pled a bilateral upper extremity injury.  
Defendants are not willing or able to admit liability for the alleged right arm injury at this 
time.   
Before any benefits can be ordered, including medical benefits, compensability of 
the claim must be established, either by admission of liability or by adjudication.  The 

BARBER V. HYPRO, INC. 
Page 4 
summary provisions of Iowa Code section 85.27, as more particularly described in rule 
876 IAC 4.48, are not designed to adjudicate disputed compensability of a claim.  
The Iowa Supreme Court has held:  
We emphasize that the commissioner’s ability to decide the merits of a 
section 85.27(4) alternate medical care claim is limited to situations where 
the compensability of an injury is conceded, but the reasonableness of a 
particular course of treatment for the compensable injury is disputed. . . .  
Thus, the commissioner cannot decide the reasonableness of the 
alternate care claim without also necessarily deciding the ultimate 
disputed issue in the case:  whether or not the medical condition Barnett 
was suffering at the time of the request was a work-related injury. 
. . . . 
Once an employer takes the position in response to a claim for alternate 
medical care that the care sought is for a noncompensatory injury, the 
employer cannot assert an authorization defense in response to a 
subsequent claim by the employee for the expenses of the alternate 
medical care. 
R. R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 197-198 (Iowa 2003) (fn 2). 
Given defendants’ refusal to admit liability for a right arm injury, claimant’s 
original notice and petition for alternate medical care cannot be considered with respect 
to the right arm.  Given their denial of liability for the condition sought to be treated in 
the petition for alternate medical care, defendants lose their right to control the medical 
care claimant seeks during their period of denial and the claimant is free to choose that 
care for the right arm.  Brewer-Strong v. HNI Corp., 913 N.W.2d 235 (Iowa 2018); Bell 
Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193 (Iowa 2010).  
With respect to the left arm injury, defendants have admitted liability.  Therefore, 
it is appropriate to move forward with the alternate medical care proceeding as it 
pertains to the left arm.  Iowa Code section 85.27 sets forth the employer’s obligations 
with respect to medical care.   
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 16, 1975). 

BARBER V. HYPRO, INC. 
Page 5 
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment – and seeking alternate care – 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable.  See Iowa 
R. App. P 14(f)(5); Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995).  
Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.  Id.  The 
employer’s obligation turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability.  Id.; 
Harned v. Farmland Foods, Inc., 331 N.W.2d 98 (Iowa 1983).   
An application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because 
claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving.  Mere dissatisfaction with 
the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical 
care.  Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not 
reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the 
claimant.  Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). 
An employer’s right to select the provider of medical treatment to an injured 
worker does not include the right to determine how an injured worker should be 
diagnosed, evaluated, treated, or other matters of professional medical judgment.  
Assmann v. Blue Star Foods, File No. 866389 (Declaratory Ruling, May 19, 1988).   
The primary fighting issue involves both a factual and a legal question.  Stated 
succinctly, the legal question is whether a functional capacity evaluation is a form of 
medical treatment pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27 for which an employer may be 
obligated to pay.  If a functional capacity evaluation can be awarded as a form of 
medical treatment, the factual issue in this case is whether the recommended functional 
capacity evaluation is actually for reasonable and necessary medical treatment.  The 
agency has prior case law that supports either party’s position. 
In Crawford v. Maytag Co., File No. 5022533 (Alternate Medical Care February 
2008), another deputy commissioner held that “the functional capacity evaluation in this 
case is better suited to an independent medical evaluation under Iowa Code section 
85.39 is correct.  A functional capacity evaluation in this case is not for medical 
treatment but rather to determine the level of vocational capacity after reaching 
maximum medical improvement.”  Having reached that conclusion, this agency denied 
the alternate medical care request for a functional capacity evaluation in Crawford. 
However, in Sears v. Midwest Continental, Inc., File No. 5029555 (Alternate 
Medical Care July 2009), a deputy commissioner concluded:  
A functional capacity evaluation is a test, which can be helpful to a 
physician for an independent medical examination but also helpful in 
determining if claimant can be returned to work, or what work restrictions 
claimant needs.  
As such, the recommendation for a functional capacity evaluation is in 
fact a recommendation for further treatment. 

BARBER V. HYPRO, INC. 
Page 6 
In Sears, the deputy analyzed the purpose of the functional capacity evaluation in 
that specific case and determined that the functional capacity evaluation was “to 
determine if claimant can return to work, and if so, under what restrictions.”  Having 
made that finding, the deputy concluded, “As such, the recommendation for a functional 
capacity evaluation is in fact a recommendation for further treatment.”  Sears v. Midwest 
Continental, Inc., File No. 5029555 (Alternate Medical Care July 2009). 
The undersigned reviewed these cases in a prior alternate medical care 
proceeding.  In that case, I stated: 
Both of these cases and analyses appear to be accurate given the specific 
facts and circumstances of the cases before each of the deputy 
commissioners.  Therefore, I conclude that the determination of whether a 
functional capacity evaluation is appropriately categorized as medical 
treatment pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27 is a factually specific 
determination.  If the functional capacity evaluation is conducted for 
purposes of determining ranges of motions and other factors necessary 
for rendering a permanent impairment rating or establishing (or defending) 
a claim for permanent disability, the functional capacity evaluation is not 
likely to be considered medical treatment pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.27.  Crawford v. Maytag Co., File No. 5022533 (Alternate Medical Care 
February 2008). 
On the other hand, if the purpose of the functional capacity evaluation is to 
help the treating physician to diagnose, or quantify, claimant’s residual 
functional abilities for purposes of assisting the physician to outline 
permanent work restrictions, then the functional capacity evaluation is 
more like treatment and is compensable pursuant to Iowa Code section 
85.27.  Sears v. Midwest Continental, Inc., File No. 5029555 (Alternate 
Medical Care July 2009). 
Heitman v. Seaton Corporation, File No. 5060002 (Alternate Medical Care Decision 
September 2015). 
In this case, claimant relies upon the analysis put forth in Heitman and cites 
several other cases, both before and after Heitman in which functional capacity 
evaluations are awarded by this agency as part of an authorized physician’s treatment 
plan.  Claimant also points to an alternate medical care decision in Newcomb v. John 
Deere Davenport Works, File No. 5052805 (Alternate Medical Care Decision May 2018) 
in which another deputy commissioner stated, “Deciding what an injured person may 
safely do (or not do) … falls squarely within the definition of treatment under section 
85.27.”  Mr. Barber urges the undersigned to similarly find and conclude that the 
recommended functional capacity evaluation in this case is medical treatment and owed 
by defendants pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27. 

BARBER V. HYPRO, INC. 
Page 7 
Defendants counter this argument, noting that the undersigned indicated in the 
Heitman case that a functional capacity evaluation could be either for purposes of 
determining permanent impairment or for purposes of treatment.  Defendants note this 
is a factual issue to be determined.  However, defendants also urge that 2017 statutory 
changes to Iowa Code section 85.34(2) render the functional capacity evaluation 
irrelevant and, therefore, unnecessary and unreasonable.  
Defendants accurately point out that one of the legislative changes made in 2017 
precludes the use of lay testimony and agency expertise from being used to determine 
permanent functional impairment of a scheduled member injury such as the currently 
litigated left arm injury.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x).  Defendants point out that the 
use of a functional capacity evaluation to determine permanent work restrictions is 
irrelevant to the pending litigation before the agency and any determination of claimant’s 
permanent functional impairment of the left arm, including any determination of 
permanent impairment using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition.  (Defendants’ Ex. A)  Having accurately pointed out the 
statutory change, defendants contend that a functional capacity evaluation would be 
irrelevant for purposes of these proceedings and would be an unnecessary and 
unreasonable expense. 
Defendants’ argument is accurate in the sense that Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(x) now clearly precludes the use of lay testimony or agency expertise in 
assessing permanent functional impairment of a scheduled member injury.  The 
requested functional capacity evaluation likely has no bearing on the ultimate award of 
permanent disability in the underlying arbitration proceeding, assuming it is tried and 
stipulated to be an injury to the left arm at the time of trial.  In this sense, if the functional 
capacity evaluation is intended to be utilized as a means of challenging the permanent 
functional impairment rating or determining that impairment rating, it is likely akin to an 
independent medical evaluation and not likely for treatment purposes.  Defendants point 
out that functional capacity evaluations are expensive endeavors and presumably argue 
that awarding the evaluation unnecessarily increases litigation expenses associated 
with scheduled member injury claims. 
On the other hand, the fact that permanent work restrictions may not be relevant 
to determination of a permanent functional impairment of a scheduled member does not 
render claimant’s right to medical treatment irrelevant, unnecessary, or unreasonable.  
Iowa Code section 85.27 guarantees claimant reasonable and necessary medical 
treatment at defendants’ expense.  Whether or not a claimant is issued a brace, 
crutches, a wheelchair, or other medical appliances generally has no bearing on a 
determination of permanent functional impairment.  Yet, those medical appliances are 
not rendered irrelevant or unnecessary medical care simply because they do not have a 
bearing on permanent functional impairment.   
Quite to the contrary, those devices may be necessary to accommodate for the 
loss of functional impairment caused by the work injury and permit an injured worker to 
regain at least some function and maintain the best possible life and health he or she 

BARBER V. HYPRO, INC. 
Page 8 
can.  Most certainly, this agency would award a claimant reasonable and necessary 
medical appliances, even though they would have no impact on the ultimate award of 
permanent partial disability benefits in a scheduled member case. 
Similarly, the use of medications, creams, injections, stimulators, TENS units, or 
other medical procedures aimed at reducing, masking, or eliminating pain may have no 
impact on the ultimate permanent functional impairment or award of permanent partial 
disability benefits in a scheduled member case.  Yet, those are legitimate, reasonable, 
and necessary medical treatment options.  This agency certainly would award those 
types of treatment pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27, even though they would have 
no impact upon the ultimate permanent functional disability in a scheduled member 
case. 
Ultimately, while conceding the accuracy of defendants’ argument that the 
functional capacity evaluation may have no relevancy or impact upon the ultimate 
permanent functional disability award in the underlying arbitration case, I conclude that 
the requirements of Iowa Code section 85.27 to provide medical treatment are not 
limited to only those efforts that reduce permanent impairment or that are relevant in the 
litigation phase of a worker’s compensation claim.  I conclude that a functional capacity 
evaluation, if for purposes of treatment of the claimant, can be awarded as alternate 
medical care pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27. 
Therefore, the question in this situation is whether the recommended functional 
capacity evaluation is for purposes of medical treatment.  This is a factual issue.  
Having reviewed the evidence and weighed the competing factual arguments of the 
parties, I found that the functional capacity evaluation was recommended by Dr. 
Recinos to more objectively ascertain claimant’s residual physical capabilities to enable 
Dr. Recinos to more accurately establish permanent work restrictions.   
Quite often, part of a doctor’s treatment plan includes realistic assessment of a 
patient’s abilities after the injury to prevent future ailments, conditions, diseases, or 
injuries.  Establishing reasonable and accurate work restrictions to prevent future injury 
is a reasonable medical treatment goal.  Therefore, having found that Dr. Recinos 
desires the functional capacity evaluation to assist in establishing permanent work 
restrictions for claimant, I conclude that the recommended functional capacity 
evaluation is medical treatment covered under Iowa Code section 85.27.  Given the 
purpose of the requested functional capacity evaluation is not to determine permanent 
impairment or to establish or bolster a permanent disability claim, but rather, to assist in 
establishing claimant’s work restrictions, I conclude that the nature of the functional 
capacity evaluation recommendation by Dr. Recinos in this case is “treatment” or 
“diagnosis” under Iowa Code section 85.27. 
Since Dr. Recinos is the authorized treating physician, and I found his 
recommendation for a functional capacity evaluation to be reasonable and necessary, 
his recommendation for a functional capacity evaluation should be followed.  Therefore, 
I conclude that claimant is entitled to his request for alternate medical care. 

BARBER V. HYPRO, INC. 
Page 9 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
The claimant's petition for alternate medical care is granted. 
Within twenty-one (21) days of the entry of this order, defendants shall authorize 
and schedule the recommended functional capacity evaluation.   
Signed and filed this _30th __ day of September, 2020. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   WILLIAM H. GRELL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Charles Showalter (via WCES) 
Nathan McConkey (via WCES) 
 
