Case Number: 23700419.01
Case Title:  POOLE, GARY V. MERCY PHYSICIAN ASSOCIATES, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Poole Gary-23700419.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
GARY POOLE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
   File No. 23700419.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                        
MERCY PHYSICIAN  
  : 
           ARBITRATION DECISION 
ASSOCIATES, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                        
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SFM MUTUAL INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
Head Note Nos.:  1402.30, 2502, 2907 
 
Defendants. 
  :                   
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Gary Poole, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from defendants, Mercy Physician Associates, Inc., as the 
employer, and SFM Mutual Insurance Company, as the insurance carrier.  Hearing was 
held on June 11, 2024 via Zoom conference call.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 8, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 9, and Employer’s Exhibits A through J.  All exhibits were received into the 
evidentiary record without objection.    
Claimant testified on his own behalf.  No other witnesses testified live at the 
hearing.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.  The 
parties requested the opportunity to file post-hearing briefs.  Their request was granted, 
and the parties filed their briefs on July 22, 2024.  The case was considered fully 
submitted to the undersigned on that date. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Nov-12  10:44:16     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

POOLE V. MERCY PHYSICIAN ASSOCIATES, INC. 
Page 2 
 
 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of 
his employment on May 12, 2021. 
2. Whether claimant sustained an injury to his left leg, right leg, or both as a 
result of the alleged May 12, 2021 injury. 
3. Whether the alleged May 12, 2021 injury caused temporary disability and, if 
so, the extent of claimant’s entitlement to temporary disability or healing 
period benefits. 
4. Whether the alleged May 12, 2021 injury caused permanent disability and, if 
so, the extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits. 
5. Claimant’s average gross weekly earnings at the time of the alleged injury 
and the corresponding weekly rate at which benefits should be paid. 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to payment or reimbursement for past medical 
expenses. 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of his independent medical 
examination fees. 
8. Whether claimant is entitled to ongoing and future medical care for either or 
both knees. 
9. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of penalty benefits for unreasonable 
delay or denial of weekly benefits. 
10. Whether costs should be assessed against either party. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Gary Poole is a 62-year-old gentleman, who lives in Hiawatha, Iowa.  Mr. Poole 
started for Mercy Physician Associates, Inc., at the airport in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, in 
January 2021.  He served as a COVID screener of passengers entering the airport.    
He worked in a single-entry workspace he described as a cubicle area.  He sat in the 
cubicle area awaiting a passenger to enter.  Once a passenger entered, claimant would 
stand, greet the passenger, and perform a COVID screening that included taking the 
temperature of the passenger and asking the passenger several questions about their 
potential COVID symptoms and exposures prior to arrival.  Mr. Poole testified he was 
scheduled to work 32 hours per week, but often worked extra hours.  He worked the 

POOLE V. MERCY PHYSICIAN ASSOCIATES, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
afternoon shift and would have to remain at his station until the last flights left the airport 
in the evening.   
In performing this screening job, claimant would stand approximately 70-75 
percent of the time but would sit between passenger screenings.  Mr. Poole testified 
that he gradually developed symptoms in his knees when sitting and arising to a 
standing position to perform his screening duties.  Claimant testified that the chair he 
was provided by the employer was not functioning properly.  He ultimately sat in this 
chair at its lowest adjustable setting and sat very low to the ground.  He described it like 
“squatting” when he sat in the chair provided.  (Transcript, page 24)   
Mr. Poole attributes this chair and the mechanism of sitting and standing from 
this chair as increasing stress and causing injury to his knees.  In March 2021, claimant 
reported his knee symptoms to his supervisor but kept working.  Claimant testified he 
began elevating his leg, using Tylenol, and wrapping his leg prior to May 2021 due to 
increasing symptoms. 
In his Answers to Interrogatories, claimant indicated that his injury was the result 
of repeatedly sitting and standing at work and did not identify any specific incident that 
caused an injury to his knee or knees.  (Tr., p. 56)  In his deposition, Mr. Poole testified 
that his knee popped on May 12, 2021.  (Tr., p. 58)  However, Mr. Poole also testified in 
his deposition that symptoms originated in his right knee and then moved to his left 
knee due to overcompensation.  (Tr., p. 33)  He confirmed at hearing that his symptoms 
originated in his right knee and then moved to his left knee as well.  (Tr., p. 79) 
On May 21, 2021, claimant went to his personal physician as a result of knee 
symptoms.  In the initial medical record, claimant’s personal physician recorded that 
claimant felt a “slip” in his left knee nine days prior.  (Joint Exhibit 2, p. 3)  There is no 
mention of any right knee issues in the initial medical record. 
On June 5, 2021, claimant sought treatment at the urgent care at MercyCare 
North.  At that evaluation, claimant noted right knee pain.  At that appointment, claimant 
reported that he had been experiencing left knee symptoms and that he felt he had 
favored his left knee causing right knee symptoms.  At this evaluation on June 5, 2021, 
the nurse practitioner noted “There was no injury mechanism.” (Joint Ex. 4, p. 38) 
Two days later, on June 7, 2021, claimant returned to his family physician’s 
office. At that appointment, he reported right knee pain that started the last Wednesday.  
(Joint Ex. 2, p. 6)  The next day, June 8, 2021, claimant went to the emergency room.  
At that evaluation, claimant reported having right knee pain for about 10 days.  He noted 
that he woke up that day feeling better and then was walking outside off a step when his 
right knee bent in an odd way.  Claimant reported that he “felt and heard a loud snap” 
during that June 8, 2021 incident. 
On June 21, 2021, claimant again sought care through the urgent care.  At that 
evaluation, Mr. Poole reported that he twisted his knee the prior night and the pain got 

POOLE V. MERCY PHYSICIAN ASSOCIATES, INC. 
Page 4 
 
 
worse again in his right knee.  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 42)  Urgent care recommended claimant 
be seen by his personal physician that same date. 
Indeed, claimant returned to his personal physician on June 21, 2021.  At the 
June 21, 2021 evaluation, he told his personal doctor that he was walking on his deck 
on June 4, 2021, “slipped down” and his right leg bent with a snapping feeling and 
difficulty walking afterward.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 9)  He described right knee swelling after 
this incident to his personal physician.  (Joint Ex. 2, p. 9)  His personal physician made 
no mention of an incident the prior evening or night. 
Through referral by his personal physician, on June 23, 2021, claimant obtained 
an orthopaedic evaluation performed by John Hart, M.D.  Dr. Hart obtained knee x-rays, 
noted right knee joint effusion, and recorded that claimant reported 10 out of 10 pain 
severity in the right knee.  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 25)  Dr. Hart recommended an MRI of the 
right knee, which was obtained. 
On July 12, 2021, Dr. Hart again evaluated claimant, reviewed the MRI, and 
diagnosed claimant with a complex tear of the medial meniscus of the right knee.  Dr. 
Hart recommended against a total knee replacement and recommended a right knee 
arthroscopy and partial medial meniscectomy.  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 31) 
Claimant sought evaluation of his right knee with his personal physician again on 
September 16, 2021.  The purpose of that care was to obtain pre-surgical clearance.  
Unfortunately, the recommended surgery was subsequently cancelled due to claimant’s 
sleep apnea. 
Mr. Poole felt like he was being given the “run around” and wanted to proceed 
with care so he elected to obtain a referral from his personal physician to another 
orthopaedic surgeon.  On April 15, 2022, Brent W. Whited, M.D. evaluated claimant at 
Steindler Orthopedic Clinic.  Dr. Whited noted bilateral knee pain.  Dr. Whited noted that 
claimant had a previous left knee arthroscopic surgery in 2014.  He also noted 
claimant’s knees were both increasingly painful and problematic.  He noted a slip on ice 
in 2021 that aggravated claimant’s condition.  Ultimately, Dr. Whited recommended 
bilateral total knee replacements. 
Claimant consented to the recommended knee replacements and claimant 
proceeded to surgical replacement of the left knee on September 6, 2022.  
Unfortunately, the left knee replacement did not alleviate all of claimant’s left knee 
symptoms and he has not proceeded with the right knee replacement as of the date of 
hearing. 
Defendants challenge whether claimant’s knee injuries arise out of and in the 
course of his employment.  Three physicians have offered opinions dealing with the 
cause of claimant’s left and right knee conditions.  Dr. Hart was claimant’s initial 
orthopaedic surgeon.  Claimant’s personal physician referred claimant to Dr. Hart for 
treatment.  Dr. Hart signed a report prepared by defense counsel on September 17, 
2021.  In that report, Dr. Hart opines: 

POOLE V. MERCY PHYSICIAN ASSOCIATES, INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
You cannot state to within a reasonable degree of medical certainty that 
Mr. Poole’s alleged work injury of May 12, 2021 or his job duties were a 
significant and/or substantial contributing factor to the right knee MRI 
findings of July 9, 2021, or your recommendation for right knee surgical 
intervention. 
(Defendants’ Exhibit A, p. 1) 
 
Claimant’s second orthopaedic surgeon, Dr. Whited, provided the second 
opinion.  On December 1, 2022, Dr. Whited signed a report in which he opined that 
claimant’s work duties and/or his alleged work injury of May 12, 2021 are not a 
significant or substantial contributing factor for either claimant’s left or right knee pain, 
complaints, symptoms, or need for surgery.  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 4)  Neither Dr. Hart 
nor Dr. Whited offered an extensive explanation of their opinion, and both are signing off 
on reports drafted by defense counsel.  On the other hand, both are orthopaedic 
treating surgeons that had the opportunity to evaluate claimant multiple times and were 
both selected on referral by claimant’s personal physician.  This lends significant 
credibility to their opinion, as neither was selected by defendants. 
 
Claimant offers a third causation medical opinion via his independent medical 
evaluator, Sunil Bansal, M.D. (Claimant’s Exhibit 1)  Dr. Bansal is an occupational 
medicine physician.  He provided no care to claimant and evaluated Mr. Poole one time 
on March 1, 2024.  Dr. Bansal provides a longer, more detailed report detailing his 
opinions.  He had the opportunity to review other providers’ medical records and offer 
detailed explanations of his opinions. 
Dr. Bansal opined, “Mr. Poole’s duties as a COVID screener at the airport for 
Mercy Physician Associates from January 2021 onward significantly aggravated his pre-
existing left knee arthritis, ultimately necessitating a total knee arthroplasty.”  
(Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 13)  Dr. Bansal explained that the repetitive loading, as well as the 
shear and compressive forces of repetitively sitting and standing “can accelerate wear 
and tear” on the knee.  He opined that “Cartilage experiences microtrauma, increased 
inflammation, and degradation of the extracellular matrix.  This leads to further joint 
space narrowing, subchondral sclerosis, and osteophyte formation.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, 
p. 14)   Ultimately, Dr. Bansal concluded that the overuse of the left knee from sitting 
and standing in a faulty chair “led to an aggravation and acceleration of his underlying 
left knee osteoarthritis.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 15) 
Dr. Bansal also addressed causation of the right knee condition and further 
reasoned, “As a result of favoring his left knee, he then developed worsening pain in his 
right knee.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 13)  He explained, “a medial meniscal tear and medial 
collateral ligament strain, can be attributed to the altered biomechanics and 
compensatory mechanisms employed by Mr. Poole as he favored his more painful left 
knee.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 15) 
In the absence of other potential causative factors, Dr. Bansal’s opinion could 
make sense and explain claimant’s condition.  However, as I review Dr. Bansal’s report, 

POOLE V. MERCY PHYSICIAN ASSOCIATES, INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
he notes many of the incidents discussed above, such as a slip on the claimant’s deck, 
slip on ice, and twisting of claimant’s knee, but he offers no analysis of those incidents 
as potential causes or aggravations of claimant’s condition.  While documenting those 
incidents in his review of the medical records, he offers no analysis of those incidents in 
the causation section of his report.  Claimant contradicts Dr. Bansal’s history when he 
testified in his deposition and again at hearing that his right knee symptoms developed 
first.  Yet, Dr. Bansal opines that claimant’s left knee symptoms were first and then 
aggravated the right knee. 
The treating orthopaedic surgeons spoke with claimant closer in time to his 
alleged injury.  They were unable to causally connect his knee conditions, symptoms, or 
need for surgery to the alleged work duties or work injury.  Ultimately, I find that 
claimant’s testimony was contradictory to some of the medical records. He denied 
incidents clearly documented by medical providers contemporaneous with the medical 
care.  Claimant’s testimony contradicted the opinions of Dr. Bansal. 
 
Ultimately, I accept the opinions of the two treating orthopaedic surgeons 
selected by claimant or his personal physician over the opinions of claimant’s one-time 
medical evaluator selected by his attorney for purposes of rendering opinions in this 
litigation.  Ultimately, I find the opinions of Dr. Whited to be most convincing and 
credible.  I specifically find that claimant failed to prove by a preponderance of the 
evidence that either his left or his right knee conditions, symptoms, or need for 
treatment and surgery after May 12, 2021 arose out of and in the course of his 
employment with Mercy Physician Associates, Inc. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 

POOLE V. MERCY PHYSICIAN ASSOCIATES, INC. 
Page 7 
 
 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma.  The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes 
of nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body.  Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence.  Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable.  Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however.  St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 650-51 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 
N.W.2d 440, 444 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 
845, 850-51 (Iowa 1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368, 373-
74 (Iowa 1985).  An occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically 
excluded from the definition of personal injury.  Iowa Code section 85.61(4)(b); Iowa 
Code section 85A.8; Iowa Code section 85A.14. 
In this case, I ultimately found the opinions of Dr. Whited and to a lesser extent 
the opinions of Dr. Hart to be most credible and convincing.  Having reached that 
finding, I also found that claimant failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence 
that either his left or right knee injuries arose out of and in the course of his employment 
with Mercy Physician Associates, Inc. on or about May 12, 2021.  Therefore, I conclude 
claimant failed to prove a compensable work injury to either his left or right knee.   
Given the conclusion that claimant failed to prove he sustained an injury arising 
out of and in the course of his employment on May 12, 2021, the issues pertaining to 

POOLE V. MERCY PHYSICIAN ASSOCIATES, INC. 
Page 8 
 
 
temporary disability, permanent disability, medical benefits, and penalty benefits are 
rendered moot.  Claimant failed to establish entitlement to any of these benefits. 
Mr. Poole also asserted a claim for reimbursement of his independent medical 
evaluation with Dr. Bansal.  Iowa Code section 85.39 provides the requirements 
necessary to obtain reimbursement for an independent medical evaluation.  Section 
85.39 provides, “An employer is not liable for the cost of such an examination if the 
injury for which the employee is being examined is determined not to be a compensable 
injury.”  Therefore, I conclude claimant fails to establish entitlement to reimbursement of 
his independent medical evaluation expense. 
 
Finally, Mr. Poole seeks assessment of his costs related to this case.  Costs are 
assessed at the discretion of this agency.  Iowa Code section 10A.328.  Having 
concluded that claimant failed to prove a compensable injury or recover any benefits in 
this proceeding, I conclude that claimant’s request for assessment of costs should be 
denied.  All parties should bear their own costs in this proceeding and claimant should 
be ordered to reimburse the employer for the cost of the hearing transcript. 
 
ORDER 
Claimant takes nothing. 
Claimant is ordered to reimburse defendants for the cost of the hearing 
transcript, if within 20 days of the entry of this decision, defendants file evidence of the 
cost of the transcript and proof of payment of that expense. 
 
Signed and filed this _12th __ day of November, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Dillon Besser (via WCES) 
Marshall Tuttle (via WCES) 
 

POOLE V. MERCY PHYSICIAN ASSOCIATES, INC. 
Page 9 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
