Case Number: 19001291.01
Case Title:  TELLEZ, MARIA V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE - IOWA INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Tellez Maria-1661847.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MARIA TELLEZ, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
  File Nos. 1661847.01, 19001291.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                           
AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC.,   : 
 
 
  :               ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                          
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ARGENT/WEST BEND MUTUAL  
  : 
INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
      Head Note Nos.:  1803, 1803.1, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
        2502, 2907, 3000 
 
Defendants. 
  :               
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Claimant, Maria Tellez, has filed two petitions for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits against Amity Fellowserve-Iowa, Inc., employer, and 
Argent/West Bend Mutual Insurance Company, insurer, both as defendants.  
 
In accordance with agency scheduling procedures and pursuant to the Order of 
the Commissioner in the matter of Coronavirus/COVID-19 Impact on Hearings, the 
hearing was held via Zoom on April 8, 2022, and considered fully submitted upon the 
simultaneous filing of briefs on April 29, 2022.  
 
The record consists of Joint Exhibits 1-15, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-7, Defendants’ 
Exhibits A-H, and the testimony of the claimant.    
ISSUES 
File No.  1661847.01 with a date of injury of 02/06/2019: 
 
1. Whether claimant sustained a permanent disability arising out of the injury of 
February 6, 2019; 
 
2. The application of Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v);  
 
3. The appropriate commencement date of PPD benefits, if any are awarded; 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Jul-20  07:12:36     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 2 
 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an IME under Iowa Code 
section 85.39;  
 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement and/or payment of medical 
expenses itemized in Exhibit 5;  
 
6. Rate; 
 
7. Assessment of costs. 
 
File No. 19001291.01 with a date of injury of 02/21/2019:  
 
1. Whether claimant sustained a permanent disability arising out of the injury of 
February 21, 2019; 
 
2. The application of Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v);  
 
3. The appropriate commencement date of PPD benefits, if any are awarded; 
 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an IME under Iowa Code 
section 85.39;  
 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement and/or payment of medical 
expenses itemized in Exhibit 5;  
 
6. Assessment of costs. 
 
STIPULATIONS 
 
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations. All of those 
stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision and 
no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed 
in this decision. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
 
The parties stipulate claimant sustained an injury arising out of and in the course 
of her employment with defendant employer on February 6, 2019, and February 21, 
2019. They agree that the alleged injury was the cause of a temporary disability during 
a period of recovery entitlement to which is no longer in dispute. 
 
 
Prior to the hearing, claimant was paid 10 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits at the rate of $344.46 per week. The parties agree that at the time of the 
February 21, 2019, injury, claimant’s gross weekly wages were $520.86. At all material 
times hereto, claimant was single and entitled to two exemptions. Based on the 
foregoing, the weekly benefit rate for the February 21, 2019, injury, was $346.26. 

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
All affirmative defenses are waived.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
Claimant, Maria Tellez, was a 25-year-old person at the time of the hearing. Her 
educational background includes high school followed by completion of a medical office 
specialist program at Kaplan. While she was studying, she waited tables and cleaned. 
She moved to MercyOne as a health unit coordinator and then switched to patient 
accounts.  
At the time of her injury, she was working for defendant employer as a 
receptionist. She began working for defendant employer in November 2018. Her job 
duties involved sitting at the desk, answering phone calls, slight computer work, and 
unlocking the building. She was not allowed to get up and move around during her shift 
unless she had someone relieve her at the desk.  
 
During maternity leave in 2019, claimant took new employment with Allen 
Hospital as an admitting tech. This job required her to register patients for outpatient 
services, answer phone calls in the ER, verify insurance eligibility, and check in 
ambulances. After a second maternity leave, she obtained a full-time position as a cash 
posting specialist for Allen Hospital. She currently earns $19.95 per hour. Due to 
COVID, there has been increased competition for health care workers and thus higher 
wages are being offered. She testified that she uses FMLA approximately four times a 
month for her leg pain.   
 
None of her prior positions other than waitressing and cleaning required much 
lifting or other physical exertions. Instead, the job duties included walking, standing and 
sitting. However, because of the fast-paced nature of her previous jobs, claimant does 
not think she would be able to do those positions without taking FMLA. Her current 
position is a work at home job that allows her to take breaks and move as needed.  
 
She fell on two different dates close in time, suffering injuries to her low back, left 
hip, leg, and right hip and right knee. At the time of her falls, claimant was pregnant.  
 
During her 2017 pregnancy, claimant was seen at a chiropractor for cervical, 
thoracic, lumbar, and sacral pain. (JE 1:1) A medical note from September 22, 2017, 
noted claimant suffered back pain. (JE 2:10)  She continued to have sporadic 
chiropractic treatment in 2018 and 2019. (JE 1:2) 
 
On February 6, 2019, claimant reported that she had slipped and fallen on the 
sidewalk. (CE 3:67) At the time, she identified pain in the back and left hip and leg. (CE 
3:67) She was sent to Allen Occupational Health and seen by Steven Olsen, M.D., who 
diagnosed claimant with contusion of her left lumbar region and buttocks. (JE 3:12) At 
the visit, she reported aching and numbness from the left lateral back, down the left 
buttock and into the lateral thigh. Her pain rating was 6 out of 10 on a 10 scale. (JE 
3:13) Patient was seen in follow-up on February 8, 2019.  At that time her straight leg 
raise test was negative, deep tendon reflexes were normal as was her gait. (JE 3:16) 
She exhibited normal flexion and extension. (JE 3:16) Dr.  Olsen wondered if she had a 

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 4 
 
piriformis injury. (JE 3:16) He gave her back exercises, physical restrictions of sitting, 
standing, and walking only as necessary, and sent her to physical therapy. (JE 3:17)  
 
On her PT intake document, her complaints included low back pain at the L5-S1 
level that referred down the left lateral leg to the top of her knee. (JE 4:42)  
 
On February 21, 2019, claimant reported the second fall on ice wherein she 
landed on the right hip and identified pain in her right hip and right knee. (CE 3:69)  This 
time she was seen by Dr. Jabbari at Allen Occupational Health. (JE 3:18) She reported 
right knee and hip pain with a pain rating of 3 on a 10 scale. (JE 3:18) She was given 
work restrictions of seated work only along with knee exercises and Tylenol. (JE 3:20)  
 
She continued to have problems on her left side with her pain varying from 3/10 
at rest to 8/10 with certain movements. (JE 3:21) She was attending physical therapy 
and experiencing numbness and hearing popping in her low back. (JE 3:21) At the 
February 27, 2019, visit, claimant was provided an SI joint support belt.  
 
On March 4, 2019, claimant was seen at the emergency room for pain shooting 
into her buttock region. (JE 5:48) The left SI joint was tender to palpation, but her 
examination was otherwise normal. Id. Jeffrey Gudes, D.O., ordered physical therapy 
and prescribed Mobic. (JE 6:49)   
 
At the March 6, 2019, visit, claimant reported worsening pain with numbness, 
tingling and sharp pain in the left piriformis and SI joint. (JE 3:22) Pain radiated into the 
left buttock. Id. She exhibited abnormal flexion and extension and a slow/antalgic gait. 
(JE 3:22) Dr. Field diagnosed claimant with left piriformis and sciatic nerve pain with 
positive Faber test and positive tenderness over the piriformis. Id. Claimant was 
returned to work with restrictions and instructed to use a cane as necessary. Id.  
 
Claimant was offered light duty work on March 25, 2019, which she accepted. 
(DE B:6) The accommodations included mostly sit down work where she could sit, 
stand, and walk as needed and work only four hours a day during the AM shift. (DE B:6)  
 
On March 26, 2019, claimant was discharged from PT as she had not returned 
since the March 4, 2019, session. (JE 4:43) The notes documented she had increased 
pain in the last PT session and PT was limited due to her pregnancy. (JE 4:43)  
 
On April 4, 2019, her work accommodations were revised to include frequent 
back stretches and back exercises as described. (DE B:8-9)  
 
On April 11, 2019, Kenneth McMains, M.D., wrote a letter in response to an 
inquiry on behalf of defendants. (JE 3:23) In the letter, Dr. McMains opined that claimant 
suffered a fall causing a direct contusion to her sciatic nerve and her buttock on the left 
side. (JE 3:23) Over time, claimant was diagnosed with left piriformis syndrome. Id. He 
anticipated that claimant would have full resolution of her symptoms but that recovery 
times were unpredictable. Id. He then saw claimant on April 16, 2019, for an in-person 
visit where she complained of increased pain radiating down her left leg following an 
increase of her work hours from four to eight a day. (JE 3:25) She exhibited abnormal 
flexion and extension along with a deliberate gait. (JE 3:26) Dr. McMains diagnosed 
claimant with chronic left piriformis syndrome. (JE 3:26)  

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
During an April 30, 2019 follow-up visit, claimant reported she had left work the 
previous day due to increased pain in the left hip. (JE 3:27) She was also having 
increased numbness and tingling from the hip into the calf with low back tightness. Id. 
She was using a cane due to pain in her leg. Id. She reported that her pain was 7 out of 
10 on a 10 scale. She was noted to have abnormal movement in bilateral flexion, 
extension, rotation, heel walking, and toe walking. (JE 3:28) There was a positive 
straight leg raise test on the left and abnormal gait with use of the cane. (JE 3:28)  
 
During April and May, claimant was seen at Fuelling Chiropractic for treatment to 
her low back and left leg. (JE 1:3-4)  
 
On May 1, 2019, Dr. McMains wrote a second letter in response to an inquiry on 
behalf of the defendants. (JE 3:29) In the letter, Dr. McMains described the April 30, 
2019, visit with claimant. (JE 3:29) She had reported back to work but was experiencing 
a great deal of pain and as a result left work due to increased pain in the left leg, 
buttocks, and hip area. Id. During the examination, claimant was unable to sit on the left 
cheek/buttock due to pain radiating down the leg, posterior thigh and into the calf area. 
Id. She had significant limited range of motion in the lumbar area in all planes of motion 
and was using a cane for ambulation. Id. She had positive straight leg raising on the left, 
weakness in the great toe on the left with knee and ankle reflexes normal bilaterally. Id. 
Dr. McMains continued to diagnose claimant with chronic left piriformis syndrome with 
an acute exacerbation. (JE 3:29)  
 
Dr. McMains could not state with any degree of medical certainty as to whether 
claimant’s condition was related to the piriformis syndrome or her pregnancy but rather 
felt that they were both likely related. (JE 3:29). He wrote: 
As she is closer to her due date, she has more laxity of ligaments, which is 
causing increased pressure in the low back area and buttocks, likely 
contributing to the increasing discomfort, but underlying condition is the 
piriformis syndrome that appears to be work related. The good news of 
this is that she has an excellent prognosis of full recovery that likely will 
occur while she is on maternity leave and prior to her returning [to] work 
after delivery. At this time, the treatment is to allow her to lay down, 
elevate the legs, keep the weight off the left buttocks/low back area, and 
start increasing ambulation as tolerated. The worker was advised today at 
the time of exam that if she is [sic] has decreasing symptoms and feels 
she is able to return to work later in the week, a phone call to the clinic will 
allow us to send you a fax stating that she is able to return at a limited 
number of hours per day. The worker reports that she is anxious to be 
able to return to work but feels at this time the pain is intolerable and has a 
need to lie down and get off her feet as much as possible.   
(JE 3:29)  
 
On May 20, 2019, claimant’s hours increased to 8 hours a day and lifting 
restrictions of no more than 5 pounds was imposed. (DE B:12) On May 31, 2019, 
claimant requested, and was granted, 8 weeks of maternity leave. (DE B:16) She 
anticipated a return on July 29, 2019. Id.   

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
On June 24, 2019, claimant’s counsel requested additional treatment for claimant 
due to injuries sustained on February 6, and February 21, 2019. (CE 2:62) 
 
On June 26, 2019, Dr. McMains wrote a letter accounting the June 19, 2019, 
medical visit to the Allen Occupational Health Services. (JE 3:33) Claimant’s symptoms 
were improving following the delivery of the child but she still had some intermittent 
paresthesias of the posterior thigh and buttocks pain with certain activities. (JE 3:33) 
Her diagnosis was chronic left piriformis syndrome, slowly improving. (JE 3:33)  Dr. 
McMains anticipated claimant would be able to return to work and perform the essential 
functions of her job at the end of her maternity leave on July 29, 2019. (JE 3:33)  
 
On July 8, 2019, claimant was seen by Gregory Harter, M.D., at Cedar Valley 
Family Medicine. The left hip was tender to palpation along the lateral to posterior 
margin. (JE 6:49) The plan was to obtain x-rays and begin physical therapy. Id. X-rays 
of the left hip that were ordered by Dr. Harter were normal. (JE 7:67-68)  
 
On July 11, 2019, Dr. McMains documented the re-examination of claimant on 
the same date. (JE 3:36) Since the delivery of her baby, claimant still reported some 
discomfort localized to the buttocks area on the left, more medially and distally. Id. At 
times, depending on activity, claimant experienced some radiculopathy that radiated 
down the left leg to her calf. Id. During the evaluation, claimant had some limitation of 
lumbar flexion with increased pain, but lumbar extension was normal. Id. Her heel/toe 
walking was normal, but heel walking was painful on the left. The rest of the 
examination was normal. Id. She did report that when she has pain, she had a slight 
limp but otherwise no gait abnormality. Id.  
 
Dr. McMains opined claimant reached MMI and assessed a 2 percent impairment 
of the whole person due to a history and consistent reporting of sciatica, based on the 
event. (JE 3:36) He further stated that while the claimant had no evidence of any 
observable asymmetry or any verifiable radicular complaints, she had consistent 
symptoms. (JE 3:35) No permanent restrictions were imposed due to the expected 
decrease in symptoms over time. Id.  
 
On July 19, 2019, claimant signed a resignation form stating that the reason she 
was resigning was due to lack of communication by management and not enough to do. 
(DE B:17) On July 17, 2019, claimant received a welcome message as a new member 
of the Unity Point team. (DE C:4) After maternity leave, claimant started a new position 
as an admitting tech. At hearing, claimant testified that she is able to move around and 
change positions which has resulted in less pain during the day although she does feel 
pain at the end of her shift. She described her pain as a tense ache that she could feel 
in her back. At work, if she is careful, her pain averages 3/10 on a 10 scale. When she 
is at home, she uses ice packs, heating pads, Tylenol and Ibuprofen for treatment. She 
also maintained that a few times a month she experiences intermittent right-sided pain 
that radiates into her right leg to the knee area.  
 
She related she has difficulty lifting her child and believes that she is only able to 
lift about 25 pounds more than once. She has trouble pushing heavy things and slight 
problems bending over. Her husband has taken over the laundry, and she has 
attempted to shovel snow. The pain affects her ability to sleep.  

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 7 
 
 
On July 23, 2019, the claimant was seen by Michaela Johnson, ARNP, for a 
return to work note. (JE 6:50) Her x-rays were normal and the MRI which had been 
scheduled was cancelled on the advice of her attorney. Id. She had numbness and 
tingling in the left lower leg and tenderness to palpation over the left piriformis muscle. 
Id. Ms. Johnson advised claimant to schedule the MRI and if the MRI is normal, she 
could return to work. (JE 6:51)   
 
After her return to work, claimant continued to complain of pain and discomfort in 
the left hip and down the left leg and back. On August 20, 2019, Dr. McMains examined 
claimant and reviewed the MRI of the left hip taken on July 25, 2019. (JE 3:39)  The 
July 25, 2019, MRI demonstrated a trochanteric bursitis versus a contusion at the level 
of the gluteus medius tendon at the trochanteric insertion. (JE 8:70) There was also a 
small, nonspecific subchondral cyst inferior and anterior to the femoral head but no 
evidence of any stress fractures, avascular necrosis, or femoral acetabular 
impingement. (JE 3:39) The claimant continued to demonstrate normal deep tendon 
reflexes at the knee and ankle bilaterally with some mild EHL weakness on the left 
compared to the right. (JE 3:39) Dr. McMains recommended a referral to a pain clinic for 
an evaluation and possible injection of the trochanteric bursa. (JE 3:39) He opined that 
should the injection have no benefit, then her likely diagnosis would be chronic 
piriformis syndrome that should improve over time with conservative treatment. (JE 
3:39) He also felt that therapy would not be beneficial if the problem was with her 
piriformis. (JE 3:39)  
 
Based on a referral, claimant was seen at Allen Pain Clinic by Asher Afzal, M.D., 
on September 24, 2019, for a possible trochanteric bursa injection. (JE 9:72) According 
to the intake notes, claimant’s pain started in the paraspinal region on the left side 
between the iliac crest and rib cage. Id. The dull, aching sensation radiated down the 
left thigh, calf and even the foot. (JE 9:72) She found it difficult to walk on toes and 
heels due to pain in the right1 foot. (JE 9:73) Lumbar spine lateral flexion was worse on 
the right side which resulted in aggravation of pain in the upper back region and pain 
into the leg. Id. Patrick maneuver caused low back pain. Compression test resulted in 
pain across the left iliac crest. Fairs test for provocation of piriformis was negative. 
Range of motion of hip was negative for reproduction of pain. Id. The MRI was 
consistent with possible trochanteric bursitis versus tendinitis, tendinosis or what is 
reported as a contusion of the gluteus medius at its insertion. Id. Dr. Afzal determined 
that a trochanteric bursa injection was not likely to alleviate her symptoms and instead 
recommended that she retry physical therapy given that therapy during her pregnancy 
might not have had any beneficial effects. Id. If there was no improvement of her 
symptoms after four to six weeks of physical therapy, he recommended obtaining an 
MRI. (JE 9:73) 
 
On October 3, 2019, claimant underwent an evaluation with David B. Kirkle, D.O. 
(JE 10:83) He documented her primary pain as located in the left side. Id. The pain was 
described as constant, sharp, stabbing that was aggravated by sitting and walking. Id. 
                                                 
1 It is unclear whether this was an error or whether claimant had right foot pain.  

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 8 
 
Claimant had secondary pain in the back. Id. A tertiary problem was right-sided pain. 
(JE 10:83) Dr. Kirkle referred claimant for an MRI and an EMG.  
 
The EMG was conducted on October 9, 2019, of both lower extremities. (JE 
11:88) The results were normal and there was no EMG evidence for lumbosacral motor 
radiculopathy, polyneuropathy, or myopathy. (JE 11:88) On October 11, 2019, claimant 
underwent an MRI of the lumbar spine. (JE 8:71) The results were normal, and the 
impression was that “no abnormality is identified to explain for the patient’s symptoms.” 
(JE 8:71)  
 
Claimant began physical therapy on October 15, 2019. (JE 4:45) The notes 
document that she was initially told the problem was an SI joint, but the diagnosis 
changed to piriformis syndrome. (JE 4:44) She presented with sciatica, decreased 
lumbar ROM, decreased trunk/BLE strength, and difficulty walking. (JE 4:45)  
 
She returned to Dr. Kirkle on October 16, 2019, with sharp shooting pain in the 
left low back. (JE 10:84) At this visit, her pain level at rest was 8 out of 10. Id. The pain 
was radiating into the buttock and down the left posterior leg to the calf. Id. It was noted 
that both the EMG and MRI were normal. Id. He prescribed Naproxen and instructed 
her to continue physical therapy, chiropractic care and home stretches. (JE 10:85)  
 
On November 26, 2019, the claim was denied based on the opinion of Dr. Kirkle. 
(CE 2:64; JE 10:87) He signed off on a prepared letter that stated, “Given Ms. Tellez 
was a ‘no call’, ‘no show’ for her 11/22/19 office visit and given what appears to be 
completely clean MRI and EMG” he agreed that the claimant sustained a temporary soft 
tissue strain which did not result in any permanent impairment, any permanent work 
restrictions, and no further medical care. (JE 10:87) Claimant testified at hearing she 
had been in California and when she called to reschedule, she was told Dr. Kirkle would 
no longer see her as a patient. She then began directing her own medical care. 
 
Claimant was discharged from PT on December 12, 2019. (JE 4:46) She met 2 
of the 7 goals that were established on her initial evaluation. Id. Goals not met were 
secondary to a continued high pain level that limited her ability to perform sustained 
activities in either aquatic or land-based settings, decreased core/LE strength and 
limited A/PROM BLE’s. Id. She did not attend any PT appointments in the four weeks 
prior to December 12, 2019, and thus was discharged. Id.  
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Afzal on January 24, 2020, reporting no improvement 
following 6 weeks of PT. (JE 9:74) He recommended an MRI of the lumbar spine as 
opposed to the left hip. Id. On February 3, 2020, claimant underwent the MRI of the 
lumbar spine. (JE 7:69) The MRI showed mild degenerative changes in the low lumbar 
spine. Id. There was no comparison between the February 2020 MRI and the October 
2019 MRI.  
 
On February 13, 2020, claimant returned to Dr. Afzal with complaints of 
significant buttock pain radiating into the leg. (JE 9:77) Dr. Afzal did not find that the 
MRI results corresponded to the symptoms but did administer a piriformis injection 
which reduced claimant’s pain by 50-60 percent for two weeks. (JE 9:77-78) A second 
injection was administered on March 11, 2020, without relief. (JE 9:78, 80) Dr. Afzal 

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 9 
 
reminded claimant to continue to do stretching exercises. (JE 9:78) Dr. Afzal believed 
that claimant’s symptoms could be arising from facet-mediated pain as she was quite 
tender over the facet joints. (JE 9:81)  
 
On April 3, 2020, claimant was seen by Gregory K. Harter, M.D., who noted that 
claimant reported no more left hip pain. (JE 6:53)  Instead, the pain was in the lumbar 
musculature on the left side. (JE 6:53) On examination, she had no tenderness to 
palpation along the LS spine or around her left hip, but she did note tenderness in the 
left lumbar musculature consistent with her verbal complaints. (JE 6:54)  Her past 
treatment included injections which were ultimately not helpful, physical therapy, and 
medications which did not do much for her. (JE 6:53) Dr. Harter prescribed Zanaflex 
and Diclofenac Sodium Tablet Delayed Release. (JE 6:55) He agreed she should 
continue to see the pain doctors but did not continue physical therapy as it had not been 
helpful in the past. (JE 6:55)  
 
On May 12, 2020, claimant returned to Cedar Valley Medical Specialists and saw 
Ms. Johnson. (JE 6:56) Claimant reported that some days were better than others. (JE 
6:56) Her examination was normal but for tenderness upon palpation along the left 
piriformis muscle. (JE 6:57) The anti-inflammatory prescribed by Dr. Harter was not 
helpful. (JE 6:56) Ms. Johnson prescribed indomethacin and advised claimant to return 
to PT as PT was the main treatment for piriformis syndrome along with heat/ice and 
stretches. (JE 6:58)  
 
Claimant began physical therapy again on May 20, 2020. (JE 12:90) During 
therapy, claimant was very tender to palpation throughout her gluteal and left SI joint. 
(JE 12:91) Even with light palpation she reported radicular symptoms down to the 
ankles. Id.  
 
On June 12, 2020, claimant returned to Ms. Johnson with reports that physical 
therapy was going well and she would be starting dry needle therapy the following 
week. (JE 6:59) She was also experiencing right leg and right hip pain. Id. On 
examination, she had tenderness to palpation along the left piriformis area and in the 
right hip and lumbar region. (JE 6:60) Although claimant had been referred for an ortho 
consult, no ortho would see her. (JE 6:59)  
 
On July 6, 2020, claimant was seen by Lynn Galloway, PA-C, at Allen 
Neurosurgery for complaints regarding left-sided low back and buttock pain that 
radiated down the posterior leg to the calf. (JE13:93) She was tender to palpation over 
the left SI joint. She had full range of motion without pain in the left leg. Patrick test on 
the left caused increased pain in the buttocks into the posterior thigh. On the right, she 
had full range of motion in the leg without pain. She was diagnosed with sacroiliac pain, 
lumbosacral disc degeneration, and foraminal stenosis of the lumbosacral region. Ms. 
Galloway recommended claimant return to Dr. Afzal for an injection in the SI joint on the 
left. (JE 13:94)  
 
On July 29, 2020, claimant returned to Dr. Afzal who recommended bilateral 
lumbar facet joint injections at L4-5 and L5-S1. (JE 9:81) It appears that authorization 
was not given for these injections as they were not administered.  

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 10 
 
 
On August 18, 2020, claimant returned to Cedar Valley Family Medicine and was 
seen by Michaela Johnson, ARNP, who noted that the lumbar facet injections 
recommended by the pain clinic had been denied by insurance and that there was no 
further care the pain clinic could provide. (JE 6:62) Ms. Johnson made a referral for a 
second opinion at Mercy Neurosurgery. (JE 6:63)  
 
On September 22, 2020, claimant was seen by Marietta Walsh, D.O., for “low 
back pain/bilateral leg pain.” (JE 14:95) Claimant stated that she had been experiencing 
this pain since her fall on February 6, 2019, and that it originated in the bilateral 
buttocks radiating into the posterior aspect of her lower extremities to her ankles. (JE 
14:95) The radiation of pain was in both lower extremities, but worse on the left than the 
right according to the report. Id. Dr. Walsh diagnosed claimant with lumbago, bilateral 
lumbar radiculopathy, and lumbar facet arthropathy. (JE 14:96) The physical 
examination revealed no motor or sensory deficits. Dr. Walsh recommended claimant 
consult with a different pain management clinic as there were no surgical options 
recommended. Id.  
 
On October 12, 2020, claimant was seen by Justin J. Elwood, M.D., a pain 
management doctor, at MercyOne for symptoms in her low back and left lower extremity 
and some symptoms on the right side. (JE 14:99) In the intake notes, claimant’s pain 
was in the low lumbar region, most significant in the left buttock with pain, numbness 
and tingling radiating in the lower left extremity and into the bottom of the foot. (JE 
14:100) She also reported occasional discomfort in the right buttock and lower 
extremity. Id.  
 
Another EMG was obtained which had normal results. (JE 14:97-98) On 
November 12, 2020, claimant returned to MercyOne and was seen by Dr. Walsh to 
review the EMG results. (JE 14:103) She had no motor or sensory deficits, absent 
patellar reflexes bilaterally, no hyperreflexia, negative Hoffman sign and no clonus. (JE 
14:103) Dr. Walsh concluded that there was no neurosurgical intervention 
recommended and suggested claimant continue to work with pain management. (JE 
14:103)  
 
On November 20, 2020, claimant returned to Dr. Harter with the primary concern 
about some dysfunctional uterine bleeding. (JE 6:64) She mentioned that she does 
have some low back pain at times and wanted a refill of her muscle relaxer. (JE 6:64) 
On examination, she had full range of motion of her back, no costovertebral angle 
tenderness but some tenderness in the low back and lumbar musculature. (JE 6:65) Dr. 
Harter refilled the Zanaflex prescription and recommended claimant continue with 
stretches. (JE 6:66)  
 
On December 28, 2020, claimant was seen by Dr. Elwood via Telemedicine 
following bilateral sacroiliac joint injections with posterior superior iliac spine trigger 
point injections of December 4, 2020. (JE 14:104) The injections alleviated claimant’s 
pain for approximately two weeks but then her pain returned to its previous level. (JE 
14:104) He concluded that based on claimant’s lack of positive response to the 
injections and other treatment along with the unremarkable MRI and EMG, claimant’s 

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 11 
 
symptoms were not likely radicular. (JE 14:108) He recommended a trial of gabapentin. 
Id.  
 
On February 1, 2021, claimant was seen for a routine well woman examination. 
(JE 14:109) Test results revealed she was pregnant. (JE 14:110) She had normal 
examination of her extremities and it was noted that she would cease taking her 
medications for her “chronic hip pain.” Id.  
 
On April 14, 2021, claimant reported an injury to her upper thigh and right hip 
which she struck as she was trying to walk around a desk. (DE C:9) On May 4, 2021, 
she reported an injury to her right shoulder which she struck against a door that did not 
fully open. (DE C:10)  
 
Video surveillance of claimant was taken on September 1, 2021. (DE H) In the 
video at 00:10-00:22, claimant is pregnant and walking with a visible limp. At 00:23, she 
is seen exiting a car, putting a backpack over her shoulders, and then lifting her son out 
of the car. An antalgic gait is not noticeable. At 1:38, she is shopping, pushing a cart 
while wearing a backpack. At 4:12 she bends over without apparent difficulty.  At 6:15 
she exits the building and walks to her car while holding her son’s hand. She appears to 
have an antalgic gait. At 7:18, she walks toward her car with one child on her hip.  
 
Dec 11, 2021, 8:50. Claimant is outside with two young boys. There is some 
snow on the ground. She is seen pushing a shovel along the ground. At times, the 
shovel is caught and requires a harder push or kick. The snow is light enough that the 
young boy is seen lifting snow in a smaller shovel. Claimant bends slightly at the 2:30 
mark but is mostly seen to be pushing the shovel while in an upright position. 
After approximately four minutes of pushing snow on the side of the house, claimant 
moves to the opposite side and is out of view for another six minutes according to the 
surveillance time stamps. At 9:00 she is seen in front of a garage again pushing and 
kicking snow with her shovel. At the 5:00 minute mark on the video, she is seen slightly 
bending or rotating at the waist. At 9:08 she returns inside the house. There are large 
areas of snow not removed. 
  
 
December 12, 2021, claimant is seen shopping at a warehouse. She pushes a 
stroller. She lifts a bottle of oil which is retrieved by a man who then places it in a cart. 
At 8:15 she lifts cans of tuna which she hands to her male companion who places it in 
the cart. She is wearing a backpack. At 9:53 she appears to be walking with a slight 
antalgic gait . At 10:24 she is seen pushing the grocery cart. At 10:42 she lifts a child 
from the cart and walks a few steps to hand the child off to her male companion. She 
then gets into her car on the passenger side. The surveillance report described her as 
walking with a “waddling gait.” (DE H) 
 
 
On March 19, 2021, claimant was seen by David H. Segal, M.D., for an 
independent medical evaluation. (CE 1) At the time of the examination, claimant’s 
current pain was 3 out of 10 on a 10 scale with an average of 6 out of 10 on a 10 scale. 
(CE 1:3) There was no explanation in the report as to why claimant’s pain was lower 
than average at the time of the IME. She reported that the pain was constant across the 
low back at the belt line, worse on the left than the right. Id. The pain radiated down the 

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 12 
 
posterior left leg to the bottom of the foot and down the right posterior leg to the calf. 
(CE 1:4) Claimant also reported occasional “shocks” of pain going down the leg that last 
2-3 minutes and constant numbness and intermittent tingling in the left posterior leg to 
the foot. Id.  
 
The pain was aggravated by prolonged activity or position with standing causing 
the most pain and relieved by rest, lying down, heat, ice, Biofreeze, and muscle 
relaxers. Id. She was currently taking Ibuprofen or Tylenol but neither helped. Id. She 
reported that the first piriformis injection alleviated the leg pain by 50 percent, but the 
second injection worsened her condition. (CE 1:4) The SI joint injection reduced pain by 
about 50 percent for two weeks. Id. Physical therapy did not help. Id.  
 
During the examination, Dr. Segal observed claimant to have substantial findings 
of radicular symptoms on the left while the right leg sensory motor and reflex exams 
were normal. (CE 1:7) He found her to have tenderness of the lower lumbar region, 
prominent left S1 dermatomal distribution losses; L5 and S1 myotomal distribution loss 
in the leg and foot; equivocal straight leg raise on the left; positive provocative SI joint 
testing bilaterally; and gait deviation with antalgic circumduction gait. (CE 1:12) There is 
mild foraminal stenosis at L5-S1 which does correspond with claimant’s symptoms 
according to Dr. Segal. Id. 
 
The IME noted claimant was pregnant during her falls at work in February 2019. 
Following the delivery of her child, there was no change in the back or leg pain and her 
eight-week maternity leave did not help to alleviate symptoms.  
 
As a result of her injuries, claimant reported to Dr. Segal that she is unable to 
pick up her youngest child, that she cannot do many chores, that she must take 
frequent breaks to sit while cooking. She cannot run, play soccer, or take her children to 
the park because she cannot stand and watch them play. Even walking is difficult. Her 
testimony at hearing and her presentation in the surveillance video presented a more 
capable, less disabled person than she presented in her subjective complaints to Dr. 
Segal. 
 
Claimant relayed that the second injury worsened her condition by 20 percent. 
(CE 1: 8) Dr. Segal adopted this figure without further explanation.  
 
Dr. Segal concluded:   
Ms. Tellez sustained damage not only to her low back, but specifically her 
lumbar nerve roots causing radiculopathy, lumbar facet joints, SI joint, 
piriformis area and greater trochanteric bursa. Additionally, she either 
directly or secondarily injured the greater trochanteric bursa. These 
symptoms persist and cause her substantial dysfunction, indication for 
further treatments including consideration of injections and surgery, 
impairment in work and life activities, as well as decreased quality of life. 
Ms. Tellez’s mechanism of injury, symptoms, exam findings, and records 
as a whole support that multiple body areas in her lumbar spine region 
were injured at the same time. There is overlap in symptomatology, 

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 13 
 
especially in regard to the low back pain that radiates down the left leg. 
This is known as double crush syndrome and is a common phenomenon 
in clinical medicine where symptoms in a body region may have more than 
one source.  
CE 1:8 
Ms. Tellez has symptoms of lumbar radiculopathy that are classic textbook 
symptoms. She has been given the diagnosis of lumbar radiculopathy by 
many providers many times in the records. 
There are four factors which are unusual in her case but do not negate the 
diagnosis or radiculopathy: mild findings on imaging, negative response to 
epidural steroid injection, and negative or equivocal straight leg raise. 
Ms. Tellez had the diagnosis of lumbar radiculopathy based on her 
symptoms and exam findings. Imaging is not necessary per the AMA 
Guides, 5th Edition. A lumbar radiculopathy is diagnosed by symptoms and 
findings and often is (but does not have to be) associated with 
compressive disc herniations. Radiculopathy is described as pain, 
numbness, tingling, or weakness caused by inflammation of the nerve 
root. While it is typically a compressive lesion that causes that 
inflammation, it does not have to be. A diagnosis of radiculopathy is based 
on symptoms both in general clinical care as well as based on the AMA 
Guides. 
CE 1:8-9 
 
Dr. Segal placed claimant at MMI as of January 20, 2021, as it was unlikely she 
would improve further based on treatment. (CE 1:24) As a result of her lumbar 
radiculopathy, facet arthropathy, SI joint pain, piriformis syndrome, and trochanteric 
bursitis, Dr. Segal assigned a 23 percent whole person impairment. (CE 1:26)  
 
He recommended the following work restrictions:  
 Walking:  30 minutes consecutive, rest for 10 minutes, then can walk 
again (4 hours/day) – should have walking cane available 
 Sitting:  15 minutes consecutive, total 4 hours with breaks as needed 
 Standing:  15 minutes consecutive with shifting 
 Bending, 1-2 times:  Occasionally 
 Bending, repetitive:  Never 
 Lifting once 0-15 pounds: Occasionally 
 Lifting once 16-30 pounds:  Rarely 
 Lifting over 30 pounds:  Never 
 Lifting repetitive:  0-10 pounds:  Occasionally 
 Lifting repetitive:  over 11 pounds:  Rarely 
 Pushing/Pulling up to 30 pounds on wheels:  Occasionally 
 Pushing/Pulling up to 10 pounds without wheels:  Occasionally 
 Squatting:  Rarely 

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 14 
 
 Ladders:  Rarely 
 Crawling:  Rarely 
 (CE 1:26-27)  
 
Dr. Segal reviewed additional records as well as the surveillance video and 
interviewed claimant via the telephone for an updated report issued on March 14, 2022. 
(CE 1:54) Dr. Segal noted that claimant’s subjective complaints were unchanged and 
that she has had no further treatment. Id. Dr. Segal wrote,  
[t]here are times she needs to bend, so she does it, but it hurts. She states 
short trips to the store are manageable. When she was seen in my office 
for the IME, it was after a long car ride here, so she was in more pain and 
bent less easily than when she had been resting and going to the store in 
August. She thinks the day of the surveillance video was a “better” day. 
(CE 1:55) However, claimant’s pain was 3 on a 10 scale at the time of the 2021 
examination when she averaged 6 on a 10 scale.  
 
Nonetheless, Dr. Segal maintained his position on claimant’s injuries and 
believed that the surveillance videos were generally consistent with the history and 
examination reflected in the IME report and disagreed with the “cursory” conclusions of 
Dr. Abernathey. (CE 1:57)  
 
Dr. Segal was detailed in his report and provided many medical justifications, 
however he arrived at some factual conclusions without substantial backing such as 
concluding claimant sustained a 20 percent increase in pain and disability based solely 
on claimant’s assessment. He also ignored the fact that he had previously recorded 
claimant’s pain on the low end of the scale at the time of the 2021 examination and 
instead suggested in his 2022 opinion that she was worse off at the time of the IME than 
she was on the days surveillance was taken.  
 
On March 2, 2022, Chad D. Abernathey, M.D., issued an opinion that claimant 
did not suffer any objective anatomic or structural change or damage to her low back 
and spine. (DE G) The MRI of the lumbosacral spine and EMG studies were 
unrevealing with the MRI from 2019 and 2021 showing minimal degenerative changes 
consistent with age. Id. He did not mention the hip MRI results and subsequent 
treatment related to that. He characterized claimant’s injury as a musculoskeletal strain 
and did not anticipate any permanent impairment or restrictions as a result. Id. He found 
her MMI date to be six months from the date of injury, due to a paucity of clinical or 
radiographic findings. Id. He further did not anticipate that any additional medical 
management would be of any “significant benefit” nearly three years post injury. Id.  (DE 
G) He favored conservative treatment. (DE G:3) 
 
Claimant has not seen Dr. Elwood since January 2021 because of her 
pregnancy, but since she has delivered the child, she would like to return to Dr. Elwood 
and attempt injections. She testified that with her most recent pregnancy there was no 
change in her symptoms.  

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 15 
 
 
Her medical bills are included in Exhibit 5. The adjusted amount claimed is 
$34,720.55. (CE 5:76) Claimant also asserts entitlement to reimbursement of mileage of 
$610.28 in Exhibit 6. (CE 6:138)  
 
Additionally, claimant seeks reimbursement for costs such as the filing fee, copy 
of the deposition, and the IME of Dr. Segal which is broken down as follows: 
Records review:   
$937.50  
Exam:   
 
$937.50 
Report:   
         $2250.00 
(CE 7:141) 
 
Defendants request a specific finding of credibility as it relates to the claimant. 
Defendants argue that based on the video surveillance as well as the lack of objective 
findings supporting claimant’s subjective complaints, claimant was not a credible 
witness. While the objective tests such as EMGs, MRIs, and x-rays did not find 
evidence of radicular symptoms, claimant’s complaints of left-sided pain and discomfort 
were consistent. Further, while claimant did show more function in her surveillance 
video than she testified to or that she related to her medical providers at times, she was 
seen walking with an altered gait. The surveillance report described her walking with a 
“waddling gait.” (DE H) Her testimony that she could lift her child and hand him off to her 
husband was seen in the surveillance video. The way that she kicks and pushes a 
shovel in the snow was consistent with the scene in the surveillance video. The one 
place where she may be characterized as exaggerating her complaints may have been 
in the report of Dr. Segal, but it might be more accurate to suggest that the way in which 
Dr. Segal portrayed her as disabled did not match the claimant’s overall condition rather 
than the claimant herself not being fully forthcoming or being contradictory.  
 
Pain is a subjective complaint. AMA Guides 5th Edition, p. 566. Each person 
experiences pain differently due to biological, psychological, and social components. Id. 
There are no precise tests to measure pain. Id.  
Physicians are confronted with ambiguity as they attempt to assess 
severity and significance of chronic pain in their patients. In large part, this 
stems from the fundamental divide between the person who suffers from 
pain and an observer who attempts to understand that suffering. 
Observers tend to view pain complaints with suspicion and disbelief, akin 
to complaints of dizziness, fatigue and malaise. As Scarry remarked, “To 
have great pain is to have certainty, to hear that another person has pain 
is to have doubt.”  
Id.  
 
Because of claimant’s consistent complaints of pain since her February 6, 2019, 
fall, along with the extensive treatments including months of physical therapy, multiple 
injections, and medications, it is found that claimant is a credible witness. Accepting 
claimant as a credible witness does not mean her testimony is given greater weight than 

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 16 
 
surveillance, objective tests, and expert testimony, but only that her testimony was 
largely consistent, and while her pain complaints may not perfectly match the objective 
tests and surveillance, it does not mean the pain is not present.  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  An 
injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the injury 
and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309. The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 17 
 
A personal injury contemplated by the workers’ compensation law means an 
injury, the impairment of health or a disease resulting from an injury which comes about, 
not through the natural building up and tearing down of the human body, but because of 
trauma. The injury must be something that acts extraneously to the natural processes of 
nature and thereby impairs the health, interrupts or otherwise destroys or damages a 
part or all of the body. Although many injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no 
requirement for a special incident or an unusual occurrence. Injuries which result from 
cumulative trauma are compensable. Increased disability from a prior injury, even if 
brought about by further work, does not constitute a new injury, however. St. Luke’s 
Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 
440 (Iowa 1999); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 
1995); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1985). An 
occupational disease covered by chapter 85A is specifically excluded from the definition 
of personal injury. Iowa Code section 85.61(4)(b); Iowa Code section 85A.8; Iowa Code 
section 85A.14. 
The parties agree claimant sustained an injury to her left hip, low back, and lower 
left extremity on February 6, 2019. They further agree, she injured her right hip and right 
lower extremity on February 21, 2019. The parties disagree as to whether these two 
injury dates resulted in permanent disabilities.  
With the February 21, 2019, injury claimant argued she aggravated her February 
6, 2019, injuries. The mechanism of the February 21, 2019, injury was falling on the 
right side.  
Claimant has consistently complained of left lower extremity radiculopathy. Her 
complaints for right lower extremity radiculopathy are not as unchanging. In her 
extensive testing with Dr. Segal, right-sided pain and weakness was not documented. 
(See CE 1:7 wherein Dr. Segal found claimant to have full motor responses in all 
muscle groups on the right, no sensory loss on the right, negative provocative SI joint 
testing on the right, negative straight leg test on the right). In the list of diagnoses, Dr. 
Segal wrote “right hip and knee injury (resolved).”   
While claimant did report bilateral pain in November 2020 to Dr. Elwood, the 
primary focus of her treatment in the months preceding was on the left side and there 
were few documented complaints of right-sided pain in the course of claimant’s 
treatment including with medical providers claimant chose on her own. In August 2021 
Fuelling Chiropractic Clinic records, claimant identified left lower back pain going into 
her left leg. (JE 15:111) In the December 2021 Fuelling Chiropractic Clinic records, 
claimant’s pain was located in the left leg along with neck and middle back. (JE 15:112) 
Her January 21, 2022, complaints to the chiropractor were of lower back pain radiating 
into the left leg. Id.  
Based on the medical records and the conclusion of Dr. Segal that the right-sided 
injuries were resolved at the time of his examination, it is determined that claimant 
sustained a temporary injury to the right side arising out of the February 21, 2019, fall 
and that any right-sided injuries have since resolved, leaving no residual disability.  

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 18 
 
Turning to the fall of February 6, 2019, and any exacerbation of the injuries to the 
low back and left lower extremity that may have occurred on February 21, 2019, the 
record does support a finding that claimant sustained some amount of permanent 
disability, even if it is only by subjective complaints. Dr. Abernathey’s opinion of March 
4, 2022, stated that claimant presented with chronic subjective lumbosacral strain 
following two falls at work. (DE G:2) Dr. McMains assessed a 2 percent permanent 
impairment as a result of the February 6 and February 21, 2019, low back injury. (DE 
E:1) Claimant had multiple injections, physical therapy referrals, and prescription 
medications to treat the lumbar strain suggesting that several health care providers 
found claimant’s complaints to be of a serious enough nature that they warranted 
treatment.  
This is sufficient evidence to support a finding that claimant sustained a 
permanent disability. Having determined claimant has sustained a permanent disability, 
the question then turns to the extent.  
Claimant currently earns $200 more per week than she earned at the time of her 
injury. While with defendant employer and at all relevant times, her hourly wage was 
$13.80. Her currently hourly wage is $19.95.  
Iowa Code sec. 85.34(2)(v) limits the amount of recovery to only a functional 
impairment and not in relation to claimant’s earning capacity when an injured worker 
returns to work at an equal or higher wage. However, the Commissioner has deemed 
that this is only applicable if the claimant is employed with the same employer and 
earning the equal or higher wages. See Martinez v. Pavlich, Inc., File No. 5063900 
(App. July 30, 2020) It should be noted that in the Commissioner’s decision, the 
positions taken by the Martinez parties were “the inverse of what might be anticipated in 
a ‘normal’ scenario—when a claimant's potential entitlement to industrial disability 
exceeds his or her functional disability. In such ‘normal’ cases, the claimant would be 
arguing for an interpretation of the statute which would entitle him or her to benefits 
under the industrial disability analysis and the defendants would be arguing for an 
interpretation that limited the claimant's benefits to his or her functional disability.” 
Zachary Martinez, Claimant, File No. 5063900, 2020 WL 5412838, at *6 (July 30, 2020) 
Regardless, the Commissioner’s argument applies to this case as the 
employment and earning facts between the two cases are similar. Like Martinez, 
claimant voluntarily separated from defendant employer and sought out new 
employment. She is earning $200 more per week than she had previously. Using the 
Commissioner’s interpretation, claimant’s loss should be measured on an industrial 
basis.  
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows: "It is therefore plain that the 
Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning 
capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of 
the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 19 
 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Section 85.34. 
In support of the claimant’s position that she has sustained a significant industrial 
disability, claimant relies on the expert testimony of Dr. Segal along with the fact that 
she had no prior record of complaints of radicular symptoms in either of her legs nor 
sought anything but minor and sporadic chiropractic treatment for low back complaints.  
Dr. Segal’s report is lengthy and detailed but not without errors and questionable 
assumptions. For instance, claimant maintained that she had a twenty percent increase 
in her pain following the second fall on February 21, 2019. Dr. Segal accepts this 
assessment without question and without pointing to any medical records for support.   
After viewing claimant’s surveillance video, Dr. Segal continued to hew to his 
original opinions and even incorrectly identified that her pain was 6 out of 10 at the IME 
visit, and that the pain at the IME visit must have been worse than during the times the 
surveillance video was taken. However, claimant’s current pain at the time of her 
examination with Dr. Segal was 3 out of 10. (CE 1:3)  
Dr. Segal stated the right radicular pain was well document in the records as a 
whole when the medical records for most of 2019 and 2020 and well into 2021 
contained only the occasional reference to right-sided radiculopathy. (CE 1:24)  
Dr. Segal also disagrees with most of claimant’s medical providers. For instance, 
Dr. Elwood commented on November 11, 2020, that it was likely claimant did not have 
radiculopathy because of the lack of effect the epidural had. (CE 1:9) He also disagreed 
with Dr. McMains who concluded that the claimant was suffering from chronic left 
piriformis syndrome because Dr. McMains’ opinion excluded well-documented lumbar 
pain and that Dr. McMains did not document severe tenderness in the piriformis area, 
meaning Dr. McMains diagnosis was not complete. (CE 1:10)  
Dr. Segal has lengthy explanations for why claimant continues to have significant 
debilitating complaints despite no objective support. Her MRIs and EMGs were both 
normal or at least within the range of normalcy given her age. Claimant was pregnant at 
the time of her fall which Dr. Segal does not give much of any weight as it relates to 
possible back or lower extremity problems. Claimant was given a full duty release by Dr. 
McMains, Nurse Practitioner Johnson, and Dr. Kirkle. Even Dr. Elwood, a doctor who 

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 20 
 
was not retained by defendants, found it highly unlikely that claimant’s condition 
included radicular symptoms given that she was not responsive to the bilateral steroid 
injections and that her EMG was normal.  
At hearing, claimant testified that her pain waxes and wanes with an average of 3 
or 4 on a 10 scale but can go higher with activity. (Tr., p. 26: Ln 14-25) She does not 
usually walk with a limp but does when her pain flares up. There are portions of the day 
she is pain free in her back and leg. Claimant attributes this to her ability to take 
frequent breaks and move as needed. She does her current position without any work 
restrictions and has not had work restrictions since taking the position with Allen 
Hospital in 2019.  
Claimant’s own testimony along with the objective test results, the surveillance 
videos, and the opinions of Dr. Elwood, Nurse Practitioner Johnson, Dr. McMains and 
Dr. Kirkle support a finding that claimant has sustained a modest industrial loss. Dr. 
McMains assessed a 2 percent permanent disability, however the AMA Guides 5th 
Edition allow for 5-8 percent BAW permanent impairments for patients with nonverifiable 
radicular complaints. 5th Edition at 384.  
Claimant is a 25-year-old person which means she can gain skill and experience 
or even undergo retraining. She has a high school education but has taken post-
secondary learning courses including completing a medical office specialist program. 
She was able to move from a receptionist position to a cash posting specialist position, 
increasing her earnings despite her impairment. These factors weigh toward a smaller 
industrial disability finding. She is motivated to return to work and actively looked for 
employment even during her maternity leave in 2019. She has ongoing pain and 
discomfort. Weighing all these factors, it is found claimant’s industrial disability is 12 
percent.  
The appropriate PPD date is January 20, 2021, based on the treatment provided 
by Dr. Elwood and his conclusion that claimant was suffering from a chronic pain not 
likely radicular in nature. She has had no treatment since that date.  
Because it is found that the dates of injury are not severable and that the 
February 21, 2019, injury exacerbated the February 6, 2019, injury, the appropriate 
benefit rate is $346.26 which is the stipulated benefit rate of the February 21, 2019, 
injury.  
As to the medical expenses, including the mileage, defendants advised claimant 
that no further medical treatment was authorized and that she should seek treatment 
through other sources. As such, an authorized defense is not available to the 
defendants. R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190 (Iowa 2003). Under the 
Bell Bros. standard, if a claim is denied, the injured worker can select his or her own 
medical care. Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 207 
(Iowa 2010) 

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 21 
 
While claimant did not obtain full recovery from the treatment she sought and 
received, the treatment was reasonable and necessary to treat the musculoskeletal 
strain that she suffered from her February 2019 falls while at work. Therefore, it is found 
that claimant is entitled to recover the expenses in Exhibit 5 and Exhibit 6.  
Claimant seeks reimbursement of the IME of Dr. Segal. According to Des Moines 
Area Reg'l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 841–42 (Iowa 2015), an IME is 
recoverable if the claimant complies with the procedure described in Iowa Code section 
85.39. 85.39 requires a triggering event. That triggering event is when a physician 
retained by the defendant employer issues an impairment rating that is deemed too low 
by the claimant. Iowa Code section 85.39. In this case, Dr. McMains issued a 2 percent 
impairment rating on July 11, 2019. This opinion triggered claimant’s right to obtain an 
IME, which she did on March 19, 2021, with Dr. Segal.  
Thus, the examination portion of the IME is awarded under Iowa Code section 
85.39 while the report is assessed as a cost under 876 IAC 4.33. See also Kern v. 
Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 966 NW2d 326 (Iowa Ct. App. 2021) (ordering the 
commissioner to reconsider the question of reimbursement for the cost of report 
preparation). In addition to the filing fee, claimant also seeks recovery for the cost of the 
deposition. 876 IAC 4.33 allows for the recovery of the attendance of a certified 
shorthand reporter or presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential 
depositions. Iowa Admin. Code r. 876-4.33(86) In this case, it was not clear what the 
cost of the deposition fee was, whether it was the cost of a copy of the deposition or the 
fee of the certified shorthand reporter. Thus, the cost of the deposition is not 
recoverable due to lack of evidence submitted by claimant.  
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant sixty (60) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits commencing on January 20, 2021, at the weekly rate of three hundred forty-six 
and 26/100 dollars ($346.26). 
 
Defendants shall receive credit for all benefits previously paid. 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. 
 
Defendants shall pay all causally related medical expenses in Exhibit 5 as well 
the mileage expenses claimed in Exhibit 6 
 
Defendants shall provide claimant with future medical care for all treatment 
causally related to the musculoskeletal strain to the low back and left-sided hip pain.  

TELLEZ V. AMITY FELLOWSERVE – IOWA, INC. 
Page 22 
 
 
Defendants shall pay the costs of the examination of Dr. Segal pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.39.  
 
Pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33, defendants shall pay claimant's costs of the 
arbitration proceeding as set forth in the arbitration decision, along with the cost of the 
hearing transcript.  
 
Signed and filed this ____20th ____ day of July, 2022. 
 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE  
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Benjamin Roth (via WCES) 
Nathan McConkey (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
