Case Number: 5048905
Case Title:  HALVERSON, APRIL V. DYERSVILLE FOOD BANK INC
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Halverson, April-5048905.District Court Decision.pdf
========================================================================

IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR POLK COUNTY 
 
DYERSVILLE FOOD BANK and 
DONEGAL MUTUAL INS. CO. d/b/a 
LEMARS INSURANCE COMPANY, 
 
         Petitioners, 
 
v. 
 
APRIL HALVERSON, 
 
         Respondent. 
 
 
   Case No. CVCV059735 
 
  
 
 
 
RULING ON JUDICIAL REVIEW 
 
 
This is a judicial review action from a decision of the Workers Compensation 
Commissioner (the commissioner) on a petition for partial commutation and a petition for 
review-reopening.  The court held a hearing on June 5, 2020.  Thomas Read represented 
petitioners Dyersville Food Bank and Donegal Mutual Ins. Co. d/b/a LeMars Insurance 
Company (jointly referred to as DFB).  Daniel Anderson represented respondent April Halverson 
(claimant).   
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Procedural background:  The facts are largely taken from the decision of the deputy 
workers’ compensation commissioner, but also directly from the administrative record.  
Claimant injured her back on June 1, 2013, while working for DFP.  The employer did not 
initially deny workers’ compensation coverage and was able to direct care.  It directed claimant 
to Dr. Joseph Chen at the Spine Rehabilitation Program with the University of Iowa Hospital and 
Clinics.  Claimant attended the two-week program in February of 2014.  The program provided 
some relief and taught exercises that claimant has continued to use.  Dr. Chen entered maximum 
E-FILED  2020 JUL 01 11:09 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

2 
 
medical improvement (MMI) on April 2, 2014.  He found an 8 percent impairment to the body as 
a whole.1 
 
An arbitration hearing was held September 9, 2015.  At that hearing, DFB denied 
liability.  The deputy entered a decision on December 1, 2015, finding that claimant suffered an 
injury, the injury arose out of and in the course of employment, and the injury caused permanent 
aggravations to claimant’s pre-existing back and mental health conditions.  The deputy awarded 
permanent total disability benefits.  DFB appealed.  On June 29, 2017, the commissioner entered 
an order affirming all of the above findings.   
 
On June 30, 2017, claimant filed a petition for partial commutation.  She sought to 
convert some of her future benefits to a present worth lump sum payment to pay primarily for 
home modifications and a used car.  On November 3, 2017, DFP filed a petition for review-
reopening, alleging that claimant refused to submit to medical treatment designed to minimize 
her disability.2  DFP argued that claimant’s benefits should be reduced, suspended, or forfeited. 
 
The two petitions were consolidated and set for hearing before a deputy commissioner on 
May 3, 2018.  On September 25, 2018, the deputy entered a decision granting the commutation 
and denying the review-reopening.  DFP filed an intra-agency appeal.  On January 13, 2020, the 
commissioner affirmed the deputy’s decision in its entirety.   
 
On judicial review, DFP does not challenge the substantive finding on the petition for 
commutation.  It argued that claimant failed to attend an independent medical examination (IME) 
with Dr. Chen on January 9, 2017, and such failure to attend justified its decision to suspend 
                                                          
1   Dr. Chen also saw claimant on September 28, 2015, following the arbitration hearing.  Dr. Chen did not change 
his treatment recommendations or finding of MMI. 
2 At hearing, DFP focused on the failure to attend the failure to attend an IME, as discussed further in this ruling. 
E-FILED  2020 JUL 01 11:09 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

3 
 
payment of workers’ compensation benefits.  DFP also claimed that the failure to attend the IME 
should serve as a basis to deny a commutation of benefits. 
 
Statement of facts relating to the IME:  Claimant continued to receive mental health 
treatment as the parties waited for the appeal decision from the commissioner.  In August of 
2016, claimant agreed to see a psychiatrist suggested by DFP, Dr. Abdur Rahim.  Dr. Rahim 
indicated in his notes that claimant’s depression might be worsening because she could not 
engage in activities she enjoyed due to her back problem.  That prompted DFP to want to 
schedule claimant for another back evaluation.  In September of 2016, a representative of DFP 
contacted claimant’s counsel to attempt to schedule an appointment with an orthopedic doctor in 
Waterloo, where claimant was then residing.  The request did not specify whether the 
appointment was for treatment or an IME.  Claimant’s attorney interpreted it as a request for 
treatment and responded that the employer had no right to direct care because it had denied 
liability at hearing and continued to do so on appeal. 
 
DFP then changed tactics.  On November 18, 2016, DFP sent a letter to claimant 
directing her to attend an appointment with Dr. Chen on November 28, 2016, to conduct an IME.  
After receiving a response from claimant’s counsel, DFP cancelled the appointment due to the 
short notice (including the Thanksgiving holiday).  The IME appointment was reset for January 
9, 2017.  Claimant’s attorney contacted the DFP’s attorney to inform him that claimant would 
not attend that appointment.  The basis for that decision was that Dr. Chen had already stated he 
had no further care to offer.  Claimant’s counsel expressed his belief that DFP was simply trying 
to create evidence it might use in a review-reopening hearing.  DFP suspended payment of 
benefits to claimant after she failed to attend the appointment. 
E-FILED  2020 JUL 01 11:09 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

4 
 
 
On July 11, 2017, DFP sent another message to claimant’s counsel trying to set an 
appointment with Dr. Chen for August 25, 2017.  This communication was made approximately 
two weeks after the commissioner’s decision to award benefits.  The appointment was not to 
obtain an IME, but was purportedly set pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27 for treatment 
purposes.  The letter stated that they wanted to evaluate her to determine whether she should 
attend the spine clinic a second time.  Claimant did not attend that appointment because she did 
not believe participation in the spine clinic program again would improve her condition. 
 
The agency decision:  The deputy commissioner first found that a review-reopening was 
not warranted because DFP was not alleging a change in claimant’s physical or employment 
condition.  DFP had stipulated that her physical condition remained the same.  The deputy 
questioned whether DFP could bring an action challenging a refusal to submit to treatment under 
section 85.27 or an IME under section 85.39 in a review-reopening procedure.  Therefore, she 
found that the review-reopening should be denied for failure to meet the standard in the statute.  
 
The deputy proceeded to discuss the merits of DFP’s claims.  She found that the failure to 
attend the IME appointments on November 28, 2016, and January 7, 2017, were reasonable 
“[e]ven assuming the appointments were for [IME’s].”  The deputy noted that claimant had 
previously been evaluated and treated by Dr. Chen.  He had previously released her with 
instructions to continue the exercises she had learned during her two weeks at the pain clinic in 
2014.  She had continued to do the exercises as instructed.  She also found that section 85.27 did 
not justify reopening because the appointments in November of 2016 and January of 2017 were 
set to do an IME and not for treatment.  Even if they were for treatment, there was no evidence 
of a change of condition and Dr. Chen had previously released claimant without further 
E-FILED  2020 JUL 01 11:09 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

5 
 
treatment recommendations.  As a result, she found DFP’s decision to suspend payment of 
benefits to be unjustified. 
 
 
E-FILED  2020 JUL 01 11:09 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

6 
 
STANDARD OF REVIEW 
Iowa Code chapter 17A governs judicial review of administrative agency action. The 
district court acts in an appellate capacity to correct errors of law on the part of the agency. Meyer 
v. IBP, Inc., 710 N.W.2d 213, 219 (Iowa 2006).  The court “may grant relief if the agency action 
has prejudiced the substantial rights of the petitioner, and the agency action meets one of the 
enumerated criteria contained in section 17A.19(10)(a) through (n).” Burton v. Hilltop Care Cntr., 
813 N.W.2d 250, 256 (Iowa 2012) (quoting Evercom Sys., Inc. v. Iowa Utilities Bd., 805 N.W.2d 
758, 762 (Iowa 2011)).  
The courts use a substantial evidence standard when considering challenges to findings of 
fact in agency decisions.  A reviewing court can only disturb factual findings if they are “not 
supported by substantial evidence in the record before the court when that record is reviewed as a 
whole.”  Burton, 813 N.W.2d at 256 (quoting Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f)).  The Iowa Supreme 
Court has outlined the court’s guidelines when reviewing substantial evidence claims under the 
17A.19 standard as follows: 
When reviewing a finding of fact for substantial evidence, we judge the finding in 
light of all the relevant evidence in the record cited by any party that detracts from 
that finding as well as all of the relevant evidence in the record cited by any party 
that supports it.  Our review of the record is fairly intensive, and we do not simply 
rubber stamp the agency finding of fact. 
 
Evidence is not insubstantial merely because different conclusions may be drawn 
from the evidence. To that end, evidence may be substantial even though we may 
have drawn a different conclusion as fact finder. Our task, therefore, is not to 
determine whether the evidence supports a different finding; rather, our task is to 
determine whether substantial evidence, viewing the record as a whole, supports 
the findings actually made. 
 
Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 845 (Iowa 2011) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
 
E-FILED  2020 JUL 01 11:09 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

7 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
A party to a workers’ compensation settlement or award may filed a petition for review-
reopening to determine whether the condition of the employees warrants an increase, a decrease, 
or an end of benefits.  Gallardo v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 482 N.W.2d 393, 395–96 (Iowa 
1992) (citing Iowa Code § 86.14(2)).  The moving party carries the burden of establishing by a 
preponderance of the evidence that, subsequent to the date of the award under review, there was 
a change to the employee’s impairment or earning capacity caused by the original injury.  Id.  
This standard implements principles of res judicata, that is, the agency “should not reevaluate an 
employee's level of physical impairment or earning capacity if all of the facts and circumstances 
were known or knowable at the time of the original action.”  Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 
N.W.2d 387, 393 (Iowa 2009).  The standard implements the legislative intent to “avoid 
litigation, lessen the expense incident thereto, minimize appeals, and afford an efficient and 
speedy tribunal to determine and award compensation under the terms of this act.”  Id. 
This case seems to exemplify the concerns that the legislature wanted to avoid.  The 
deputy commissioner entered a decision finding permanent disability on December 1, 2015, 
following a contested hearing.  That was two and a half years after the injury occurred.  The 
discovery and evidence gathering stage of the case should have been done.  DFP kept going. 
Three years after the injury, while the case was on intra-agency appeal, DFP tried to send 
claimant to an orthopedic specialist to evaluate her back, ostensibly for treatment purposes.  
However, because DFP had denied liability at hearing and on appeal, it lost the ability to direct 
care.  See Winnebago Indus., Inc. v. Haverly, 727 N.W.2d 567, 575 (Iowa 2006); Iowa Code § 
85.27.  As a result, claimant turned down the request.  DFP then tried to send claimant back to 
Dr. Chen for an IME.  However, the purpose of an IME is to determine “the extent and character 
E-FILED  2020 JUL 01 11:09 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

8 
 
of the injury for purposes of paying benefits in the event of a disability resulting from the 
injury.”  Des Moines Area Reg'l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 843 (Iowa 2015) (cites 
and internal quotes omitted).  This case had been heard and decided at the time DFP made this 
request.  There was no legitimate purpose for an IME at that point in the proceedings. 
Moreover, DFP wanted to use Dr. Chen to conduct the IME.  Dr. Chen had previously 
treated and evaluated claimant in 2014.  He found that claimant was at MMI and made an 
impairment rating at that time.  He saw claimant again in September of 2015 for a review.  He 
did not change his findings.  He had already determined and reaffirmed the “extent and 
character” of the back injury.  There was no reason to send claimant back to Dr. Chen for an 
IME in 2017, more than three and a half years after the injury.  
DFP was obviously trying to use the statutory process to attempt to gain evidence to 
support a petition for review-reopening.  The statute does not work that way.  The requesting 
party must have evidence to support a review-reopening, not use a meritless IME request to 
support review-reopening.  The only basis for DFP’s review-reopening was claimant’s refusal to 
attend the IME.  That placing the process in reverse. 
The supreme court discussed this issue in a different context in Kohlhaas.  In that case, 
the employee filed a petition for review-reopening and then sought an IME to attack the 
employer’s physician’s report from the prior proceeding.  Kohlhaas, 777 N.W.2d at 394.  The 
court held that the review-reopening is a “new and distinct proceeding apart from the original 
arbitration action[.]”  If the employer had obtained a new evaluation during the review-
reopening, the employee might have the right to obtain an IME to challenge the new evaluation.  
Id.  However, he could not use section 85.39 to obtain an IME to challenge an evaluation used at 
the arbitration hearing three years earlier.  Id. at 395.   
E-FILED  2020 JUL 01 11:09 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

9 
 
In this case, the parties had not even got to the point of the new and distinct proceeding.  
The case had been decided by the deputy, so the evidentiary stage of the arbitration hearing was 
complete.  The petition for review-reopening had not been filed, so there were no grounds to ask 
for an IME as part of a new proceeding.  DFP essentially tried to weaponized section 85.39 to 
create a reason to relitigate the disability issue.  DFP did not have any right to use section 85.39 
at that stage of the proceedings. 
The agency’s decision was correct.  There was no evidence to support a review-
reopening.  Claimant’s refusal to attend the IME was reasonable and not required by law.  
Because the review-reopening was not supported by any evidence, all of DFP’s other arguments 
necessarily fail.  The suspension of benefits was improper and there is substantial evidence to 
support the partial commutation.  Accordingly, the agency decision is affirmed in all respects. 
RULING 
 
The agency decision is affirmed.  Petitioner shall pay any court costs.     
E-FILED  2020 JUL 01 11:09 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

State of Iowa Courts
Type:
OTHER ORDER
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV059735
DYERSVILLE FOOD BANK INC ET AL VS APRIL HALVERSON
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2020-07-01 11:09:29     page 10 of 10
E-FILED  2020 JUL 01 11:09 AM POLK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT
