Case Number: 20008199.01
Case Title:  HEMER, DYLAN V. STEPHANIE BALLANTINE
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Hemer Dylan-20008199.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DYLAN HEMER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
   File No. 20008199.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                       
STEPHANIE BALLANTINE, 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                      
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
GRINNELL MUTUAL REINSURANCE    : 
 
COMPANY, 
  : 
         Head Note Nos.: 1803, 2502 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :              
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Dylan Hemer, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Stephanie Ballantine (Ballantine), employer, and Grinnell 
Mutual Reinsurance Company, insurer, both as defendants.  This matter was heard on 
April 22, 2024, with a final submission date of May 24, 2024. 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 9, Claimant’s Exhibits 
1 through 6, Defendants’ Exhibits A through I, and the testimony of claimant and Diane 
Hemer.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
ISSUES 
1. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits. 
2. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
evaluation (IME) under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Oct-28  15:20:43     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HEMER V. STEPHANIE BALLANTINE 
Page 2 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
Claimant was 23 years old at the time of hearing.  Claimant graduated from high 
school.  Claimant graduated from Iowa State University with a degree in agricultural 
studies and a minor in agronomy.  (Hearing Transcript, pages 11, 20) 
 
Claimant worked for Ballantine at Ballantine Farms part-time beginning in the 
spring or summer of 2019.  Claimant then left to attend school at Iowa State University.  
(Tr., pp. 11-13) 
 
Claimant said that in the spring of 2020, when the COVID pandemic occurred, he 
returned home to complete his spring semester at ISU online.  During that time, 
claimant returned to work for Ballantine.  (Tr., p. 13)  Claimant’s job duties with 
Ballantine included, but were not limited to washing equipment, mowing grass, hauling 
corn, and maintaining equipment.  (Tr., pp. 13-14)  Claimant said that when classes 
ended in May of 2020, he worked full-time for Ballantine during the summer.  (Tr., p. 14) 
 
On June 24, 2020, claimant was spraying weeds on fence lines of two farms run 
by Ballantine.  Claimant had a sprayer on an ATV.  Claimant finished spraying at one 
farm and was en route to another.  Claimant said his last memory of that day is that he 
was driving the ATV on a gravel road.  (Tr., pp. 15-16) 
 
According to an accident report, claimant lost control of the ATV and was thrown 
into a ditch.  A witness to the accident said that claimant was found unresponsive.  (Tr., 
p. 17; Defendants’ Exhibit B, page 4) 
 
Claimant was transferred by ambulance to an area hospital.  (Ex. B, p. 4; Joint 
Exhibit 2) 
 
On June 24, 2020, claimant was admitted to the emergency room at Horn 
Memorial Hospital.  Claimant had amnesia of the accident.  Claimant was assessed, in 
part, as having an unstable T3 fracture and a subdural hematoma.  Claimant also had  
spinous process fractures at T1 and T2.  Because of the severity of his injuries, claimant 
was transferred by helicopter to Mercy Hospital in Sioux City.  
 
Claimant was evaluated at Mercy in Sioux City on the same date.  Claimant 
underwent an MRI.  It showed, in part, an acute Chance-type fracture of T6 and acute 
T3-T6 spinous process fractures.  Claimant was also assessed as having a traumatic 
brain injury.  (JE 4, pp. 22-23) 
 
Records indicate that claimant’s mother was told claimant was lucky because if 
the injury had progressed slightly further, claimant could have severed his spinal cord.  
(Claimant’s Exhibit 1, page 4) 
 
On June 24, 2020, claimant underwent surgery performed by Quentin Durward, 
M.D.  Surgery consisted of partial T5, T6 laminectomies with decompression of the 
spinal canal; reduction of kyphotic deformity and spondylolisthesis at T5-T6; bilateral 

HEMER V. STEPHANIE BALLANTINE 
Page 3 
 
posterior and posterolateral fusion at T4, T5, T6, T7 and T8 utilizing local harvested 
autograft bone, allograft bone chips, and left iliac crest bone marrow aspirate; bilateral 
pedicle screw instrumentation and stabilization of T4, T5, T6, T7 and T8.  (JE 4, p. 33) 
 
Claimant was hospitalized from June 24, 2020, through July 2, 2020, at Mercy in 
Sioux City.  (JE 4, p. 35)  While in the hospital, testing showed that claimant had 
cognitive-linguistic deficits following the accident.  Claimant had problems with memory, 
fluency and abstract problem solving.  Speech therapy was recommended.  (Ex. 1, p. 5) 
 
Between June 6, 2020, and October 5, 2020, claimant underwent physical 
therapy approximately 2-3 times a week. 
 
Claimant was evaluated by Dr. Durward on August 3, 2020.  Claimant had 
recovered well from the injury.  Claimant was still wearing a back brace and was told to 
wean off the brace.  Claimant was told he could return to school within two weeks.  (JE 
6, pp. 56-57) 
 
From August 18, 2020, through May 3, 2021, claimant continued to undergo 
physical therapy.  (JE 7) 
 
Claimant returned for his sophomore year at ISU.  Records indicate claimant had 
difficulty with focus, comprehension, and studying due to his traumatic closed head 
injury.  Records indicate accommodations were made to help claimant with cognitive 
issues.  (Ex. 1, p. 6; JE 6, pp. 59, 61) 
 
On November 6, 2020, claimant underwent cognitive testing.  It showed that 
claimant had a mild neurocognitive disorder due to his traumatic brain injury.  Claimant 
had difficulties that included, but were not limited to, multitasking, memory, and 
processing speed.  Recommendations were made for accommodations for claimant at 
school.  Those recommendations included: 
1. Claimant should be given outlines with specific instructions, copies of 
PowerPoints; 
2. Considerations should be given to reduce the number of things claimant must 
attend to and remember or do when solving problems; 
3. Claimant should be given software to record his voice and transcribe his 
written assignments.  Claimant should also be given applications that help 
him with organization and time management;  
4. Claimant should be given extra time for testing; 
5. Claimant should be given the option to test in a quiet environment; 
6. Claimant should be given extra time for projects; 
7. Claimant may require prompting with more complex tasks; 

HEMER V. STEPHANIE BALLANTINE 
Page 4 
 
8. Memory aides and visual cues would be helpful for claimant to overcome 
difficulties he has with storage of short-term memory. 
(JE 6, p. 76; Ex. 1, p. 7) 
 
Claimant returned to work for Ballantine during winter break from school in 
December of 2020 and January of 2021.  (Tr., pp. 21, 36, 42) 
 
In a May 12, 2021, response to a letter from defendant-insurer, Dr. Durward 
opined that claimant had a 20 percent permanent impairment for his work-related injury.  
Claimant was allowed to return to work with no permanent restrictions.  (JE 6, p. 86) 
 
In the spring of 2021, claimant went to work part-time for an area farm owned by 
Kurt Duitsman.  (Tr., pp. 22-23)  During the summer of 2021, claimant was hired as a 
full-time paid intern with Bayer.  During this time, he continued to work for Mr. Duitsman 
on the weekends.  (Tr., pp. 23, 36-37; Ex. 6, p. 35) 
 
Claimant testified that during the 2021 and 2022 school year he worked part-time 
for Mr. Duitsman.  (Tr., p. 36)  He also worked part-time on the ISU farm.  (Ex. 6, pp. 35-
36) 
 
Claimant testified that in approximately the fall of 2022 he began working for 
Hoegemeyer Hybrids (Hoegemeyer) as a seed corn dealer.  Claimant said the job 
required him to meet with farmers in the fall and spring and to write down sales 
information and then to input that information into a program to submit to Hoegemeyer.  
(Tr., pp. 24, 39-40, 50) 
 
Claimant graduated from ISU in December of 2022.  Since that time claimant has 
worked full-time as a farmhand on the Duitsman farm.  Claimant earns approximately 
$16.00 an hour and works approximately 40 hours per week.  Claimant testified he 
planned to continue to work for Mr. Duitsman and hoped to eventually take over the 
farm.  (Tr., p. 38)  He said that Mr. Duitsman accommodates his physical limitations.  
(Tr., p. 35)  He said he also occasionally helps on his family’s farm.  (Tr., p. 42) 
 
In a February 20, 2023 report, John Kuhnlein, D.O., gave his opinions of 
claimant’s condition following an IME.  Claimant indicated problems with anger 
management.  Claimant had difficulty with multitasking.  Claimant had difficulty driving 
at night and had anxiety.  Claimant had headaches up to two times a week.  Claimant 
had constant neck pain and indicated his arms felt numb and tingly.  Claimant had 
constant thoracic pain.  He had intermittent back pain.  (Ex. 1, pp. 9-10) 
 
Dr. Kuhnlein found claimant had an 8 percent permanent impairment related to 
the traumatic brain injury, based on Tables 13-5 and 13-6 of the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  He found that claimant fell into the 
DRE thoracic category IV, and had a 23 percent permanent impairment for the thoracic 
injury and multilevel fusion.  The combined values of both permanent impairments 
resulted in a 29 percent permanent impairment to the body as a whole.  (Ex. 1, p. 15) 

HEMER V. STEPHANIE BALLANTINE 
Page 5 
 
 
Dr. Kuhnlein recommended claimant have a neuropsychological evaluation with 
On With Life.  He recommended, in part, that claimant be limited to lifting 40 pounds 
occasionally from floor to waist and waist to chest.  (Ex. 1, pp. 15-16) 
 
In a March 7, 2024 report, Robert Arias, Ph.D., gave his opinions of claimant’s 
condition following a neuropsychological evaluation.  Dr. Arias opined, in part, that 
claimant had allegedly two performance validity test failures and allegedly test failure 
problems in other testing.  He opined this indicated “. . . a 95-100% chance of 
noncredible performance due to suboptimal effort/intent to perform poorly.”  (Ex. G, p. 
20)  Dr. Arias assessed claimant as having a mild complicated traumatic brain injury.  
He found that claimant had no permanent impairment due to his traumatic brain injury.  
(Ex. G, pp. 20-21) 
 
Claimant and his mother both testified that claimant gave good effort in his 
testing with Dr. Arias’ office.  (Tr., pp. 52, 66) 
 
In a March 11, 2024 letter, written by defendants’ counsel, Dr. Durward indicated 
he still believed claimant had no permanent restrictions and recommended against 
further treatment.  In a question indicating “I informed you that, in an IME, Dr. Mark 
Taylor provided a 23% PPD rating.  Do you still believe 20% is the correct rating . . .”  In 
response to that question, Dr. Durward marked a box labeled “yes.”  (Ex. F, p. 15) 
 
As noted in the record, the IME in this case was performed by Dr. Kuhnlein, not 
Dr. Taylor.  The March 11, 2024, letter also indicates Dr. Durward was not given and did 
not review Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME.  (Ex. F, p. 15) 
 
Claimant testified he still struggles with memory issues and has anxiety.  (Tr., pp. 
32-33)  He says he has difficulty with multitasking.  (Tr., pp. 32-33) 
 
Diane Hemer testified she is claimant’s mother.  She said claimant still resides at 
home with his parents.  (Tr., pp. 54-55)  Ms. Hemer said that every morning and every 
night claimant complains of his back pain.  She said that claimant takes too much 
ibuprofen and Tylenol for pain.  She said claimant is in a lot of pain in the morning and 
evening.  (Tr., pp. 60-61) 
 
Ms. Hemer said that claimant has anxiety and gets agitated if he has to multitask.  
She said claimant also has issues with memory.  (Tr., pp. 61-63) 
 
Ms. Hemer testified that claimant has been in a lot of pain.  Because of this, the 
family has had to personally pay for chiropractic treatment for claimant.  Ms. Hemer said 
this was necessary as claimant received no care from the workers’ compensation 
insurer.  (Tr., p. 60) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The first issue to be determined is the extent of claimant’s entitlement to 
permanent partial disability benefits. 

HEMER V. STEPHANIE BALLANTINE 
Page 6 
 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e). 
 
 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 591, 258 N.W. 899, 902 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that 
the Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of 
earning capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of 
percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963); Barton 
v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660, 663 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is medically 
indicated that maximum medical improvement from the injury has been reached and 
that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be determined by the 
use of the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
Medical Association, as adopted by the Commissioner. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)   
 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) states, in relevant part: 
In all cases of permanent partial disability other than those described or 
referred to in paragraphs “a” through “u”, the compensation shall be paid 
during the number of weeks in relation to five hundred weeks as the 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the disability 
bears in relation to the earning capacity that the employee possessed 
when the injury occurred… If an employee who is eligible for 
compensation under this paragraph returns to work or is offered work for 
which the employee receives or would receive the same or greater salary, 
wages, or earnings than the employee received at the time of the injury, 
the employee shall be compensated based only upon the employee’s 
functional impairment resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the 
employee’s earning capacity.  
 
Claimant was 23 years old at the time of hearing.  He was in an ATV accident 
where he sustained a traumatic brain injury and multiple fractures to the thoracic spine.  
Claimant underwent back surgery which, in part, resulted in claimant having a fusion 
from his T4 through T8 levels.   
 
Claimant and his mother both credibly testified that claimant has continued back 
pain in the morning and at night.  Claimant’s mother indicated that claimant recently had 

HEMER V. STEPHANIE BALLANTINE 
Page 7 
 
out-of-pocket chiropractic care due to back pain.  Both claimant and his mother credibly 
testified claimant has problems with memory, with multitasking and anxiety when he has 
to deal with multiple tasks.  Claimant works full-time on a farm.  He also works as a 
seed salesperson.  Claimant occasionally helps out on the family farm.   
 
Three experts have opined regarding claimant’s permanent impairment. 
 
Dr. Arias conducted a neuropsychological evaluation of claimant via Zoom.  He 
found that claimant had no permanent impairment related to his traumatic brain injury.  
This was based, in part, on a finding that claimant gave poor effort on 
neuropsychological exams. 
 
The record in this case indicates claimant was motivated to return to college after 
his ATV accident and graduated from college.  Claimant was able to do this because he 
had numerous accommodations in college.  These accommodations included, but were 
not limited to, extra time for projects and testing, that claimant be given an outline of 
PowerPoints, and that claimant be given special software to help with cognitive 
difficulties.  Claimant continues to work full-time on a farm. He also attempts to sell seed 
corn as an independent contractor.  Claimant helps on his family’s farm.  In short, 
claimant’s efforts since his ATV accident to return to college and to have a productive 
life, indicates a person who is highly motivated despite his physical and cognitive 
limitations.  This record does not suggest a person who tries to cheat on testing.  Both 
claimant and his mother testified claimant gave good effort in testing provided by Dr. 
Arias’ office. 
 
A review of past agency cases indicates Dr. Arias is often used as an expert by 
defendants to test and opine regarding an injured worker’s cognitive abilities.  A review 
of these cases indicates that Dr. Arias has routinely found noncredible performance in 
neuropsychological testing by injured workers.  Sadler v. Progressive Processing, File 
No. 20006029.02 (Arb. December 6, 2022); Garcia v. Smithfield Foods, File No. 
1657969.01 (Arb. October 28, 2022); Malual v. Farmland Foods, File No. 5052300 (Arb. 
April 13, 2017); Gallegos v. Shelly Krieg, Inc., File No. 5066131 (Arb. February 20, 
2020); Reeves v. Plymouth County Solid Wastewater, File No. 21006846.02 (Arb. 
October 16, 2023); Zuniga v. Smithfield Foods, Inc., File No. 1660515.01 (Arb. January 
24, 2022).  
 
Given this record, I find that Dr. Arias’ opinions regarding claimant’s permanent 
impairment for his traumatic brain injury are not credible.  
 
Dr. Kuhnlein found that claimant had a permanent impairment based on the use 
of the AMA Guides.  As detailed above, claimant and his mother credibly testified 
regarding claimant’s cognitive issues with memory, multitasking and anxiety.  Given this 
record, it is found that the impairment rating given by Dr. Kuhnlein regarding claimant’s 
traumatic brain injury is more convincing than that of Dr. Arias.  Claimant is found to 
have an 8 percent permanent impairment related to his traumatic brain injury. 

HEMER V. STEPHANIE BALLANTINE 
Page 8 
 
 
Two experts have opined regarding claimant’s permanent impairment related to 
his back injury and subsequent surgery. 
 
Dr. Durward treated claimant and performed the surgery.  He opined that 
claimant had a 20 percent permanent impairment.  Dr. Kuhnlein evaluated claimant 
once for an IME.  He found that claimant had a 23 percent impairment to the body as a 
whole related to claimant’s back injury and subsequent surgery. 
 
I respect the opinions of Dr. Durward as an orthopedic specialist.  However, Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s opinions regarding permanent impairment are more detailed than those of 
Dr. Durward.  I am able to follow and understand how he arrived at his finding for 
permanent impairment using the Guides and his evaluation of claimant.  Dr. Durward’s 
opinion was made in May of 2021.  Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinions are closer to the time of 
hearing and are a more accurate snapshot of claimant’s condition at the time of hearing.   
 
Dr. Durward did reiterate his finding of a 20 percent permanent impairment in a 
2024 letter written by defendants’ counsel.  However, the opinion refers to an IME 
performed by Dr. Taylor.  As noted, Dr. Kuhnlein evaluated claimant and not Dr. Taylor.   
It is clear from the 2024 check-the-box letter that Dr. Durward did not read Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s 2023 report.  For that reason, and those detailed above, it is found that Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s opinion regarding permanent impairment are more convincing than those of 
Dr. Durward.   
 
Dr. Kuhnlein found that claimant had a combined permanent impairment of 29 
percent.  It is found that claimant is due 145 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits (29 percent x 500 weeks). 
 
The next issue to be determined is whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement 
of the IME. 
 
Iowa Code section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.   Iowa Code § 85.39(2) (2023).  The section also 
permits reimbursement for reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and 
for any wage loss occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination.  
Iowa Code § 85.39 (1), (2).   
 
 
The Iowa Supreme Court has provided a literal interpretation of the plain 
language of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section only allows the employee to 
obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer’s expense if an evaluation of 
permanent disability has already been made by an employer retained physician.  Des 
Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015). Under 
the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the employer's expense if 
an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an employer-retained 
physician. Id. 

HEMER V. STEPHANIE BALLANTINE 
Page 9 
 
An employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the employee 
is being examined is determined to be compensable.  Iowa Code § 85.39(2) (2017).  
“An employer is not liable for the cost of such examination if the injury for which the 
employee is being examined is determined not to have a compensable injury. A 
determination of the reasonableness of a fee for an examination made pursuant to this 
subsection, shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider to perform 
an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is conducted.”  Iowa Code 
§ 85.39(2); Tweeten v. Tweeten, 999 N.W.2d 270, 282 (Iowa 2023).   
Iowa Code section 85.39(2), as amended, allows an employee with a 
compensable injury to be reimbursed the reasonable cost of an examination. See Iowa 
Code § 85.39(2)(2017); Mid American Construction LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838, 849 
(Iowa 2024). Under the statute, an examination may include reviewing medical records, 
conducting a physical exam, opining on causation, assessing permanent impairment, 
assigning restrictions, and recommending further care. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d at 851.  
The burden is on the claimant to show the reasonableness of his or her chosen 
physician’s IME fee. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d at 852; see also Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e) 
(stating “Ordinarily, the burden of proof on an issue is upon the party who would suffer 
loss if the issue were not established.”); Pexa v. Auto Owners Ins. Co., 686 N.W.2d 150, 
156 (Iowa 2004)(stating “the plaintiff has the burden to prove the reasonable value of 
the [medical] service rendered”).  The reasonableness of an IME fee is a question of 
fact to be decided by the commissioner. See Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 
154 (Iowa 1996). The reasonableness of an IME fee must be based upon the typical fee 
charged by a medical provider performing an impairment rating in the local area where 
the IME is conducted. Iowa Code § 85.39 (2); Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d at 852.   
 
Dr. Durward, the employer-retained expert, gave his opinions of claimant’s 
permanent impairment prior to the opinions of Dr. Kuhnlein.  Dr. Kuhnlein noted,  
Several hours of interview, examination, drafting and review have gone 
into this report.  The fees for this examination are reasonable based on my 
training and certification as a Board Certified Specialist in Occupational 
and Environmental Medicine, the time spent with the examinee obtaining 
the history and performing the examination, the time spent in preparing 
this report, and the time spent by my staff preparing the file to use 
preparing this report. 
 
Defendants offer no rebuttal to Dr. Kuhnlein’s statement. Given Dr. Kuhnlein's 
statement, it is found the costs associated with the IME are reasonable.  Dr. Kuhnlein 
charged $5,090.50 for the IME.  (Ex. 4 and 5)  Claimant is entitled to reimbursement for 
that amount under Iowa Code section 85.39.  
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 

HEMER V. STEPHANIE BALLANTINE 
Page 10 
 
 
That defendants shall pay claimant 145 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits at the rate of two hundred ninety-one and 66/100 dollars ($291.66) per week 
commencing on November 7, 2020. 
 
That defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.  
 
That defendants shall be given credit for benefits previously paid. 
 
That defendants shall reimburse claimant for the costs associated with Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s IME. 
 
That defendants shall pay costs. 
 
That defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
under Rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
 
Signed and filed this __28th ___ day of October, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Chad Swanson (via WCES) 
 
Aaron Oliver (via WCES) 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
     JAMES F. CHRISTENSON 
          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
