Case Number: 23700255.02
Case Title:  TOLLE, HANNAH V. CITY OF FORT DODGE
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Tolle Hannah-23700255.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
HANNAH TOLLE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
  File No. 23700255.02 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                       
CITY OF FORT DODGE, 
  : 
         ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                        
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
IMWCA 
  : 
 
 
  : 
   Headnote Nos.:  1803, 1803.1, 2907 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :                 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Hannah Tolle, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from defendants, City of Fort Dodge, as the employer, and 
IMWCA, as the insurance carrier.  Hearing was held on March 11, 2025, via Zoom video 
conference.  Counsel filed post-hearing briefs on April 25, 2025, at which time the case 
was deemed fully submitted. 
The evidentiary record in the case includes joint exhibits 1-4, claimant’s exhibits 
1-4, and defendants’ exhibits A through K.  Claimant testified live.  No other witnesses 
testified at the time of hearing. 
The parties also submitted a hearing report prior to the commencement of the 
evidentiary hearing.  On that hearing report, the parties entered into certain stipulations.  
Those stipulations are accepted and relied upon in this decision without further 
comment or factual findings. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. Whether the claimant’s August 3, 2022 work injury caused permanent 
disability. 
2. If claimant proved permanent disability, whether the injury should be 
compensated with functional impairment or industrially. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Jul-11  11:08:32     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

TOLLE V. CITY OF FORT DODGE 
Page 2 
 
 
3. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits. 
4. Whether costs should be assessed against either party. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Hannah Tolle is a 19-year-old female, who worked for the City of Fort Dodge as a 
lifeguard at their city pool while in high school.  Ms. Tolle began her employment as a 
lifeguard in the spring of 2021 and worked for two summer lifeguarding seasons.  In this 
role, she served as a pool lifeguard as well as providing summer swim lessons through 
the City. 
On August 3, 2022, Ms. Tolle struck her head on a water slide while performing 
her duties as a lifeguard.  She was running from one location at the pool to her next 
assigned area, got distracted, and struck her head twice on the underside of a slide.  
She testified that no one saw her, but she immediately began to cry.  She immediately 
got dizzy and “saw double.” 
Claimant continued working, but reported the incident to her supervisor 
approximately 40 minutes later.  Her supervisor ran a “concussion protocol” on her, did 
not think she sustained a concussion, but also would not let claimant drive home from 
work.  Ms. Tolle’s father came to transport her from the pool to home. 
Ms. Tolle returned to work the following day, conducted scheduled swim lessons, 
but then left work and went to the emergency room due to her symptoms.  The 
emergency room physician documented that claimant reported a severe headache and 
vomiting since she hit her head the prior day working as a lifeguard.  Claimant also 
reported photophobia and indicated that she felt tired but could not sleep.  (Joint Ex. 1, 
p. 1)  Claimant submitted to a head CT while in the emergency room, which was 
negative for any hemorrhage or other abnormality.  The emergency room physician 
diagnosed claimant with a concussion without loss of consciousness as well as an 
intractable acute post-traumatic headache.  He took claimant off work and instructed her 
against any reading or use of screen time until her symptoms improved.  (Joint Ex. 1, 
pp. 4, 15) 
Ms. Tolle’s symptoms continued and she was directed to an occupational 
medicine physician on September 13, 2022.  Claimant reported she had continued 
dizziness and constant headaches on the left side of her head.  The occupational 
medicine physician diagnosed her with a post-traumatic headache, prescribed some 
Tylenol and referred claimant to a concussion clinic.  (Joint Ex. 2) 
Shawn P. Spooner, M.D., evaluated claimant on October 3, 2022 at the 
UnityPoint Sports Medicine and Concussion Center.  Dr. Spooner is a board-certified 
physician with extensive experience in concussion management.  (Claimant’s Ex. 3)  Dr. 

TOLLE V. CITY OF FORT DODGE 
Page 3 
 
 
Spooner documented a similar history of claimant hitting her head twice on a water slide 
on August 3, 2022.  He noted claimant reported acute emotional lability, dizziness, 
headache, double vision, sensitivity to light and sound, and cognitive symptoms.  (Joint 
Ex. 3, p. 22)  Dr. Spooner indicated that claimant’s history and exam were “consistent 
with concussion” and that she had “[t]ypical postconcussive symptoms.”  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 
27) 
Ms. Tolle presented for follow-up evaluation with Dr. Spooner via telehealth on 
October 17, 2022.  In this office note, Dr. Spooner noted, “I did think underlying 
generalized anxiety was playing a role here.”  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 36)  Dr. Spooner noted 
that he would recommend a neuropsychological evaluation if claimant did not 
experience improvement of symptoms within two weeks.  After an evaluation on 
November 14, 2022, Dr. Spooner indicated he “[w]ould really like her to follow-up with 
neuropsychology.”  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 51) 
By January 9, 2023, Ms. Tolle reported a recurrence of headaches and insomnia 
after discontinuing some medications.  She reported trouble focusing and that it 
interfered with her academic pursuits.  Claimant also indicated a desire to return to full-
time work, if possible.  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 59)  Dr. Spooner concurred and allowed claimant 
to return to work full time as of January 9, 2023.  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 65)  Dr. Spooner further 
noted in his office note that claimant’s condition was “equivocal for postconcussive 
component versus other functional lifestyle issues.”  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 63)  Dr. Spooner 
noted, “I favor more some underlying generalized anxiety and chronic nonrestorative 
sleep.”  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 63) 
There is no record of further medical care until September 13, 2023, when 
claimant sought evaluation with a pediatric neurologist, Asit Tripathy, M.D., for ongoing 
headaches.  Dr. Tripathy noted that claimant had photophobia and phonophobia.  He 
noted she had blurry vision and dizziness sometimes, as well as daily headaches.  Dr. 
Tripathy also noted that claimant reported a second type of headache that was more 
severe.  Dr. Tripathy recommended medication management of claimant’s headaches 
and referral to a headache specialist given that claimant was attaining the age of 
majority.  (Joint Ex. 4) 
Dr. Tripathy re-evaluated Ms. Tolle on December 20, 2023.  Dr. Tripathy 
recommended referral to a headache specialist.  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 90)  Dr. Tripathy again 
examined claimant on January 10, 2024.  At that point, he indicated that he did not find 
a diagnosis for claimant’s condition.  (Joint Ex. 4, p. 105)  He again recommended 
referral to a headache specialist. 
Defendants then scheduled and obtained an independent evaluation with 
neuropsychologist, Bruce Jasper, Ph.D.  (Defendants’ Ex. C)  Dr. Jasper performed his 
testing and neuropsychological evaluation on January 3, 2024, and issued his report on 
February 12, 2024.  (Defendants’ Ex. A)  As part of his evaluation, Dr. Jasper performed 
a battery of 14 assessments.  He noted that claimant’s performance on at least four of 
those tests were atypical or invalid.  He noted some of these tests suggested the 
presence of somatoform and/or malingering by claimant.  (Defendants’ Ex. A, pp. 9-10)   

TOLLE V. CITY OF FORT DODGE 
Page 4 
 
 
Ultimately, Dr. Jasper opined, “Ms. Tolle did not experience a concussion or TBI 
caused by the 08/03/2022 work incident.”  (emphasis in original) (Defendants’ Ex. A, p. 
13)  He further opined that claimant does not have any permanent psychological, 
cognitive, or physical impairments caused by the August 3, 2022 work incident.  Dr. 
Jasper further opined that claimant does not require any permanent work or activity 
restrictions caused by the August 3, 2022 work incident.  (Defendants’ Ex. A, p. 13) 
In response to Dr. Jasper’s evaluation and report, claimant’s counsel scheduled 
a telephone conference to discuss those opinions with Dr. Spooner.  Following the 
telephone conference, Dr. Spooner signed a report prepared by claimant’s counsel on 
March 25, 2024.  In that report, Dr. Spooner opined that “Hannah Tolle is not 
malingering in regards to her complaints of post concussive headaches.”  He further 
noted, “I did not appreciate any signs of malingering behavior and it would be very 
unusual for a 16 year old to know how to malinger.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 3, p. 21)  Dr. 
Spooner further opined, “It is my medical opinion that the mechanism of injury of 
banging her head on a slide on August 3, 2022, while in the course of employment 
caused or at least materially aggravated her headaches.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 3, p. 21) 
Ms. Tolle also sought an independent medical evaluation performed by Sunil 
Bansal, M.D., on June 18, 2024.  (Claimant’s Ex. 2)  Dr. Bansal diagnosed claimant with 
a mild traumatic brain injury with post-concussive syndrome, including migraines and 
vertigo.  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 13)  He opined that “Ms. Tolle’s ongoing neurologic 
symptoms are causally related to the work incident on August 3, 2022, noting the work 
incident “is entirely consistent with the biomechanics capable of producing a mild 
traumatic brain injury, mTBI, or concussion.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 14)  Dr. Bansal also 
opined that claimant’s symptoms after the traumatic brain injury were “entirely 
consistent with post-concussive syndrome.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 14) 
Dr. Bansal also reviewed and disagreed with the neuropsychological report from 
Dr. Jasper.  Dr. Bansal opined, “Dr. Jasper’s interpretation of the performance validity 
tests (PVTs) and his conclusions of ‘somatoform disorder and/or malingering’ is 
questionable.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 15) Instead, Dr. Bansal opines that it is “important 
to consider that persistent post-concussive symptoms, including cognitive fatigue and 
attentional issues, can impact test performance.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 15)  Dr. Bansal 
further interprets the results of Dr. Jasper’s MMPI testing and notes “underreporting of 
psychological symptoms are not necessarily indicative of malingering, but could reflect a 
lack of insight into emotional symptoms or a desire to focus on physical complaints.  
Moreover, the absence of permanent cognitive impairments on testing does not 
preclude the existence of other persistent post-concussive symptoms such as 
headaches and dizziness.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 15) 
While Dr. Bansal’s statement seems reasonable and logical, I note nothing in his 
resume that would suggest an expertise in the administration or interpretation of 
neuropsychological tests.  Presumably, experts devising, administering, and interpreting 
neuropsychological testing are aware of potential issues that will affect testing and 
results.  Dr. Bansal demonstrates none of this type of expertise in his resume, and his 
opinions in this regard appear to be a bit outside of his area of expertise.  Dr. Bansal is 

TOLLE V. CITY OF FORT DODGE 
Page 5 
 
 
an occupational medicine physician.  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, pp. 18-19)  I note that 
defendants’ authorized occupational medicine provider felt the need to refer claimant on 
for more specialized care with Dr. Spooner. I give Dr. Bansal’s opinions pertaining to 
interpretation of the neuropsychological testing little weight. 
On the other hand, Dr. Bansal notes that Dr. Jasper’s “attribution of Ms. Tolle’s 
symptoms to other factors such as medication side effects, iatrogenesis, or pre-existing 
conditions fails to adequately consider the temporal relationship between symptom 
onset and the work incident.  While these factors may contribute to or exacerbate 
symptoms, they do not fully explain the abrupt onset and persistence of symptoms 
following the 08/03/2022 incident.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 15)  Dr. Bansal is qualified to 
consider and discuss the effects of medication and other potential causes.  Once again, 
his opinion offers some element of reasonableness and is logical.   
Dr. Bansal opined that Ms. Tolle achieved maximum medical improvement (MMI) 
on June 18, 2024.  (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 13)  Dr. Bansal offers an unrebutted four 
percent whole person permanent impairment rating related to claimant’s vertigo and 
headaches.  Dr. Bansal also opines that claimant should avoid constant loud noise 
environments, and be allowed to wear tinted glasses or work in areas with adjustable 
lighting due to photosensitivity.  Finally, Dr. Bansal recommends claimant avoid 
activities with frequent or rapid head movements to avoid vertigo and dizziness.  
(Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 16) 
At defendants’ request, Dr. Jasper authored a rebuttal to Dr. Bansal’s opinions 
on September 17, 2024.  In that rebuttal report, Dr. Jasper is critical of Dr. Bansal’s use 
of the term post-concussive syndrome, noting, “The most recent revisions and updates 
of the leading diagnostic systems utilized by mental health professionals and medical 
professions … no longer include diagnoses of Post-concussion Syndrome and 
Postconcussional Syndrome.”  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 14)  Dr. Jasper reiterated his 
opinion and explained that Ms. Tolle’s incident and reported symptoms were “not 
sufficient to warrant a diagnosis of TBI…. Ms. Tolle failed to meet the ACRM paper’s 
minimally necessary criteria needed to qualify for a definitive diagnosis of mild-TBI.”  
(Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 15)  Therefore, Dr. Jasper reiterated his opinion that “Ms. Tolle 
cannot reasonably or conclusively be diagnosed with having experienced a concussion, 
mild-TBI or TBI of any severity.”  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 15) 
Dr. Jasper also explained in his rebuttal report that Ms. Tolle demonstrated no 
objective evidence of cognitive fatigue or attention deficit during her testing session with 
Dr. Jasper.  He explained the validity of the neuropsychological testing he performed as 
well as the underlying criteria to establish the performance validity testing within those 
tests.  Dr. Jasper also explained the results of the MMPI testing in far greater detail than 
Dr. Bansal, noting that the results point to a somatoform disorder or at least a 
somatoform orientation.  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 18) 
If I consider the opinions of Dr. Bansal and Dr. Jasper in isolation, I tend to find 
the opinions of Dr. Jasper to be more credible and convincing.  Dr. Bansal does not 
appear to have equivalent training, experience, and expertise to the credentials of Dr. 

TOLLE V. CITY OF FORT DODGE 
Page 6 
 
 
Jasper in the administration and interpretation of neuropsychological testing.  If those 
two opinions were the only opinions in this record, I would likely conclude claimant 
cannot prove a concussion or traumatic brain injury occurred as a result of the August 
2022 work incident. 
However, I find Dr. Spooner’s opinions to be quite instructive and convincing.  As 
the treating specialist, Dr. Spooner’s opinions carry great weight with me.  Dr. Spooner 
diagnosed Ms. Tolle with a concussion without loss of consciousness as well as having 
a post-concussion headache.  (Joint Ex. 3, p. 27)  Dr. Spooner issued a supplemental 
report after Dr. Jasper’s evaluation, noting that he “did not appreciate any signs of 
malingering behavior and it would be very unusual for a 16 year old to know how to 
malinger.”  Dr. Spooner evaluated claimant multiple times.  I find that his expertise, 
opportunity to evaluate claimant multiple times, and his status as the treating specialist 
all give his opinions significant credibility.  Ultimately, when considering all of the 
evidence in this record, I find Dr. Spooner’s causation opinion to be the most 
convincing.  I accept Dr. Bansal’s impairment ratings for vertigo and headaches 
because they are unrebutted.  Dr. Spooner released claimant to return to full-time 
employment, which is reasonable.  However, the restrictions recommended by Dr. 
Bansal are also reasonable to avoid claimant’s sensitivity to loud noises, light, and to 
prevent vertigo or dizziness. 
Ms. Tolle was 17 years old at the time of this injury.  She was 19 years old at the 
time of hearing.  She graduated early from high school and maintained above a “B” 
average in school.  She has minimal work history.  However, she obtained employment 
with Friendship Haven in July 2022, prior to this injury occurring.  She has subsequently 
obtained her certified nursing assistant (CNA) certification and was promoted at 
Friendship Haven.  She continued to work at this nursing home at the time of the 
hearing. 
At hearing, Ms. Tolle testified she aspired to become a physician or a nurse after 
high school.  Unfortunately, this injury has made such pursuits more difficult. During 
high school, claimant missed several days of school due to her symptoms.  After high 
school, she enrolled at Iowa Central Community College.  She signed up for online 
courses that included statistics, microbiology, and criminal justice.  (Tr., p. 38)  
Unfortunately after a couple of weeks of her courses, Ms. Tolle dropped her classes 
because she could not tolerate the screen time, studying, and time demands between 
college and her job at Friendship Haven.  Nevertheless, Ms. Tolle continues to express 
a desire to return to college and pursue her dream of becoming a doctor or nurse if her 
headaches improve.  However, she credibly described difficulties with reading for long 
periods of time, which would limit her ability to complete college-level studies. 
I find that Ms. Tolle is a motivated, young worker.  She sustained four percent 
permanent functional impairment as a result of her head injury at work in August 2022.  
She requires the permanent restrictions outlined by Dr. Bansal.  These restrictions will 
limit her capacity to seek future employment.  Claimant has not convincingly proven she 
sustained a significant reduction in her earning capacity.  Any educational pursuits to 
become a physician or nurse were speculative, though her high school grade point 

TOLLE V. CITY OF FORT DODGE 
Page 7 
 
 
average make it likely she could have achieved a nursing degree.  Nevertheless, 
claimant could enroll and attend college in person to reduce screen time attending on-
line classes.  She has ample time and opportunity to pursue other vocational training at 
her age. 
Considering claimant’s age, education, employment history, subsequent 
employment, motivation, ability to retrain, permanent impairment, permanent physical 
restrictions, the situs and severity of claimant’s injury, as well as all other factors of 
industrial disability outlined by the Iowa Supreme Court, I find that Ms. Tolle proved she 
sustained a 20 percent loss of future earning capacity as a result of the August 3, 2022 
work injury. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
In this case, I found the opinions of Dr. Spooner to be the most convincing and 
credible.  Therefore, I found claimant proved she sustained a permanent disability as a 
result of the head injury she sustained at work on August 3, 2022.  Claimant carried her 
burden of proof to establish that her current symptoms are causally related to the work 
injury and that the work injury caused permanent disability. 

TOLLE V. CITY OF FORT DODGE 
Page 8 
 
 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or as an unscheduled injury pursuant to the provisions of section 
85.34(2)(v).  Ms. Tolle’s injury involves a head injury and resulting migraine headaches, 
as well as light and sound sensitivities and dizziness.  All of these injuries and resulting 
symptoms are unscheduled injuries.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2). Therefore, Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(v) is applicable. 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) provides: 
If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or would 
receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the employee 
received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be compensated based 
only upon the employee’s functional impairment resulting from the injury, 
and not in relation to the employee’s earning capacity. 
In this case, claimant re-applied for employment as a lifeguard with the City of 
Fort Dodge the following spring.  However, she did not believe she could successfully 
complete the lifeguard certification due to her symptoms.  Claimant requested the 
opportunity to work as a lifeguard only providing swim lessons.  The employer rejected 
this request, and claimant ultimately voluntarily terminated her employment, or declined 
to return as a lifeguard the summer of 2023.  Defendants contend that claimant was 
offered employment at the same or greater wages than those earned at the time of her 
injury.  Claimant declined that employment.  However, defendants contend claimant’s 
recovery is limited to a scheduled member functional impairment as a result of her 
refusal of a work offer.  Therefore, I must determine whether the claimant’s permanent 
disability should be compensated industrially or with functional impairment.   
The Iowa Court of Appeals recently considered this issue in Den Hartog 
Industries v. Dungan, 19 N.W.3d 711 (Iowa Ct. App. 2025) (unpublished opinion) (2025 
WL 52449).  The Court of Appeals determined that Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) 
provides two different categories of employees.  The first is the employee that returns to 
work at the same or greater pay.  The second category is the employee that does not 
return to work.  Ms. Tolle worked for a few hours after her date of injury, but did not 
return to work after seeking medical care.  I conclude Ms. Tolle qualifies as a second 
category employee described by the Iowa Court of Appeals because she did not return 
to work for this employer at the same or greater pay. 
Similarly, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner considered the effect 
of the Court of Appeals’ decision in Dungan and concluded that a claimant’s termination 
of employment “whether categorized as a voluntary termination or as a constructive 
discharge, triggered the provisions of Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) ‘for a determination 
of any reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the employee’s 
permanent partial disability.’”  Spranger-Jones v. Kimco Facility Services, L.L.C., File 
No. 21006203.01 (Appeal March 2025).  Again, the Commissioner’s interpretation of 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) supports the conclusion that claimant’s termination of 

TOLLE V. CITY OF FORT DODGE 
Page 9 
 
 
employment with the City of Fort Dodge justifies an award of industrial disability 
benefits.  I conclude claimant has proven permanent disability and is entitled to an 
award of industrial disability under the facts of this case. 
Since claimant has an impairment to the body as a whole, an industrial disability 
has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of 
Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 591, 258 N.W. 899, 902 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that 
the Legislature intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of 
earning capacity and not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of 
percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963); Barton 
v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660, 663 (1961). 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin when it is medically 
indicated that maximum medical improvement from the injury has been reached and 
that the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be determined by the 
use of the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
Medical Association, as adopted by the Commissioner. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)   
I accept Dr. Bansal’s opinion that claimant achieved maximum medical 
improvement.  Therefore, this case is ripe for an award of industrial disability benefits.  
Having considered all of the relevant industrial disability factors outlined by the Iowa 
Supreme Court, I found that claimant proved a 20 percent loss of future earning 
capacity.  This is equivalent to a 20 percent industrial disability award.  Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(v). 
Industrial disability benefits are payable “during the number of weeks in relation 
to five hundred weeks as the reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by 
the disability.”  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v).  Twenty percent of 500 weeks is 100 
weeks of permanent partial disability.  Therefore, I conclude claimant is entitled to an 
award of 100 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(v). 
The final issue submitted for determination is whether costs should be assessed 
against either party.  Assessment of costs is within the discretion of the agency.  Iowa 
Code section 10A.328.  In this instance, claimant prevailed on the disputed issues.  
Therefore, I conclude that it is appropriate to assess costs in this case. 
Claimant seeks assessment of her filing fee ($125.30).  Defendants will be 
ordered to reimburse claimant’s filing fee pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7).  Claimant also 

TOLLE V. CITY OF FORT DODGE 
Page 10 
 
 
seeks assessment of her costs ($16.50) related to service of her petition.  Service fees 
are permissible costs and assessed against defendants pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(3). 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant one hundred (100) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits commencing on January 10, 2024 at the stipulated weekly rate of 
three hundred fifty-one and 00/100 dollars ($351.00). 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest.  All interest on past due weekly compensation benefits shall be payable at an 
annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal 
reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  
See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018).   
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of one hundred forty-
one and 80/100 dollars ($141.80). 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7.   
Signed and filed this __11th ___ day of July, 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Brian Keit (via WCES) 
Ryan Clark (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
