Case Number: 24001864.01
Case Title:  HOLLAND, MICHAEL V. OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Holland Michael - 24001864.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
MICHAEL HOLLAND, 
  : 
           File No. 24001864.01 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Notes: 1403.30; 1801; 1803; 
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
  : 
 
 
2206; 2209; 2401; 
 
 
  :  
 
 
2803          
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
Michael Holland, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Owen Industries, Inc., self-insured employer, as defendant.  
The hearing was held on October 9, 2024, Pursuant to an order from the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner, this case was heard via videoconference using Zoom 
with all parties and the court reporter appearing remotely.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  Those 
stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision and 
no factual issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed in this 
decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
In accordance with the hearing assignment order, on September 25, 2024, the 
parties filed proposed exhibits and the hearing report for this claim.  On October 3, 
2024, defendant filed objections to all of claimant’s proposed exhibits and moved to 
exclude them from the hearing record on the grounds that claimant failed to timely 
disclose his expert witnesses and untimely served reports.  Defendant also claimed that 
the exhibits were irrelevant to the case, as well as unfairly prejudicial.  On October 8, 
2024, claimant filed a response to defendant’s objections.  Claimant’s response 
indicated that exhibits 1-3 were served on defendant in June 2024 and exhibit 4 was 
served on defendant in July 2024.  Claimant argued that defendant was aware of 
claimant’s proposed exhibits well in advance of hearing and had not proven they were 
unfairly prejudicial.   
On October 7, 2024, claimant moved to dismiss his petition without prejudice.  
On October 8, 2024, defendant resisted claimant’s motion.  The resistance argued that 
claimant’s motion to dismiss was an attempt to get around the hearing deadlines and 
defendant’s evidence objections.  Defendant claimed it would be an abuse of discretion 
for the agency to grant claimant’s requested dismissal so close to hearing.  A phone 
conference was held for claimant’s motion on October 8, 2024, at 3:15 p.m. Both parties 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Mar-31  16:19:50     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HOLLAND V. OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 2 
 
 
provided argument. Prior to the hearing on October 9, 2024, the agency issued a ruling 
denying claimant’s motion to dismiss without prejudice. The ruling noted that there was 
a discovery motion pending in the case and claimant had not made a showing of good 
cause for the requested dismissal.  
At the start of the hearing, claimant’s counsel verbally withdrew exhibit 5, a 
vocational report, from the record.  The undersigned overruled defendant’s objections to 
claimant’s remaining exhibits.  Claimant’s exhibit 1 is an Auxier letter prepared by 
defendant’s third-party administrator.  The document was created and served by 
defendant’s own representative; its admittance into the hearing record is not unfairly 
prejudicial.  Claimant’s exhibits 2 and 4 are reports from a treating physician that was 
already known to defendants.  In Schoenfeld v. FDL Foods, Inc., 560 N.W.2d 595, 598-
599 (Iowa 1997), the Iowa Supreme Court declared that it is an abuse of discretion for 
the agency to exclude a treating doctor’s late report if that doctor’s existence was 
already disclosed to the defendant.  Claimant’s exhibit 3 is an FCE report that was 
served on defendants in July 2024, well in advance of the 30-day deadline.  Defendant 
was not unfairly surprised or prejudiced by its admittance.  Claimant’s exhibit 6 is a 
medical bill summary.  Defendant received copies of the corresponding treatment 
records with claimant’s discovery responses several months prior to hearing.  
Defendant was unable to explain how the admittance of a medical bill summary was 
unfairly prejudicial.  Defendant’s objections were overruled.   
Claimant’s counsel then made a verbal motion to continue the hearing. Counsel 
stated that when he filed this case in January 2024, he believed bilateral shoulder 
injuries were properly compensated as industrial disabilities under Iowa law. He 
prepared claimant’s case in accordance with that belief, procuring a vocational report 
instead of an impairment rating.  He indicated that he recently became aware of the 
Iowa Supreme Court’s opinion in Anderson v. Bridgestone Americas, Inc., 4 N.W.3d 
676, 684-685 (Iowa 2024), declaring claimant’s bilateral shoulder injuries should be 
compensated as scheduled member injuries.  He requested the hearing be continued 
so that claimant could obtain an impairment rating.  Defendant resisted, arguing the 
motion to continue suffered from the same flaws as claimant’s motion to dismiss without 
prejudice.  Defendant argued claimant had ample time prior to hearing to obtain an 
impairment rating, and a mistake of law was not good cause to continue the hearing.  
Claimant’s motion to continue was overruled.   
Michael Holland was the only witness to testify live at trial.  The evidentiary 
record contains Joint Exhibits 1-3, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-4 and 6; Defendant’s Exhibits 
A-I; and Defendant’s Rebuttal Exhibit J. The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on 
November 15, 2024, at which time the case was fully submitted to the undersigned.  
ISSUES 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of 
his employment with Owen Industries, Inc., on January 10, 2024.  
2. Whether the case is barred due to lack of timely notice under Iowa Code section 
85.23. 

HOLLAND V. OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 3 
 
 
 
3. Whether the alleged injury resulted in any permanent disability; and if so, 
 
4. The nature and extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability 
benefits. 
 
5. The commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits if any are 
awarded. 
 
6. Whether the claimant is entitled to additional temporary disability or healing 
period benefits because of the alleged injury. 
 
7. Whether defendants are entitled to a credit for overpaid temporary total or 
healing period benefits.  
 
8. Whether claimant is entitled to payment of the medical expenses in claimant’s 
exhibit 6. 
 
9. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds as follows: 
At the time of the hearing the claimant, Michael Holland (hereinafter “Holland”) 
was 60 years old. (Hearing Transcript, p. 25). After graduating from high school, Holland 
acquired an associate’s degree in electrical engineering from ITT Technical Institute of 
Omaha in 1995. (Ex. H, p. 29).  According to his resume, Holland has an extensive work 
history. (Id. at 24-30).  He has worked as a cable installer, quality control inspector, door 
dash driver, forklift operator, as a packer in a warehouse, scanner, machine operator, 
equipment operator, assistant manager of a warehouse, car detailer, furniture mover, 
and construction worker. (Id.).   
In August 2023, Owen Industries, Inc. (hereinafter “Owen”) hired Holland to work 
as a laser operator. (Ex. J; Tr., p. 27).  As a laser operator, Holland was responsible for 
running a CNC machine. (Tr., p. 29).  This involved troubleshooting machine problems, 
taking measurements, replacing filters and cylinders, carrying steel skeletons, stacking 
parts, emptying slag trays and barrels, cleaning up the work area, filling out paperwork, 
and assisting other operators. (Tr., pp. 28-29; Ex. G).  Holland made $20.50 per hour 
and worked 8-hour days. (Tr., p. 29). Prior to starting work at Owen, Holland was 
required to pass a pre-employment physical. (Id. at 27).   
Holland is alleging he suffered work-related injuries to his bilateral shoulders on 
or around January 10, 2024. (See Petition; Tr., p.  102). At the hearing, he testified that 

HOLLAND V. OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 4 
 
 
Owen initially assigned him to run machine 16. (Id. at 33-34).  According to Holland, 
machine 16 was fully automated and only produced small parts. (Id.).  He testified that 
the operator only had to remove and measure the cut parts; the machine did everything 
else. (Tr., p. 34).  At some point, machine 16 broke down. (Id.).  While machine 16 was 
broken, Holland volunteered to run machine 20. (Id. at 34-35).  Machine 20 was not 
automated. (Id. at 35).  It required the operator to remove parts from the metal skeleton 
and carry them to a pallet on a skid loader. (Id.).  Holland testified that removing parts 
required him to pound them out of the steel skeleton with a mallet. (Id. at 35-36).  He 
then stacked them up and carried them over to the correct pallet and lifted them up onto 
the pallet, which was above waist height. (Id. at 36).  He estimated each load of parts 
weighted between 40-60 pounds. (Id. at 37).  Holland thought he spent around 60 
percent of his day removing steel parts. (Id. at 39).  He described running machine 20 
as physically demanding, with continuous lifting and reaching away from his body. (Id. 
at 38-41).   
According to Holland, after working on machine 20 for a while he started to notice 
fatigue in his arms, trouble lifting his arms, and pain in his shoulders when he tried to 
sleep. (Tr., pp. 40-41).  At the hearing, Holland was not able to pinpoint the exact date 
when he noticed the symptoms.  He testified that the symptoms appeared “probably two 
weeks before” he notified his supervisors that he could no longer physically perform his 
job at Owen. (Id. at 42, 75, 95).  Defendant submitted the first report of injury into 
hearing evidence. (Ex. A, p. 1).  It indicates Holland reported his injury on January 10, 
2024, at 10:30 a.m. (Id.).  In the section explaining the alleged injury, it states “During 
pulling of parts, he thinks he caused injury to both shoulder rotator cuffs. Employee was 
not sure of the time of injury, possibly in October. He thought it would get better over 
time but has not.” (Id.).   
According to the medical records, Holland was evaluated by Jaime Pieper, D.O., 
at Nebraska Medicine on January 11, 2024. (JE 1, p. 2).  Holland reported bilateral 
shoulder pain. (Id.).  Dr. Pieper’s treatment note reads “he states that while working at 
Owen Industries as a laser operator, his usual machine broke down in October and he 
was put on a new machine.” (Id.).  On the new machine, he was required to frequently 
lift parts off a low table and stack them on a skid loader above shoulder height. (Id.).  
Holland described constant shoulder pain that had progressively gotten worse, as well 
as a grinding sensation, popping, and his left shoulder locking up. (Id.).  Dr. Pieper’s 
treatment note states the shoulder pain “had a rather insidious onset since this new 
placement at work in October.” (Id.).  She diagnosed Holland with acute pain in both 
shoulders, and ordered x-rays, with a possible MRI and a referral to an orthopedic 
surgery to follow. (Id.).  She notes that Holland could not be prescribed NSAIDs for his 
pain due to chronic kidney disease and stated prednisone was also not an option 
because he has diabetes. (Id.).   
Dr. Pieper provided Holland with temporary work restrictions of lifting no more 
than 5 pounds and instructed him to follow up in two weeks. (JE 1, p. 4).  At the bottom 
of Dr. Pieper’s work note outlining his restrictions, there are some handwritten words.  

HOLLAND V. OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 5 
 
 
(Id.).  It is not clear who added this language to the work note.  The handwriting does 
not clearly match Dr. Pieper’s signature and there are no initials or signatures included 
with it.  The added language states as follows:  
 
(JE 1, p. 1). It is not clear where this information came from, nor does the timeline 
provided line-up with the other evidence in the record.  The undersigned does not find 
this to be conclusive evidence of the date Holland changed jobs, nor of when his 
shoulder symptoms emerged.1  
On January 15, 2024, Dr. Pieper added an addendum to her treatment note. (JE 
1, p. 4).  It indicates that an x-ray of Holland’s right shoulder was completed. (Id.).  It 
showed fibrocystic changes consistent with rotator cuff pathology. (Id.).  Dr. Pieper 
renewed her recommendation for an MRI and orthopedic referral. (Id.).  On February 
15, 2024, Owen approved the requested MRI and referral. (JE 1, p. 5).   
Holland was evaluated by Richard Amendola, M.D., on January 25, 2024. (JE 1, 
p. 6).  Dr. Amendola is an orthopedic surgeon at Nebraska Medicine. (Id.).  Dr. 
Amendola’s treatment note indicates Holland’s shoulder pain began in November 2023. 
(Id.).  The note states that in addition to shoulder pain, Holland was experiencing 
weakness and loss of range of motion in his shoulder joints. (Id.).  Dr. Amendola 
ordered x-rays of Holland’s bilateral shoulders. (Id.).  They showed moderate 
osteoarthritis of the glenohumeral joint, worse on the left side. (Id.).  Dr. Amendola 
diagnosed him with bilateral glenohumeral osteoarthritis, left worse than right. (Id.).  Dr. 
                                                                 
1 As the owner of machine 16, presumably Owen has paperwork showing when the machine went out of 
commission.  It did not submit any of that paperwork at hearing.  Additionally, medical records also give October 
and November 2023, as potential dates when Holland started working on machine 20/began experiencing 
symptoms. (JE 1, pp. 2 and 6-7; JE 3, p. 1).   

HOLLAND V. OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 6 
 
 
Amendola reviewed Holland’s treatment options. (Id.).  Holland indicated he did not 
want a steroid injection and declined formal physical therapy. (Id.).  He wanted to 
proceed with an MRI. (Id.).  Dr. Amendola continued his 5-pound lifting restriction for 6 
more weeks “to see if we can get the left shoulder to calm down and get the pain to 
improve.” (Id.). 
On February 5, 2024, Holland was seen at Work Fit Occupational Health. (JE 2).  
The treatment record from this visit is not in evidence.  (Id.).  However, the Work 
Restriction Sheet submitted by the parties indicates the provider gave Holland 
restrictions of no lifting more than 5 pounds, no overhead lifting with the left arm, and no 
ladder climbing. (Id.).  The provider also suggested Holland try using Voltaren cream for 
his pain. (Id.).  Holland testified that he tried using the cream once and it did not help. 
(Tr., p. 58).   
An MRI of Holland’s right shoulder was taken on February 16, 2024. (JE 1, p. 
45). It showed tendon tears in the supraspinatus/anterior infraspinatus tendons, a 
circumferential to near circumferential glenoid labral tear and degeneration, moderate 
acromioclavicular DJD, subacromial subdeltoid bursitis, and adhesive capsulitis versus 
sequelae capsular ligamentous injury. (Id.).   
Dr. Amendola met with Holland to review the MRI results on February 29, 2024. 
(JE 1, pp. 7, 45).  Dr. Amendola diagnosed him with right glenohumeral osteoarthritis.  
(Id. at 45).  He laid out Holland’s treatment options, which included rest, activity 
modification, ice/heat, anti-inflammatory medications, Tylenol, physical therapy and/or a 
steroid injection. (Id.).  Dr. Amendola’s treatment note also indicates he could proceed 
with a total shoulder arthroplasty, however, Dr. Amendola encouraged him to put off 
surgery as long as he could. (Id.).  Dr. Amendola offered Holland formal physical 
therapy. (Id.). Holland declined. (Id.).  Dr. Amendola encouraged him to consider 
proceeding with a steroid injection. (Id.).  The treatment note indicates Holland wanted 
to think about it. (Id.).  This is the last treatment record from Dr. Amendola in the hearing 
record.  
Owen arranged for a second opinion with James Mantone, M.D. (JE 3, p. 1).  Dr. 
Mantone evaluated Holland on March 18, 2024. (Id.).  Dr. Mantone is an orthopedic 
surgeon at MD West One. (Ex. E, p. 7).  Dr. Mantone’s treatment note states Holland’s 
shoulder pain started around November 23, 2023. (JE 3, p. 1).  He describes Holland’s 
condition as a “use-abuse-type phenomenon at work where his lifting chest overhead 
and away from him produces significant pain and difficulty and escalation of symptoms.” 
(Id.).  Dr. Mantone notes Holland’s shoulder x-rays show moderate to advanced 
arthrosis, left greater than right. (Id. at 2).  Dr. Mantone assessed Holland with “overuse 
difficulty with work of stress-strain phenomenon, impingement and exacerbation of his 
underlying advanced glenohumeral arthrosis, left greater than right.” (Id.).  Dr. 
Mantone’s treatment note indicates they discussed Holland’s treatment options 
including heat/ice, topical gels, anti-inflammatories, oral steroids, injections, and 
surgery. (Id.).  About surgical options, Dr. Mantone states “I have touched on surgical 

HOLLAND V. OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 7 
 
 
measure, limited of something arthroscopic that I think for his level of disease will be 
temporary, but possibly functionally restoring for work measures. I have touched on a 
total shoulder arthroplasty as definitive measure.” (Id.).  Dr. Mantone recommended 
Holland proceed first with an injection. (Id. at 3).  The treatment note indicates Holland 
did not want to proceed with any of the suggested treatments, he just wanted a job 
change. (Id. at 2).   
Dr. Mantone’s treatment note indicates they discussed Holland’s date of 
maximum medical improvement (MMI) and impairment rating. (JE 3, p. 3). He states “I 
have touched on impairment rating. This would be more for his impingement, cuff strain 
and pathology than the arthritic disease as that is not causative for the work measures.” 
(Id.).  Dr. Mantone gave conflicting responses about Holland returning back to work at 
Owen. On one hand, he said Holland was fine to return to work, but he also stated that 
he could not physically perform the job and would likely be terminated. (Id.). He 
recommended vocational rehab. (Id.). Dr. Mantone indicated Holland was at MMI and 
would have an impairment rating. (Id.).   
On June 14, 2024, Dr. Pieper issued a report at the request of claimant’s 
counsel. (Cl Ex. 2, p. 1).  In the report, Dr. Pieper agreed that in her opinion Holland’s 
diagnoses of moderate bilateral shoulder glenohumeral degenerative joint disease and 
mild bilateral acromioclavicular degenerative joint disease was either caused or 
substantially aggravated by the repetitive lifting Holland did at Owen. (Id. at 2).  Dr. 
Pieper indicated Holland needed to seek a second opinion from an orthopedic surgeon. 
(Id.).  Dr. Pieper stated that in her opinion, he should give more consideration to having 
surgery. (Id. at 3).  She, however, stated that if Holland chose not to seek further 
treatment for his work injury, he was at MMI. (Id.).  Dr. Pieper recommended Holland 
get a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) to assess his need for permanent work 
restrictions. (Id.).  Claimant’s counsel asked Dr. Pieper whether Holland had suffered 
permanent impairment as a result of his work at Owen. (Id.).  Dr. Pieper responded, “I 
am not able to comment—this is not my specialty and the outcome depends on 
treatment +/- surgery.” (Id.).   
Holland attended an FCE with Jennifer Beran, PT, Premier Physical Therapy, on 
June 19, 2024. (Cl Ex. 3, p. 2).  The results of the FCE indicated Holland could work in 
the medium physical demand category and occasionally lift 70 pounds to his waist and 
20 pounds to his shoulder and carry 50 pounds. (Id.) It also indicated Holland should 
avoid reaching above shoulder height. (Id.).  On July 5, 2024, Dr. Pieper signed a report 
adopting the restrictions outlined in the FCE report. (Cl Ex. 4).  
On September 1, 2024, Dr. Mantone provided defendant’s counsel with a follow-
up report. (Ex. D, pp. 4-5).  It is not clear whether Dr. Mantone physically examined 
Holland before releasing his second report. (Id.).  The report indicates that Dr. 
Mantone’s diagnosis for Holland’s January 2024 work injury is subacromial bursitis, 
impingement syndrome or synovitic inflammatory flare of his underlying arthritic disease 
in the shoulders. (Id. at 4).  The rest of Dr. Mantone’s report reads as follows: 

HOLLAND V. OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 8 
 
 
His diagnosis for synovitic inflammatory pathology is related to his 
underlying advanced glenohumeral arthrosis.  This arthritis is what has 
been aggravated by his work injury and produced his difficulties.   
As far as maximal medical improvement, Mr. Holland did not want any of 
my treatment measures or options discussed with him implemented.  As 
such, for all intense [sic] and purposes, his maximal medical improvement 
was the date of my single office visit and second opinion with him.  
As far as permanent impairment I would expect his impairment to be none. 
There are stipulations for a single time, lifetime implementation of strain, 
impingement bursitis-type diagnosis that would produce a 1% impairment. 
That could be pushed in his case, but would not be recommended nor 
expected.  
With regards [sic] to restrictions, there was confusion previous from such as 
common sense avoidance that cautionary measures for what he does for 
his work activities would produce difficulty, hence, the commonsense 
avoidance, but no restrictions. For your specifics from the January 8th 
incident, no work restrictions are necessary.  
As far as future medical treatment for this injury, I would proceed with a 
glenohumeral injection arthrogram should the patient want that.  His 
definitive treatment, not relative to the work environment, would be total 
shoulder arthroplasty.  
(Id.).  This is the last report in the hearing record.  
 
At the hearing, Holland testified that he had never sought treatment for shoulder 
pain prior to working at Owen. (Tr., p. 49). There is no evidence in the hearing record 
showing Holland had prior medical treatment for his shoulders.  Holland was diagnosed 
with diabetes approximately six years ago. (Id. at 49-50).  He takes insulin daily to 
manage his blood sugars.2 (JE 1, pp. 3-4).  Holland testified that he did not want to 
proceed with the suggested steroid injections or medication recommendations because 
they would raise his blood sugar and increase his risk of infection. (Tr., pp. 50-51, 62). 
He was also very concerned about the suggested treatment damaging his kidneys. (Id. 
at 54).  In her treatment notes, Dr. Pieper states that prednisone can increase blood 
sugar levels. (JE 1, p. 3).  Dr. Mantone’s report also mentions that oral steroids could 
increase Holland’s glucose levels. (Id. at 58).  At the hearing, Holland testified that he is 
interested in proceeding with surgery on his shoulders “at some point,” but needs to 
generate some income before he can proceed. (Tr., p. 67).   
Holland did not return back to work at Owen after he reported his shoulder 
injuries. (See Tr., pp. 44-45).  According to Dr. Pieper’s records, Owen was unable to 
accommodate Holland’s work restrictions and sent him home. (JE 1, p. 4).  Defendant 
                                                                 
2 Holland did not disclose this condition at his pre-employment physical. (See Ex. J).   

HOLLAND V. OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 9 
 
 
submitted a benefit summary into evidence. (Ex. I, p. 32).  This states that Owen paid 
Holland weekly indemnity benefits from January 11, 2024, through June 6, 2024, at the 
rate of $466.10. (Id.).  On May 8, 2024, Owen’s third-party administrator sent Holland an 
Auxier letter stating his benefits would be terminated on June 6, 2024, because Dr. 
Mantone released him to return to work without restrictions. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1). Holland 
indicated he has been looking for work since Owen stopped paying him indemnity 
benefits but has not found a job. (Tr., pp. 68-69).   
Holland relies on the opinion of Dr. Pieper to prove his claim.  Owen relies on the 
opinions of Dr. Mantone. I do not find Dr. Mantone’s opinions persuasive.  When read 
together, his two reports are contradictory, confusing and contrary to Iowa law.  For 
example, in his first report, Dr. Mantone stated, 
He is fine to return to work and I probably would not put restrictions on him.  
He is at the same time, though, unable for regular duty just because he 
cannot accomplish that.  He understands and it will either be termination or 
he will terminate. 
(JE 3, p. 3).  So, Dr. Mantone acknowledges that Holland is physically unable to perform 
his job at Owen because of his shoulder conditions, but also states he is not going to 
give him any work restrictions for his shoulders.  Similarly, Dr. Mantone’s opinions on 
permanent impairment are contradictory and confusing.  In his first report, Dr. Mantone 
states that Holland would have permanent impairment from his shoulder injuries. (Id.).  
Then in his second report, Dr. Mantone states he is not going to assign Holland 
permanent impairment for his shoulder injuries, while at the same time acknowledging 
that the diagnosis he gave Holland could provide him with a 1 percent impairment 
rating. Given the above, Dr. Mantone’s opinion is not adopted.  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
 
Owen asserts a notice defense.  Iowa Code section 85.23 requires an employee 
to give notice of the occurrence of an injury to the employer within 90 days from the 
date of the occurrence, unless the employer has actual knowledge of the occurrence.  
The purpose of the 90-day notice or actual knowledge requirement is to give the 
employer an opportunity to timely investigate the facts surrounding the injury. The actual 
knowledge alternative to notice is met when the employer, as a reasonably 
conscientious manager, is alerted to the possibility of a potential compensation claim 
through information which makes the employer aware that the injury occurred and that it 
may be work related. Dillinger v. City of Sioux City, 368 N.W.2d 176 (Iowa 1985); 
Robinson v. Dep't of Transp., 296 N.W.2d 809 (Iowa 1980).  Failure to give notice is an 
affirmative defense which the employer must prove by a preponderance of the 
evidence. DeLong v. Highway Comm'n, 229 Iowa 700, 295 N.W. 91, 92 (1940). 
 

HOLLAND V. OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 10 
 
 
According to the above factual findings, Owen had knowledge of Holland’s 
alleged shoulder injuries on January 10, 2024.  (Ex. A, p. 1).  In their post-hearing brief, 
Owen argues that this notification was outside of the 90 days allotted in Code section 
85.23. (Defendant’s Post-Hearing Brief, p. 6).  This argument, however, is premised on 
Holland’s injury occurring on the date machine 16 broke down, forcing him to work on 
machine 20. (Id.).  Owen alleges the machine broke down sometime between 
September 21, 2023, and September 25, 2023. (Id. at 6).  Owen obtained these dates 
from some handwritten notes at the bottom of Dr. Pieper’s January 11, 2024 medical 
record.  As stated above, however, the provenance and credibility of that information is 
unclear.  Nevertheless, Owen argues this is when Holland’s injury occurred under the 
language of Code section 85.23.  (Id.).   
 
In 2017, the Iowa legislature amended Iowa Code section 85.23.  Prior to that 
amendment, the language of Iowa Code section 85.23 read:  
 
Unless the employer or the employer's representative shall have 
actual knowledge of the occurrence of an injury received within ninety days 
from the date of the occurrence of the injury, or unless the employee or 
someone on the employee's behalf or a dependent or someone on the 
dependent's behalf shall give notice thereof to the employer within ninety 
days from the date of the occurrence of the injury, no compensation shall 
be allowed. 
 
Iowa Code § 85.23 (2015).  However, in 2017, the legislature added the following 
definition to section 85.23: “For the purposes of this section, ‘date of the occurrence of 
the injury’ means the date that the employee knew or should have known that the injury 
was work-related.” Id. (2017).   
 
 
In Tweeten v. Tweeten, 999 N.W.2d 270, 279-282 (Iowa 2023), the Iowa 
Supreme Court interpreted identical language that the legislature added to Iowa Code 
section 85.26 in 2017.  Code section 85.26 contains the statute of limitations for filing 
workers’ compensation actions.  The Tweeten decision found that, prior to the 2017 
amendment, the commencement of the limitation period in section 85.26 was tied to 
claimant’s discovery of the nature, seriousness, and probable compensable character of 
the injury. Id. at 279-280.  This was titled the discovery rule. See, e.g., Baker v. 
Bridgestone/Firestone, 872 N.W.2d 672, 682 (Iowa 2015). The Court held that adding 
the definition of “date of the occurrence of the injury” to section 85.26 abrogated the 
discovery rule and changed the commencement of the limitation period in that section, 
tying it to the occurrence of a specific event, namely the date “the employee knew or 
should have known that the injury was work related.” Tweeten, 999 N.W.2d at 280.  
Owen argues that under the holding in Tweeten, Holland’s 90-day notice period 
commenced on the date he first noticed shoulder symptoms, which they claim is the 
date he started working on machine 20.  As support for this claim, Owen has also cited 
to the holding in Tyler v. Tyson Fresh Meats, Inc., 4 N.W.3d 721 (Table) (Iowa Ct. App. 
2024) (interpreting the revised language of Code section 85.23).  
 

HOLLAND V. OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 11 
 
 
 
I do not find Owen’s argument persuasive.  Tyler is an unpublished opinion from 
the Iowa Court of Appeals; its holding is not binding precedent.  See Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(2)(c) (stating “Unpublished opinions or decisions of a court or agency shall not 
constitute controlling legal authority . . . .”).  However, even if it were binding on this 
agency, Tyler, does not address the factual scenario presented in this case.  While the 
Tyler decision also involved the application of amended Iowa Code section 85.23, the 
fighting issue in Tyler was when the claimant knew his injury was work-related. See id. 
at *2.  In that case, both the Court of Appeals and the agency determined that the 
claimant knew his injury was work-related when he retired, that he had not notified his 
employer of the injury within 90 days of his retirement, and so he was barred from 
recovery under Code section 85.23. Id. That is not the situation presented in this case.  
In Holland’s claim, the pressing question is not when he knew or should have known 
that his alleged shoulder injuries were work-related; the pertinent question is when did 
his alleged shoulder injuries actually occur.  Neither the Court, nor the agency’s 
holdings in Tyler answer that question.  
 
 
Similarly, the holding in Tweeten does not squarely address the fighting issue in 
this case.  While Tweeten does interpret identical language in Code section 85.26, 
Holland is making a cumulative injury claim and the Tweeten decision specifically states 
“We do not address how the revisions to section 85.26 might apply to a cumulative-type 
injury.” Tweeten, 999 N.W.2d at 282.  Additionally, while the Tweeten decision abrogated 
the discovery rule, it did not clearly alter the established test for when an injury 
manifests.  The Court stated “ ‘[t]hese two rules are closely related, . . . [although] they 
are not the same.’ ” Id. at 281 (quoting Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284, 287 (Iowa 
2001)(overruled as it pertains to the discovery rule)). The Court continued,  
  
 
They are closely related because they both toll the period for commencing 
the statute of limitations. The manifestation test tolls the period until the 
employee knows (or should know) that he is injured and that the injury is 
work-related. They are not the same because the discovery rule tolls the 
period one step longer—until the employee recognizes (or should 
recognize) that the injury is compensable. 
 
Id.3  The Court’s manifestation test was originally established in McKeever v. Smith, 379 
N.W.2d 368, 374 (Iowa 1985), and further developed in Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. 
Tasler, 483 N.W.2d 824, 829-830 (Iowa 1992).  The Tweeten decision does not explicitly 
or implicitly overrule either decision.   
 
 
 
In cumulative injury cases, the date of injury is defined as the time at which the 
“disability manifests itself.” Tasler, 483 N.W.2d at 829.  “ ‘Manifestation . . . the date on 
which both the fact of the injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant’s 
employment would have become plainly apparent to a reasonable person.’ ” Id. (quoting 
Bellwood Nursing Home v. Industrial Comm’n, 115 Ill.2d 524, 106 Ill. Dec. 235, 238, 505 
N.E.2d 1026, 1029 (1987)).  In McKeever, the Court found the injury manifested when 
                                                                 
3It is noted that the Court’s test for manifestation closely tracks the language added to Code sections 
85.23 and 85.26 in 2017.  

HOLLAND V. OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 12 
 
 
“because of pain or physical inability, he can no longer work.” 379 N.W2d at 374.  In 
Tasler, the Court affirmed the agency’s determination that claimant’s injury manifested 
on the date the employer permanently closed its plant. 483 N.W.2d at 829.  The Court 
gave the agency a “substantial amount of latitude” in determining the manifestation date 
because it “is an inherently fact-based determination.” Id.  They specifically rejected an 
interpretation of manifestation that fixed the injuries occurrence at the time “the 
employee first became aware of the physical condition.” Id.   In other words, under the 
prevailing law for cumulative injuries, an injury does not manifest the first time an 
employee notices any pain, symptoms, or is asked to do a difficult work task.  I decline 
to adopt Owen’s proposed manifestation/injury date.  
 
 
According to the evidence, Holland performed his job at Owen on machine 20 
until January 10, 2024.  (Ex. A, p. 1).  At which time, Holland testified that he could no 
longer physically perform his job. (See Tr., pp. 41-42, 75, 95).  Given the above test, 
January 10, 2024, is found to be the date Holland’s alleged injuries manifested and the 
correct date of injury for this case. Holland notified Owen of the injury that same day. 
Owen has failed to prove a notice defense.  
 
 
The next issue that must be addressed is whether Holland sustained an injury 
that arose out of and in the course of his employment with Owen on January 10, 2024. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the 
alleged injury occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311.  The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 

HOLLAND V. OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 13 
 
 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410, 420 
(Iowa 2001); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995).  Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
When an expert's opinion is based upon an incomplete or incorrect history, it is 
not necessarily binding on the commissioner or the court. It is then to be weighed, 
together with other facts and circumstances, the ultimate conclusion being for the finder 
of the fact.  Musselman v. Central Telephone Company, 154 N.W.2d 128, 133 (Iowa 
1967); Bodish v. Fischer, Inc., 257 Iowa 516, 522, 133 N.W.2d 867, 870 (1965).  The 
commissioner as trier of fact has the duty to determine the credibility of the witnesses 
and to weigh the evidence, together with the other disclosed facts and circumstances, 
and then to accept or reject the opinion.  Dunlavey, 526 N.W.2d at 853. 
While a claimant is not entitled to compensation for the results of a preexisting 
injury or disease, its mere existence at the time of a subsequent injury is not a defense. 
Rose v. John Deere Ottumwa Works, 247 Iowa 900, 908, 76 N.W.2d 756, 760-61 
(1956). If the claimant had a preexisting condition or disability that is materially 
aggravated, accelerated, worsened or lighted up so that it results in disability, claimant 
is entitled to recover. Nicks v. Davenport Produce Co., 254 Iowa 130, 135, 115 N.W.2d 
812, 815 (1962); Yeager v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 374-75, 112 
N.W.2d 299, 302 (1961). 
In their post-hearing brief, Owen alleges that Holland “has not explained any 
work at Owen that would explain his symptoms, which have been described as an 
aggravation of his preexisting arthritis.” (Defendant’s Post-Hearing Brief, p. 6).  
Defendant’s brief goes on to state “It is far more likely that the Claimant’s preexisting 
arthritis and pain associated with his preexisting arthritis was caused by one of hiss [sic] 
300 prior jobs that he’s consistently worked since age 14.” (Id.).   
There are two causation opinions in the hearing record—Dr. Pieper’s and Dr. 
Mantone’s.  In his September 1, 2024 evaluation, Dr. Mantone diagnosed Holland with 
subacromial bursitis and impingement syndrome or synovitic inflammatory flare of 
underlying arthritic disease in his shoulders. (Ex. D, p. 4).  He then stated, “His 
diagnosis for synovitic inflammatory pathology is related to his underlying advanced 
glenohumeral arthrosis.  This arthritis is what has been aggravated by his work injury 
and produced his difficulties.” (Id.)(emphasis added).  In her June 14, 2024 report, Dr. 
Pieper diagnosed Holland with moderate bilateral shoulder glenohumeral degenerative 
joint disease and mild bilateral acromioclavicular degenerative joint disease. (Cl Ex. 2, 
p. 2).  She then went on to opine that those diagnoses were either caused or 
substantially aggravated by the repetitive lifting Holland did at Owen. (Id.).   

HOLLAND V. OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 14 
 
 
Given the above opinions, Holland has met his burden to prove a causal 
relationship between his current shoulder conditions and the job he was performing at 
Owen on January 10, 2024. One doctor opined that the work either caused his shoulder 
condition or substantially aggravated an underlying condition.  The other agreed that his 
underlying arthritic disease was aggravated by his work.  At a minimum this medical 
evidence shows that Holland’s underlying arthritis was materially aggravated or lighted 
up by the work he performed at Owen.4  I find Holland proved by a preponderance of 
the evidence that his ongoing shoulder complaints arose out of and in the course of his 
employment with Owen on January 10, 2024.  He has established compensable work 
injuries.   
The next issue that must be decided is whether Holland has proven entitlement 
to permanent disability benefits are a result of the January 10, 2024 injury date. Under 
the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is compensated either 
for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(a)-
(u) or for loss of earning capacity under section 85.34(2)(v). The extent of scheduled 
member disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is determined by using 
the functional method. Functional disability is “limited to the loss of the physiological 
capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 
(Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312, 320 (Iowa 1998).  At the start of 
the hearing, both parties stipulated that Holland’s injuries were scheduled member 
injuries to the bilateral shoulders. (See Hearing Report).  Thus, his permanent 
impairment is determined under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n).  Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(n) limits compensation for a shoulder injury to four hundred weeks.  Iowa Code 
§ 85.34(2)(n) (2023).   
 
In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” through 
“u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not loss of earning 
capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be determined 
solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by 
the American Medical Association, as adopted by the workers' compensation 
commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall 
not be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment pursuant to 
paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional impairment 
and not loss of earning capacity.  Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(x).  There are no permanent 
impairment ratings in the hearing record that comply with the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  Dr. Pieper indicated she was unable 
to provide an impairment rating and Dr. Mantone gave contradictory statements, first 
stating Holland did not have any permanent impairment while also admitting that his 
diagnosis provided for a 1 percent rating without supplying any citations to the AMA 
                                                                 
4 While it is possible for a claimant to sustain a temporary non-compensable aggravation of an underlying 
condition, no physician has explicitly stated that Holland returned back to his pre-injury baseline condition and the 
hearing evidence shows his pain complaints continue.  Additionally, Owen did not submit any records at hearing 
showing that Holland ever sought medical care for his shoulder conditions prior to the injury date.  

HOLLAND V. OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 15 
 
 
Guides.  Given the state of the evidence, Holland has not proven entitlement to 
permanent disability benefits in this action.  
The next issue that must be determined is whether Holland is entitled to 
additional temporary total benefits or healing period benefits. (See Hearing Report).  
Holland did not prove entitlement to permanent benefits in this action; thus, the benefits 
he seeks are temporary total benefits. See Dunlap v. Action Warehouse, 824 N.W.2d 
545, 556 (Iowa Ct. App. 2012). 
Iowa Code section 85.33(1) governs temporary total benefits. Under Iowa Code 
section 85.33(1), temporary total disability benefits are payable “until the employee has 
returned to work or is medically capable of returning to employment substantially similar 
to the employment in which the employee was engaged at the time of injury, whichever 
occurs first.”  Holland did not return to work at Owen after the January 10, 2024 injury 
date, and at the time of hearing he still had not found other employment.  However, on 
the hearing report, Holland only requested additional temporary benefits through June 
14, 2024. (See Hearing Report).  That is the date Dr. Pieper placed him at MMI for the 
work injury, if he chose not to seek further treatment. (Cl Ex. 2, p. 3).   
According to the medical records provided, Dr. Pieper gave Holland work 
restrictions of no lifting more than 5 pounds at his first appointment on January 11, 
2024. (See JE 1, pp. 2-3).  Owen was not able to accommodate this restriction and 
volunteered temporary benefits. (Ex. I, p. 32).  On January 25, 2024, Dr. Amendola 
continued Holland’s 5-pound lifting restriction for 6 more weeks. (JE 1, p. 6).  Then, 
Holland was seen at Work Fit Occupational Health on February 5, 2024. (JE 2).  The 
provider at Work Fit gave him restrictions of no lifting more than 5 pounds, no overhead 
lifting with the left arm, and no ladder climbing. (Id.).  It does not appear that Owen was 
able to accommodate these restrictions either—they continued to volunteer temporary 
benefits. (Ex. I, p. 32).  Holland continued under these restrictions until his evaluation 
with Dr. Mantone on March 18, 2024. (JE 3, p. 3).  During that evaluation Dr. Mantone 
stated he was “fine to return to work and I probably would not put restrictions on him.” 
(Id.).  However, Dr. Mantone also acknowledged Holland could not physically perform 
his job at Owen and that he would likely be terminated. (Id.). As stated above, the 
undersigned does not find Dr. Mantone’s opinion to be persuasive and does not adopt 
it.  On May 8, 2024, Owen sent Holland an Auxier letter terminating his benefits based 
on Dr. Mantone’s full duty release. (Cl Ex. 1, p. 1).   
Except for Dr. Mantone, no other provider has opined that Holland can return to 
full duty work without restrictions.  Additionally, there is nothing in the record showing 
that Dr. Pieper or the provider at Work Fit lifted Holland’s work restrictions before June 
14, 2024, the date of Dr. Pieper’s supplemental report. In that supplemental report, Dr. 
Pieper did not return Holland to full duty work without restrictions, she recommended he 
undergo an FCE to determine permanent restrictions. (Cl Ex. 2, p. 3).  He underwent 
the FCE on June 19, 2024, and was placed in the medium physical demand category 
with an occasional 70-pound lifting restriction to his waist. (Cl Ex. 3, p. 2).  So, while it is 

HOLLAND V. OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 16 
 
 
not entirely clear from the hearing record whether Holland was medically capable of 
returning to a substantially similar job on June 14, 2024, he clearly had/needed work 
restrictions which Holland could not accommodate until June 14, 2024.  Under this 
record, Holland is entitled to the additional temporary compensation he seeks. Holland 
is awarded temporary total benefits from June 6, 2024, through June 14, 2024.  The 
parties have stipulated that Owen paid Holland 21.857 weeks of benefits at the rate of 
$466.10 prior to hearing. (See Hearing Report).  According to Owen’s payment 
summary, those benefits were paid from January 11, 2024, through June 6, 2024. (Ex. I, 
p. 32).  Owen is entitled to a credit for the benefits actually paid; they are not, however, 
entitled to a credit for overpayment of benefits.  
Holland seeks payment of the medical expenses listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 6. 
For all compensable injuries under Iowa Code chapter 85 or 85A, the employer must 
“furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, 
physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services and supplies therefor 
and shall allow reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred for such 
services.” Iowa Code § 85.27(1).  
According to Claimant’s Exhibit 6, Holland seeks payment of two bills: 1) one for 
$820.00 for a shoulder x-ray taken at Nebraska Medicine on January 11, 2024, and 2) 
another for $120 for a patient visit to Nebraska Medicine on January 25, 2024. (Cl Ex. 6, 
pp. 1-3).  Dr. Pieper works at Nebraska Medicine. On January 11, 2024, she evaluated 
Holland for bilateral shoulder pain. (JE 1, p. 2).  During that visit, Dr. Pieper ordered x-
rays of his shoulders. (Id.).  On January 25, 2024, Holland saw Dr. Amendola for 
bilateral shoulder pain. (Id. at 6).  Dr. Amendola is an orthopedic surgeon at Nebraska 
Medicine. (Id.).  These visits were causally related and necessitated by the January 10, 
2024 date of injury. If Holland has paid the medical expense listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 
6, he is entitled to reimbursement of that expense.  If Holland has not paid the expense 
listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 6, Owen is ordered to pay the provider directly.5  See, Krohn 
v. State, 420 N.W.2d 463, 464-465 (Iowa 1988).  
Finally, Holland asserts a claim for alternate medical care.  It is, however, unclear 
exactly what care he is seeking.  In his post-hearing brief, Holland states he would like 
“care as directed by Dr. Pieper and or a physician she directs for that purpose.” 
(Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, p. 12).  Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant 
part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish reasonable 
services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the right to 
choose the care .... The treatment must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee. If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction 
to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the employer and 
                                                                 
5 According to Claimant’s Exhibit 6, it appears that these bills have already been covered by Holland’s 
personal health insurance.  (Cl Ex. 6, pp. 1-3).   

HOLLAND V. OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 17 
 
 
the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited to treat the 
injury. If the employer and employee cannot agree on such alternate care, 
the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
Id.; see also, Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 436-37 (Iowa 
1997). 
“Iowa Code section 85.27(4) affords an employer who does not contest the 
compensability of a workplace injury a qualified statutory right to control the medical 
care provided to an injured employee.” Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 
N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016) (citing R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 
195-97 (Iowa 2003)). “In enacting the right-to-choose provision in section 85.27(4), our 
legislature sought to balance the interests of injured employees against the competing 
interests of their employers.” Ramirez, 878 N.W.2d at 770-71 (citing Bell Bros. Heating 
and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 202, 207 (Iowa 2010); IBP v. Harker, 
633 N.W.2d 322, 326-27 (Iowa 2001)).  
The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except where the 
employer has denied liability for the injury. Iowa Code § 85.27; Holbert v. Townsend 
Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 
(Review-Reopening, October 16, 1975). An employer’s right to select the provider of 
medical treatment to an injured worker does not include the right to determine how an 
injured worker should be diagnosed, evaluated, treated, or other matters of professional 
medical judgment. Assmann v. Blue Star Foods, File No. 866389 (Declaratory Ruling, 
May 18, 1988). Reasonable care includes care necessary to diagnose the condition, 
and defendants are not entitled to interfere with the medical judgment of its own treating 
physician. Pote v. Mickow Corp., File No. 694639 (Review-Reopening Decision, June 
17, 1986). 
The employer must furnish “reasonable medical services and supplies and 
reasonable and necessary appliances to treat an injured employee.” Stone Container 
Corp. v. Castle, 657 N.W.2d 485, 490 (Iowa 2003) (emphasis in original). Such 
employer-provided care “must be offered promptly and be reasonably suited to treat the 
injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.” Iowa Code § 85.27(4). 
By challenging the employer’s choice of treatment - and seeking alternate care - 
claimant assumes the burden of proving the authorized care is unreasonable. See e.g., 
Iowa R. App. P. 14(f)(5); Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d at 209; Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 
N.W.2d 122, 124 (Iowa 1995). An injured employee dissatisfied with the employer-
furnished care (or lack thereof) may share the employee’s discontent with the employer 
and if the parties cannot reach an agreement on alternate care, “the commissioner may, 
upon application and reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order the 
care.” Iowa Code § 85.27(4). “Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is 
a question of fact.” Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123; see also Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d at 436. As 
the party seeking relief in the form of alternate care, the employee bears the burden of 

HOLLAND V. OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 18 
 
 
proving that the authorized care is unreasonable. Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124; Gwinn, 779 
N.W.2d at 209; Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d at 436. Because “the employer’s obligation under 
the statute turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” an injured 
employee’s dissatisfaction with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough 
to find such care unreasonable. Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124. 
 
Holland has not met his burden at this time. Owen has offered a plethora of 
treatment options- medications, anti-inflammatories, physical therapy, analgesics, and 
injections.  Holland has refused most of the treatment offered. Holland testified his 
refusal was motivated by his fear of potential interactions with his pre-existing diabetes. 
(Tr., p. 62).  There is some support for his concern. Dr. Pieper’s treatment records 
indicate Holland could not be prescribed NSAIDs because of his kidney disease or 
prednisone due to his diabetes. (JE 1, p. 3). Dr. Mantone also indicated that oral 
steroids could increase Holland’s blood glucose levels. (JE 3, p. 3).  However, the same 
cannot be said for the remainder of the recommended treatment. For example, no 
doctor has indicated Holland is unable to participate in physical therapy because of his 
underlying conditions. At the hearing, Holland testified he “was only interested in 
surgery.” (Tr., pp. 84-85). Moreover, when Dr. Pieper was asked for further treatment 
recommendations, the only suggestion she had was for Holland to get a second opinion 
from an orthopedic surgeon.  (Cl Ex. 2, p. 2).  He, however, has already done that.  
Holland has been evaluated by both Dr. Amendola and Dr. Mantone, both qualified 
surgeons.  (JE 1, pp. 7, 45; JE 3, p. 3; Ex. D, pp. 4-5).  Both doctors indicated Holland 
will eventually need a total shoulder replacement but encouraged him to put the surgery 
off as long as possible. (JE 1, pp. 7, 45; JE 3, p. 3; Ex. D, pp. 4-5).  Neither doctor is 
currently recommending the surgery.   
 
Based upon the information in the record, I find Holland has not proven that the 
care offered is unreasonable.  While he has chosen not to accept the treatment options 
Owen offered, there is no evidence that they were unreasonable.  Holland has already 
seen two orthopedic surgeons.  Neither doctor is currently recommending surgery.  His 
request for alternate medical care is denied at this time.6  
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendant shall pay Holland one (1) week and one (1) day of temporary total 
benefits at the rate of four hundred sixty-six and 10/100 dollars ($466.10) per week for 
the period from June 6, 2024, through June 14, 2024.  
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with interest 
at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the 
                                                                 
6 This reasonableness determination does not change Owen’s future responsibility for medical care. Owen 
remains liable for all future reasonably necessary care for the January 10, 2024 work injury.  In other words, if 
Holland decides to proceed with any of the previously suggested treatment options, Owen is obligated to provide 
them.    

HOLLAND V. OWEN INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 19 
 
 
federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two 
percent.    
If Holland has paid for the medical expenses listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 6, he is 
entitled to reimbursement of those expenses.  If he has not paid the expenses listed in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 6, defendant is ordered to pay the listed providers directly.  
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this ___31st ____ day of March, 2025.  
  
 
   
__________________________ 
           AMANDA R. RUTHERFORD 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
    COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
John Corrigan (via WCES) 
Brian Moore (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers ’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Avenue, Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will 
be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
 
 
