Case Number: 21700950.03
Case Title:  HAWK, TODD V. COMPASS GROUP USA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Hawk Todd-21700950.03d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
TODD HAWK, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
   File No. 21700950.03 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
COMPASS GROUP USA, 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
AIU INSURANCE COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos.:  1402.40, 1802, 2206, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
  2501, 2052, 2907 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Todd Hawk, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers' 
compensation benefits from defendants Compass Group USA, employer, and AIU 
Insurance Company, insurer.  The hearing occurred before the undersigned on June 21, 
2023, via Zoom. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  In the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of those 
stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision, 
and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties' stipulations will be raised or 
discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 4; Claimant's Exhibits 
5 through 18; and Defendants' Exhibits A through G.  Claimant testified on his own 
behalf.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing.  The 
case was considered fully submitted upon receipt of the parties' briefs on August 4, 
2023. 
ISSUES 
1. Whether the stipulated injury caused permanent disability; 
2. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits, 
including a claim for permanent total disability benefits and/or odd-lot 
status; 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Mar-01  15:36:21     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HAWK V. COMPASS GROUP USA 
Page 2 
 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.27;  
4. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an independent 
medical evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39; and  
5. Costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
The instant case revolves around a stipulated back injury occurring on May 21, 
2021.  The claimant at the center of this case is Todd Hawk.  At the time of the 
evidentiary hearing that brought forth this claim, Mr. Hawk was 61 years old and living in 
Indianola, Iowa. (Hearing Transcript, pages 11, 13)  He did not graduate from high 
school or obtain a Certificate of High School Equivalency. (Hr. Tr., pp. 16-17) 
 
Mr. Hawk has worked as a general laborer for various companies that contract 
with Simpson College in Indianola, Iowa, since June 21, 1993. (Hr. Tr., p. 18)  
Originally, claimant was hired by Marriott.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 8, p. 96)  Marriott became 
Marriott Sodexo, which then became Sodexo.  (Id.)  In 2019, Simpson College replaced 
Sodexo with Compass Group USA, the defendant employer.  (Hr. Tr., p. 18)  The 
defendant employer hired Mr. Hawk to continue working as a general laborer at 
Simpson College.   
As a general laborer, Mr. Hawk assisted with the day-to-day upkeep, 
maintenance, and operation of the buildings and campus. (Ex. 10, p. 98)  He also 
repaired, maintained, and assisted in the installation of machines and other equipment. 
(Id.)  In addition, Mr. Hawk painted indoor and outdoor structures, and helped setup/tear 
down for events. (See Ex. 5, p. 70)  The job required him to frequently lift up to 25 
pounds, and to occasionally lift up to 100 pounds. (Ex. 10, p. 99) 
 
Mr. Hawk testified that his job duties largely remained the same between 1993 
and 2021; however, he had to perform more work and at a faster pace once Compass 
Group took over in 2019. (Hr. Tr., pp. 18-19)  As an example, Compass Group did not 
hire student crews to help during the summer months as his previous employers did. 
(Hr. Tr., p. 18)   
 
Mr. Hawk’s medical history is relevant for back and neck pain dating back to at 
least 2003.  Between 2003 and 2013, Mr. Hawk received chiropractic adjustments on 24 
occasions. (Joint Exhibit 1, pp. 1-12)  He did not present to his chiropractor between 
August 2013 and May 2020. (See JE1, p. 12)  Additionally, Mr. Hawk presented to his 
primary care physician for low back pain periodically between 2012 and 2020. (Ex. 5, 
pp. 71-74) 

HAWK V. COMPASS GROUP USA 
Page 3 
 
In March 2021, two months prior to his stipulated work injury, Mr. Hawk 
presented to his chiropractor reporting low and mid-back pain from his work activities. 
(JE2, pp. 13-14)  He also reported pain in his mid-back up through the shoulder blades 
and into his neck. (JE2, p. 13)  He reported that this pain in particular had been more 
severe over the past several days. (Id.)  He attributed the pain to working with drywall. 
(Id.) 
 
 
On May 21, 2021, Mr. Hawk heard a “pop” in his back and experienced shooting 
pain in his low back and legs while patching a wall. (Hr. Tr., pp. 21-22)  The wall Mr. 
Hawk was patching was located behind a toilet.  As such, he had to kneel in awkward 
positions to complete the task. (Id.) 
Defendants authorized medical care through Concentra.  X-rays of the lumbar 
spine showed significant degenerative disc and degenerative joint disease. (JE2, p. 17)  
Carlos Moe, D.O. assessed Mr. Hawk with acute low back pain with left-sided sciatica, 
degenerative joint disease, and degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine. (Id.) 
 
When physical therapy failed to alleviate Mr. Hawk’s pain, Dr. Moe ordered an 
MRI of the lumbar spine. (JE2, p. 23)  The MRI revealed a bulging disc at L4-L5 with 
nerve root irritation worse of the left side. (JE3, p. 56; see JE2, p. 45)  After reviewing 
the MRI results, Dr. Moe referred Mr. Hawk for an orthopedic evaluation. (JE2, p. 53) 
 
Trevor Schmitz, M.D. conducted the orthopedic evaluation on July 28, 2021. 
(JE4, pp. 57-59)  Dr. Schmitz did not recommend surgery, but referred Mr. Hawk to pain 
management to explore injection options. (JE4, p. 59)  Dr. Schmitz also prescribed 
physical therapy and gabapentin. (Id.) 
 
In response to a check-the-box style letter from defendants, Dr. Schmitz agreed 
that Mr. Hawk’s degenerative disc disease, lumbar foraminal stenosis, and bulging 
lumbar disc were materially and substantially aggravated by the traumatic work injury on 
May 21, 2021. (JE4, p. 60)  Dr. Schmitz signed the letter on September 10, 2021. (Id.) 
 
Mr. Hawk first presented to John Rayburn, M.D. on January 19, 2022. (JE4, p. 
61)  Dr. Rayburn outlined a multi-step treatment plan.  First, Dr. Rayburn planned to 
administer bilateral medial branch blocks at L3-L4, L4-L5, and L5-S1.  Depending on 
the result of the medial branch blocks, Dr. Rayburn planned to proceed with either 
radiofrequency ablation or bilateral GTB injections. (JE4, p. 63)  Dr. Rayburn added that 
Mr. Hawk could consider bilateral L4-L5 transforaminal epidural steroid injections; 
however, he wanted to hold off on recommending the same as Mr. Hawk was not 
having radicular complaints at the time. (Id.) 
 
Dr. Rayburn administered medial branch block injections on March 17, 2022. 
(JE4, p. 68) 
 
In response to another check-the-box style letter, Dr. Rayburn agreed that Mr. 
Hawk’s lumbar spondylosis was materially and substantially aggravated by his traumatic 
work injury on May 21, 2021. (JE4, p. 64)  He further agreed that the medical care and 

HAWK V. COMPASS GROUP USA 
Page 4 
 
treatment he recommended for Mr. Hawk was necessitated by the May 21, 2021, injury. 
(Id.) 
 
 Following Dr. Rayburn’s treatment recommendations, defendants conducted a 
conference call with Dr. Schmitz and produced a letter summarizing the opinions he 
expressed during said conference call.  According to the letter, Dr. Schmitz opined that 
Mr. Hawk did not suffer any structural change or damage to his low back or spine in 
relation to the May 21, 2021, injury, and Mr. Hawk, at most, suffered a temporary 
aggravation of the preexisting degenerative conditions in his spine. (JE4, p. 65)  The 
letter also provided that Dr. Schmitz was of the opinion that the proposed medial branch 
block injections would be reasonable, necessary, and related to Mr. Hawk’s work injury; 
however, any additional medical treatment would not be reasonable, necessary, or 
causally related to the work injury. (JE4, p. 66)  Dr. Schmitz signed off on the accuracy 
of the summary on February 20, 2022. (Id.) 
 
As a result of Dr. Schmitz’s updated opinions, the defendants denied 
authorization for any additional care. (Ex. 18, p. 146)  Claimant has not presented to 
any healthcare provider for his low back pain since March 2022. 
 
Following defendants’ denial, claimant sought and obtained an independent 
medical evaluation with John Kuhnlein, D.O. (Ex. 5)  Dr. Kuhnlein examined Mr. Hawk 
on August 3, 2022. (Ex. 5, p. 70)  He diagnosed chronic musculoskeletal low back pain 
with lumbar spondylosis and possible piriformis syndrome, as well as bilateral iliotibial 
band pain, and right greater trochanteric bursitis. (Ex. 5, p. 79)  He opined it is more 
likely than not that the May 21, 2021, injury “lit up” and materially aggravated the pre-
existing degenerative changes in Mr. Hawk’s lumbar spine, and produced the now 
chronic low back pain. (Ex. 5, p. 80)  He further provided: 
The records show a different pattern of care for his lower back pain after the 
injury compared to before. He had episodic care for low back pain with no 
evidence of any chronic or accelerating low back pain before the May 21, 
2021 injury. The record shows ongoing care for low back pain with sciatica 
after the May 21, 2021 incident until the insurer denied further care. 
(Id.)  Dr. Kuhnlein disagreed with Dr. Schmitz’s comments regarding causation.  He 
opined that whether the MRI revealed structural change or damage is irrelevant, as MRI 
findings do not necessarily correlate to clinical symptoms. (Id.)   
In response to Dr. Kuhnlein’s report, defendants obtained an independent 
medical examination with Joseph Chen, M.D. (Defendants’ Exhibit A)  Dr. Chen 
examined Mr. Hawk on March 15, 2023. (Ex. A, p. 1)  Dr. Chen agreed with Dr. Schmitz 
that claimant did not sustain any structural change or damage to his low back or spine 
in relation to the May 21, 2021, work injury. (Ex. A, p. 13)  He further opined that 
claimant sustained only a temporary aggravation of his pre-existing degenerative 
conditions in his spine. (Id.)  Interestingly, Dr. Chen acknowledged that temporary 
aggravations typically resolve within three months after the onset of symptoms.  He then 
opined that the fact claimant’s care spanned 10 months indicates his treating physicians 

HAWK V. COMPASS GROUP USA 
Page 5 
 
were providing treatment for Mr. Hawk’s chronic back pain when they performed the 
medial branch blocks on March 17, 2022. (Id.)  Dr. Chen used March 17, 2022 as the 
date of maximum medical improvement. (Id.)   
 
I do not afford significant weight to Dr. Chen’s causation opinion.  While I respect 
Dr. Chen’s expertise, I find it challenging to reconcile the logical coherence of his 
opinion.  Dr. Chen initially attributes Mr. Hawk’s chronic low back pain to the May 21, 
2021, incident, describing it as a temporary aggravation.  He then opined that temporary 
aggravations typically resolve within three months, and the fact that claimant received 
treatment for 10 months suggests his treating physicians were treating his chronic low 
back pain, rather than the stipulated work injury, in March 2022.  Dr. Chen does not 
provide an estimate of when claimant’s treatment stopped addressing the work injury 
and started addressing his pre-existing chronic back pain.  He similarly failed to address 
how claimant’s temporary aggravation could resolve while his symptoms remained the 
same.  The inconsistency warrants further clarification; however, Dr. Chen’s report fails 
to provide the same.   
 
For similar reasons, I do not afford any weight to the causation opinions of Dr. 
Schmitz.  Dr. Schmitz initially opined that claimant’s lumbar degenerative disc disease 
was materially and substantially aggravated by the May 21, 2021, work injury.  He also 
stated that his medical care and treatment were related to the work injury.  Then, 
without sufficient explanation, Dr. Schmitz changed his causation opinion and agreed 
that claimant at most suffered a temporary aggravation of a pre-existing condition.  
 
Claimant testified to the radiating pain he experienced down both legs following 
the May 21, 2021, work injury.  He emphasized the fact he had never felt anything 
similar prior to the date of injury.  Following the May 21, 2021, work injury, claimant’s 
low back pain never resolved or returned to a baseline threshold as it previously had.  
As discussed by Dr. Kuhnlein, claimant had episodic care for low back pain with no 
evidence of any chronic or accelerating low back pain prior to the May 21, 2021, injury.   
 
Mr. Hawk’s credible testimony is in line with the causation opinions of Dr. 
Rayburn and Dr. Kuhnlein.  The evidentiary record supports a finding that the May 21, 
2021, work injury aggravated and accelerated claimant’s underlying condition to the 
point where it became symptomatic on a continuous basis.  As such, I accept the 
causation opinions of Dr. Kuhnlein and Dr. Rayburn. 
Having accepted the causation opinions of Dr. Kuhnlein and Dr. Rayburn, I find 
claimant carried his burden of proving he sustained a permanent and material 
aggravation or worsening of his pre-existing low back condition as a result of the May 
21, 2021, work injury. 
 
Claimant continues to experience low back pain.  He testified he has not been 
pain-free since the date of injury. (Hr. Tr., p. 50)  He takes over-the-counter pain 
medication twice a day, every day. (Hr. Tr., p. 51)  In terms of his functional abilities, 
claimant testified he is able to complete chores around the house and shop for 
groceries. (Hr. Tr., p. 49)   

HAWK V. COMPASS GROUP USA 
Page 6 
 
Defendants introduced approximately 10 minutes of surveillance video taken in 
December 2022. (Ex. F)  The video depicts claimant carrying groceries into his home 
without obvious loss of function or symptoms. (Id.)  Claimant’s symptoms appear to be 
well-controlled on the surveillance footage.  At hearing, claimant admitted that he is 
capable of performing the various activities depicted in the surveillance video. (Hr. Tr., 
pp. 55-56)  I did not observe any specific activities on the surveillance footage that 
would clearly violate the medical restrictions recommended by Dr. Kuhnlein.   
The undersigned had the opportunity to observe Mr. Hawk at the evidentiary 
hearing, via Zoom.  Claimant presented as a kind and pleasant individual.  It appeared 
as though he answered every question to the best of his ability.  He did not provide the 
undersigned with any reason to question the veracity of his testimony. 
Mr. Hawk has not been able to hold a job since April 13, 2022, when he was laid 
off after Simpson College did not renew its contract with Compass Group. (Ex. 11, pp. 
100-101)  He worked a few hours for Tyson Foods on April 12, 2023; however, he was 
unable to complete his shift due to his back pain. (Hr. Tr., pp. 42-43)  According to 
claimant, he was hired to work in small engine repair; however, when he presented for 
work he was instructed to lift snowplows, 50-pound bags of feed, and hog panels. (Hr. 
Tr., p. 42) 
Claimant’s attorney arranged for him to undergo a vocational assessment with 
Ted Stricklett, M.S. (Ex. 15)  Stricklett reviewed records, interviewed claimant, and 
performed a labor market survey of the Indianola/Des Moines, Iowa area, then issued a 
report. (Ex. 15, pp. 130, 136)  Stricklett's analysis showed claimant sustained a loss of 
access to jobs in the labor market of the Indianola/Des Moines area of approximately 91 
percent. (Ex. 15, p. 136)  Stricklett added that claimant’s loss of access to the labor 
market was likely higher than 91 percent given claimant’s lack of a high school diploma. 
(Id.)  Based on the restrictions recommended by Dr. Kuhnlein, Mr. Stricklett felt 
claimant’s loss of earning capacity is 100 percent, and he would also be classified as an 
“odd-lot” worker. (Ex. 15, p. 137) 
In total, three physicians addressed the issue of permanent impairment. 
Dr. Kuhnlein noted that Dr. Rayburn was not allowed to pursue further diagnostic 
testing to determine claimant’s pain generator. (Ex. 5, p. 80)  He provided claimant’s 
workup was stopped “midstream” and should be resumed. (Ex. 5, pp. 80-81)  If claimant 
elected to resume medical care for his injury, Dr. Kuhnlein opined he would not be at 
maximum medical improvement; however, if claimant declined further care, he would 
have reached maximum medical improvement on or about March 17, 2022. (Ex. 5, p. 
81)  In such a scenario, Dr. Kuhnlein assigned 7 percent whole person impairment 
based on claimant’s loss of range of motion. (Ex. 5, p. 81)  Notably, the validity criteria 
were not met for the flexion range of motion measurement used in Dr. Kuhnlein’s 
impairment assessment. (Id.)  Dr. Chen opined this was likely due to Mr. Hawk’s large 
body habitus. (Ex. A, p. 14) 

HAWK V. COMPASS GROUP USA 
Page 7 
 
Dr. Chen and Dr. Schmitz opined that Mr. Hawk does not have any permanent 
impairment causally related to the May 21, 2021, injury, according to the AMA Guides, 
5th Edition. (Id.; JE4, p. 66) 
This case is complicated by the fact both parties appear to assert the extent of 
claimant’s permanent disability is ripe for determination, yet neither of the experts I 
found most credible opine that claimant has reached maximum medical improvement.  
Claimant asserts, “Because he had not had additional medical care after the medial 
branch blocks done by Dr. Rayburn, Dr. Kuhnlein determined that Todd reached MMI 
(maximum medical improvement) as of March 17, 2022, and sustained a 12% whole 
person impairment rating.” (Claimant’s Brief, p. 9)  However, this assertion misquotes 
Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinion.  In his report, Dr. Kuhnlein opined, “If he resumes medical care 
for this injury, he has not reached maximum medical improvement. If the insurer further 
denies care, or if Mr. Hawk does not choose to participate, then he reached maximum 
medical improvement on or about March 17, 2022.” (Ex. 5, p. 81)  Claimant desires and 
intends to pursue the additional treatment recommended by Dr. Rayburn and Dr. 
Kuhnlein. (Hr. Tr., p. 29)   I find the treatment recommendations are reasonable and 
appropriate, and may provide, or lead to additional recommendations that may affect 
claimant’s functional abilities. 
Having found the medical opinions of Dr. Kuhnlein and Dr. Rayburn to be the 
most persuasive and acknowledging that neither physician has definitively placed 
claimant at maximum medical improvement, I find that it would be premature to 
determine the level of claimant’s permanent disability at this time.  Recommendations 
for treatment exist and such treatment should be undertaken before a determination of 
claimant’s permanent disability occurs.  Claimant has been denied care under the 
workers’ compensation system.  If claimant’s condition is able to be treated, it is 
possible his functional abilities and earning capacity will increase.   
Costs and claimant’s entitlement to reimbursement of Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME report 
will be addressed in the conclusions of law section.  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The parties agree Mr. Hawk sustained a back injury, but dispute whether the 
injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 

HAWK V. COMPASS GROUP USA 
Page 8 
 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke's Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 
2001); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995); Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
In the instant case, two physicians have opined that Mr. Hawk’s degenerative 
disc disease, lumbar foraminal stenosis, and bulging lumbar disc were materially and 
substantially aggravated by the traumatic work injury on May 21, 2021.  Dr. Schmitz 
initially held this opinion; however, his position abruptly changed in February 2022. 
Having accepted the opinions of Dr. Rayburn and Dr. Kuhnlein as the most 
convincing opinions in the record, I found claimant carried his burden of proving the 
stipulated work injury permanently and materially aggravated his pre-existing, 
degenerative low back condition.  Having reached this conclusion, I must now 
determine whether claimant is currently entitled to permanent partial disability benefits. 
The Iowa Supreme Court has described MMI as “stabilization of the condition or 
at least a finding that the condition is ‘not likely to remit in the future despite medical 
treatment.’” Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 200 
(Iowa 2010) (citation omitted).  Deciding the issue of permanency before it is ripe risks 
making a final decision that could be undermined or altered by later evidence. Id. 
Dr. Rayburn and Dr. Kuhnlein did not place claimant at maximum medical 
improvement.  Instead, they recommended additional forms of diagnostic treatment 
intended to determine claimant’s pain generator and presumably improve the condition 
of his low back.  These recommendations belie a finding of maximum medical 
improvement.   
Claimant has not worked since April 13, 2022.  There is no indication that 
claimant was capable of returning to substantially similar employment on or before the 
date of the evidentiary hearing.  The only physician to release claimant to return to work 
or place him at maximum medical improvement is Dr. Schmitz, whose opinions I have 
dismissed.   
According to the medical evidence I have accepted as most convincing in this 
record, claimant had not yet achieved MMI prior to the evidentiary hearing.  He remains 
in a healing period. 

HAWK V. COMPASS GROUP USA 
Page 9 
 
Claimant did not assert a claim for healing period benefits through the date of 
hearing.  Rather, the hearing report provides that claimant’s entitlement to temporary 
disability and/or healing period benefits is no longer in dispute. (Hearing Report, p. 1)   
The undersigned is cognizant of the similarities between this case and Sandhu v. 
Nordstrom, Inc., No. 5046628 (App. Jan. 24, 2019), and acknowledges that an 
argument exists for the undersigned to assess the extent of claimant’s permanent 
impairment based on the intent of the parties.  However, the instant case is 
distinguishable from Sandhu. 
In Sandhu, the deputy commissioner found claimant sustained a permanent 
work-related injury to her bilateral shoulders.  The deputy commissioner also 
determined the medical treatment for claimant’s shoulders, including surgery, was 
related to the work injury.  However, the deputy commissioner concluded the extent of 
claimant’s permanent disability was not ripe for determination because claimant had not 
yet reached maximum medical improvement for her work-related mental health 
condition.  As a result, the deputy commissioner found the claimant had not reached 
MMI for all conditions and awarded claimant a running award of healing period benefits.   
On appeal, the defendant argued it was improper for the deputy commissioner to 
issue a running award of healing period benefits when claimant did not request a 
running award of healing period benefits and the parties stipulated claimant’s healing 
period had ended.  The claimant disputed defendant’s position that the parties 
stipulated claimant’s healing period had ended.  However, on cross-appeal, claimant 
argued she was permanently and totally disabled and requested that the commissioner 
reverse the deputy commissioner’s award of running healing period benefits and make 
findings and conclusions regarding the extent of her permanent disability.  Both parties 
agreed that they wanted and expected the deputy commissioner to decide the extent of 
claimant’s permanent disability. 
The commissioner reversed the deputy commissioner and concluded that 
permanent disability was ripe for adjudication.  In reaching this conclusion, the 
commissioner largely relied on the intent of the parties.  The decision provides, “On 
appeal, both parties continue to assert that the extent of claimant’s permanent disability 
is ready to be decided. […]  Thus, I respectfully disagree with the deputy commissioner 
and I find the extent of claimant’s permanent disability was and continues to be ripe for 
determination.”  Sandhu, File No. 5046628, 2019 WL 366447 at 2 (App. Jan. 24, 2019) 
Notably, at least two physicians placed Sandhu at maximum medical 
improvement for her bilateral shoulder condition prior to the date of injury.  Additionally, 
the parties stipulated on the hearing report that the work injury was a cause of 
permanent disability and asserted alternative commencement dates for permanency 
benefits.  In the instant case, the parties dispute that the injury is a cause of permanent 
disability.  In other words, the parties agree that there is an active disagreement 
regarding whether the injury is a cause of permanent disability.  The parties further 
dispute claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits.  Given the disputed 

HAWK V. COMPASS GROUP USA 
Page 10 
 
issues in this case, and the lack of a credible opinion finding Mr. Hawk has reached 
maximum medical improvement, I find this case is distinguishable from Sandhu.   
Claimant seeks an order for alternate medical care and specifically requests that 
the care recommended by Dr. Rayburn be authorized.  Defendants denied liability for 
the care claimant seeks.   
 
“[T]he employer has no right to choose the medical care when compensability is 
contested.” Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 204 
(Iowa 2010). “The statute contemplates that an injured employee may select his or her 
own medical care when the employer abandons the injured employee through the 
denial of compensability of the injury.” (Id.) Therefore, given defendants' denial of 
liability, I conclude that the defendant employer has no right to assert the authorization 
defense or challenge claimant’s assertion of a claim for alternate medical care.   
In this case, defendants have not provided ongoing medical care for claimant’s 
low back condition.  Defendants’ lack of care is not reasonable nor compliant with Iowa 
Code section 85.27. Claimant's request for alternate medical care will be granted and 
defendants will be ordered to provide and pay for causally related future medical care 
as recommended by Dr. Rayburn. 
The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement 
for an independent medical evaluation under Iowa Code section 85.39.  Section 85.39 
permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent examination by a physician of 
the employee's choice where an employer-retained physician has previously evaluated 
“permanent disability” and the employee believes that the initial evaluation is too low.   
Claimant seeks reimbursement for his IME with Dr. Kuhnlein.  The Iowa Supreme 
Court provided a literal interpretation of the plain-language of Iowa Code section 85.39, 
stating that section 85.39 only allows the employee to obtain an independent medical 
evaluation at the employer's expense if dissatisfied with the evaluation arranged by the 
employer.  Des Moines Area Reg'l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 
2015).  Under the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the 
employer's expense if an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an 
employer-retained physician. 
The Iowa Court of Appeals considered the scope of an employer's responsibility 
to pay for an examination by a doctor of the injured employee's choice in Kern v. 
Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 966 N.W.2d 326, 2021 WL 3890603, 2 (Iowa App. 
2021) (Table). The work injury at issue in Kern occurred on May 20, 2016, so the 
opinion construed Iowa Code section 85.39 (2016). Id. at 2-3. The statutory text, as 
amended in 2017, was not at issue in the case. See id. 
At the agency level, the claimant sought reimbursement of the costs relating to 
an IME by Dr. Bansal. Id. at 2; see also Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., No. 
5062419, 2017 WL 6764066, 1, 13-14 (Iowa Workers' Comp. Comm'r, Dec. 18, 2017) 
(Arb. Decision). Relying on the Iowa Supreme Court's holding in Young, the presiding 

HAWK V. COMPASS GROUP USA 
Page 11 
 
deputy concluded that the claimant was not entitled to reimbursement because she had 
failed to establish the prerequisites to qualify for an evaluation at the defendants' 
expense under section 85.39. Id. at 2-3; see also Kern, 2017 WL 6764066 at 14. The 
commissioner affirmed on intra-agency appeal. See id.; see also Kern v. Fenchel, 
Doster & Buck, P.L.C., No. 5062419, 2019 WL 4135356 *2 (Iowa Workers' Comp. 
Comm'r, Jul. 2, 2019) (App. Decision). On judicial review, the district court also affirmed. 
Id. at 2. 
On judicial review, a court of appeals panel reversed, concluding: 
In this case, Kern presented herself for an examination by Dr. Paulson, 
a provider of the employer's choosing. See Iowa Code § 85.39. Although 
Dr. Paulson did not use the words “zero” or “no” disability, the clear effect 
of his no-causation determination was a finding of no compensable 
permanent disability. Kern disagreed and thought such a determination was 
“too low.” If we read section 85.39 liberally to benefit the worker, the next 
logical step was for Kern to have an IME, seeking evidence of permanent 
disability, which can only be made if there is also a causation determination, 
typically done in the same examination. In fact, there can be no disability 
determination arising out of a disability evaluation without a determination 
there was causation. Kern's request that the employer pay for that 
evaluation is consistent with the statutory procedural requirements of 
section 85.39 and also promotes an appropriate balance of the interests of 
each party. 
We see no conflict applying our supreme court's interpretation of section 
85.39 in Young to a finding that Dr. Paulson's opinion on lack of causation 
was tantamount to a zero percent impairment rating and, in fact, we find 
such interpretation compelling. 
Id. at 4-5 (italics used in original citations). 
 
The agency has followed the court of appeals' Kern opinion. See Hines v. Tyson 
Foods, Inc., No. 20700462.01, 2022 WL 1788263 (Iowa Workers' Comp. Comm'r, May 
13, 2022) (App. Decision) 
 
Dr. Schmitz, an employer-retained physician, opined in February 2022 that Mr. 
Hawk did not sustain any permanent impairment causally related to the May 21, 2021, 
injury. (JE4, p. 66)  Dr. Kuhnlein conducted an IME of claimant on August 3, 2022, well 
after Dr. Schmitz examined claimant and assessed permanent impairment.  I conclude 
that the prerequisites of section 85.39 were met, and defendants shall reimburse 
claimant for the reasonable costs of Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME in the amount of $4,667.50. 
The last issue to be addressed is costs.  Assessment of costs is a discretionary 
function of the agency.  Iowa Code § 86.40.  Because claimant was successful in his 
claim, I conclude it is appropriate to assess claimant’s costs in some amount. 

HAWK V. COMPASS GROUP USA 
Page 12 
 
Claimant first seeks reimbursement for his filing fees. These costs are 
appropriate and assessed pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7). 
Second, claimant seeks the costs associated with Mr. Stricklett’s vocational 
report, totaling $1,520.95. 876 IAC 4.33(6).  Having concluded that claimant had not 
reached maximum medical improvement prior to the evidentiary hearing, I did not find 
Mr. Stricklett’s report to be helpful in this matter.  As such, I conclude it is inappropriate 
to tax the cost of Mr. Stricklett’s evaluation or report at this time. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall provide claimant ongoing medical care for his low back 
condition. 
Defendants shall authorize further evaluation and treatment with Dr. Rayburn as 
claimant’s authorized treating pain management specialist for the low back condition. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME as set forth above. 
Costs are taxed to defendants pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33, as set forth in the 
decision. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2), and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this _1st _ day of March, 2024. 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Corey Walker (via WCES) 
Nathan McConkey (via WCES) 
 

HAWK V. COMPASS GROUP USA 
Page 13 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
   
