Case Number: 19004619.01
Case Title:  BAILEY, MICHELE V. ALLSTEEL, INC./ 2ND INJ-FUND
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Bailey Michele-19004619.01O.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
MICHELE BAILEY, 
File No. 19004619.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
ALLSTEEL, INC., 
 
RULING ON APPLICATIONS 
FOR REHEARING BY 
CLAIMANT & EMPLOYER 
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
 
 
Defendants. 
On April 7, 2022, the agency issued an arbitration decision in this case finding, 
among other things, claimant Michele Bailey is entitled to permanent partial disability 
(PPD) benefits for industrial disability from defendant-employer Allsteel, Inc., under Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(v). Under rule 876 IAC 4.24, Bailey applied for reconsideration. 
On April 11, 2022, Allsteel did the same. Bailey resisted Allsteel’s application, Allsteel 
has not responded to Bailey’s application, and the Second Injury Fund of Iowa (Fund) 
has not filed a response to either application.  
1. ALLSTEEL’S APPLIC ATION . 
Rule 876 IAC 4.19(3)(f) requires the parties to a contested case before the 
agency to “prepare and file a joint hearing report that defines the claims, defenses, and 
issues that are to be submitted to the deputy commissioner who presides at the 
hearing.” The agency “cannot consider the hearing report in a vacuum.” Staff Mgmt. v. 
Jimenez, 839 N.W.2d 640, 656 (Iowa 2013). The parties to a case may “put different 
interpretations on a stipulation.” Graen’s Mens Wear, Inc. v. Stille-Pierce Agency, 329 
N.W.2d 295, 300 (Iowa 1983). The agency must “consider the stipulation ‘with reference 
to its subject matter and in light of the surrounding circumstances and the whole record, 
including the state of the pleadings and issues involved.’” Jimenez, 839 N.W.2d at 656–
57.  
In this case, there are two defendants, each with potential individual liability: 
Allsteel, the employer, and the Fund. Iowa Code section 85.64 makes an employer 
liable for “the degree of disability” resulting from the work injury that caused the second 
qualifying loss for purposes of Fund benefits. The Fund is then liable after payment of 
benefits by the employer for “compensation as would be payable for the degree of 
permanent disability involved after first deducting from such remainder the compensable 
value of the previously lost member or organ.” Iowa Code § 85.64(1). Consequently, the 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Apr-28  10:55:52     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BAILEY V. ALLSTEEL, INC. 
Page 2 
 
question of liability for permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits necessitates 
consideration of both Allsteel and the Fund’s defenses. 
In the petition, Bailey alleged injuries to both arms and her “whole body” and 
identified “industrial disability” as a disputed issue. In the Fund’s answer, it denied the 
applicability of the Second Injury Fund Act, Iowa Code sections 85.63 through 85.69. 
Thus, the petition and the Fund’s answer gave Allsteel notice and a chance to mount a 
defense with respect to the permanent disability resulting from Bailey’s alleged injuries 
for which it is liable. See Larson Mfg. Co. Inc. v. Thorson, 763 N.W.2d 842, 853 (Iowa 
2009); see also Drake Univ. v. Davis, 769 N.W.2d 176, 181–82 (Iowa 2009). 
In Allsteel’s application for rehearing, it raises the hearing report’s stipulations 
regarding Bailey’s injuries and the permanent disability they caused. The parties 
stipulated Bailey sustained work injuries on June 7, 2019, that caused permanent 
disability. Hrg. Rpt. §§ 2(a), 3(b). In Section 5 of the Hearing Report, the parties 
indicated: 
 Bailey’s entitlement to PPD benefits is disputed.  
 They dispute whether Bailey is entitled to PPD benefits for an eight percent 
functional impairment to each arm and a thirteen percent functional 
impairment to her right shoulder. Id. at § 5(a). 
Further, the parties stipulated, “If the injury is found to be a cause of permanent 
disability, [t]he disability is a scheduled member disability to the bilateral arms and right 
shoulder.” Id. at § 5(b). They indicated it was disputed whether the disability is an 
industrial disability “for purposes of the Fund Claim.” Id. at § 5(b). The parties also 
disputed the commencement date for benefits depending on what injuries were found to 
result in permanent disability. 
This case went to hearing on August 17, 2021. The agency issued an arbitration 
decision in Anderson v. Bridgestone Americas, Inc. and Second Injury Fund of Iowa, 
File No. 5067475, on September 2, 2021. The parties’ post-hearing briefs were due on 
September 24, 2021. Bailey’s post-hearing brief did not discuss the Anderson decision. 
Neither did Allsteel’s. 
In contrast, the Fund’s post-hearing brief cited to Anderson and argued that if the 
agency found Bailey sustained permanent disabilities to her arms and shoulder, 
permanent disability must be determined based on lost earning capacity under Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(v). The Fund further contended Allsteel was liable for such 
industrial disability, not the Fund. While the parties’ respective positions in this case 
were admittedly ill-defined at the time of hearing and the agency issued a decision that 
implicated their respective positions between the date of hearing and the due date of 
post-hearing briefs, it is plain that the Fund did not believe it had stipulated away its 
defense on liability with respect to the applicability of section 85.34(2)(v) to disability 
caused by Bailey’s alleged work injuries. 

BAILEY V. ALLSTEEL, INC. 
Page 3 
 
On January 25, 2022, the Commissioner issued an appeal decision affirming and 
adopting the arbitration decision as final action in Anderson. The agency filed the 
arbitration decision in this case on April 7, 2022. In it, the undersigned found Bailey’s 
injuries to her bilateral arms and right shoulder caused permanent disability. The 
undersigned found the Fund’s argument persuasive regarding the application of section 
85.34(2)(v) persuasive under Anderson. Because permanent disability is measured by 
lost earning capacity under section 85.34(2)(v), the undersigned applied an industrial 
disability analysis to determine Bailey’s entitlement to PPD benefits and found Allsteel 
liable. 
Allsteel applied for rehearing because of the arbitration decision’s application of 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). The application contains no discussion of whether the 
presiding deputy must apply the holdings off agency decisions issued after the date of 
the hearing in a case. It argues the parties’ stipulation in Section 5(b) of the hearing 
report that the injuries to Bailey’s bilateral arms and shoulder caused “scheduled 
member disability” means that “any award of permanency benefits should have been 
rendered pursuant to Iowa Code sections 85.34(2)(t) for the bilateral carpal tunnel 
(arms) and 85.34(2)(n) for the right shoulder, respectively. Industrial disability is 
inapplicable pursuant to the parties’ stipulation on the [h]earing [r]eport.” Allsteel 
contends the arbitration decision’s application of section 85.34(2)(v) violated its due 
process rights. 
Bailey resisted Allsteel’s application. Bailey noted Allsteel cited to Robinson v. 
City of Des Moines, File No. 5035076 (App. January 25, 2013), in which the 
Commissioner ruled “stipulations entered into by parties should be binding so long as 
they are not erroneous as a matter of law.” Bailey contends the Commissioner’s appeal 
decision in Anderson, which was issued after the submission of post-hearing briefs by 
the parties, makes the parties’ stipulation legally erroneous and non-binding on the 
agency. Consequently, according to Bailey, Allsteel’s application should be rejected. 
Courts have long recognized “a stipulation does not foreclose legal questions.” 
Case v. Los Angeles Lumber Prod., 308 U.S. 106, 114 (1939). “Stipulations as to the 
law do not settle . . . what the law is, and consequently are of no validity.’” Freeman v. 
Ernst & Young, 541 N.W.2d 890, 894 (Iowa 1995) (quoting State v. Aumann, 236 
N.W.2d 320, 322 (Iowa 1975) and citing 73 Am.Jur.2d Stipulations § 5, at 539 (1974)). 
“Although litigants may stipulate to facts, they may not stipulate to what the law 
requires, or to the law that will apply to a given state of facts.” 83 C.J.S. Stipulations § 
28. In workers’ compensation cases before the agency, the Iowa Supreme Court has 
held “it is the [C]ommissioner’s duty to determine the application of law to the contested 
facts, and this determination is not within the parties’ power by stipulation.” Jimenez, 
839 N.W.2d at 656 (citing Mycogen Seeds v. Sands, 686 N.W.2d 457, 467 (Iowa 2004) 
and Iowa Supreme Ct. Att’y Disciplinary Bd. v. Gailey, 790 N.W.2d 801, 804 (Iowa 
2010)).  
 
 

BAILEY V. ALLSTEEL, INC. 
Page 4 
 
The case law is clear. A stipulation with respect to the application of law to facts 
is not binding on the agency. It is axiomatic that the agency applying the law to the facts 
of a case independent of a stipulation does not infringe on a party’s right to due 
process. 
Moreover, even assuming arguendo the parties can dictate how the agency 
applies the law in a case, the stipulation that Bailey’s injuries caused “scheduled 
member disability” cannot reasonably be construed to preclude the agency applying 
industrial disability analysis under section 85.34(2)(v). The Fund signed onto the 
hearing report that the undersigned issued an order adopting. But the Fund clearly did 
not believe the parties had entered into a stipulation regarding how chapter 85 applied 
in this case, as evidenced by its defense against liability. The Fund argued that if the 
agency found Bailey sustained permanent disability to her arms, Allsteel was liable for 
any industrial disability under section 85.34(2)(v). Thus, there was no meeting of the 
minds between the parties on the application of the law to the facts in this case. 
Allsteel prays for the undersigned to “find the at-issue injuries to be ‘scheduled 
member’ injuries pursuant to the stipulation(s) via the [h]earing [r]eport and to award 
permanency benefits accordingly.” Granting Allsteel’s application would require ignoring 
the Fund’s defense on liability with respect to Anderson as well as the text of sections 
85.34(2)(v) and 85.64(1). This would place the burden of paying PPD benefits for 
permanent disability caused by injuries arising out of and in the course of Bailey’s 
employment with Allsteel on the Fund. Even if the parties could dictate by stipulation the 
application of the law in a case before the agency, the parties’ stipulations in this case 
cannot reasonably be construed to dictate such a result. 
For these reasons, the parties’ stipulations regarding the application of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Act to the facts in this case are not binding on the agency. The 
arbitration decision’s application of Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) is not a violation of 
Allsteel’s right to due process. Allsteel’s application for rehearing is denied.  
2. B AILEY’S APPLIC ATION . 
Bailey moved for rehearing on the question of industrial disability because of an 
incorrect calculation of functional disability using the combined values chart in the Fifth 
Edition of the American Medical Association (AMA) Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment (Guide). According to Bailey’s motion, the undersigned 
miscalculated the combined value of her permanent functional impairments. Neither 
Allsteel nor the Fund responded to Bailey’s motion. 
Bailey is correct. The arbitration decision incorrectly combined her permanent 
functional impairments. Using the combined values table on pages 604 and 605 of the 
Guides, Bailey’s seven percent impairment must be combined with her four percent 
impairment of one arm. This results in a combined value of eleven percent that must in 
turn be combined with the four percent impairment of her other arm. Doing so in 
accordance with the table gives Bailey a combined functional impairment of fifteen 
percent.  

BAILEY V. ALLSTEEL, INC. 
Page 5 
 
Using fifteen percent, the correct combined value for Bailey’s functional 
impairment, and the previously articulated analysis of the other factors used in an 
industrial disability analysis, the weight of the evidence establishes an industrial 
disability of twenty-two percent. Five hundred multiplied by twenty-two percent is one 
hundred ten weeks. Bailey is entitled permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits for one 
hundred ten weeks in the amount of four hundred ninety-five and 6/100 dollars per 
week. 
OR D ER  
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
1) Allsteel’s application for rehearing is DENIED. 
 
2) Bailey’s application for rehearing is GRANTED.  
 
3) The arbitration decision is amended with respect to its permanent disability 
analysis as set forth above.  
 
4) The defendants shall pay to Bailey permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits 
for one hundred ten (110) weeks in the amount of four hundred ninety-five 
and 6/100 dollars ($495.06) per week. 
Signed and filed this 28th day of April, 2022. 
 
 
 
                     BEN HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Nate Willems (via WCES) 
Edward Rose (via WCES) 
Jonathan Bergman (via WCES) 
 
 
