Case Number: 5066714
Case Title:  MARTINEZ YANEZ, RAUL V. VAZQUEZ, RUMUALDO
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Martinez Yanez Raul-5066714D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
RAUL MARTINEZ YANEZ, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
    File No. 5066714 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                ARBITRATION DECISION 
RIUMALDO VAZQUEZ, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Defendant. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
RAUL MARTINEZ YANEZ, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
File No. 5066714.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                ARBITRATION DECISION 
HUMBERTO TOLENTINO, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
  Head Note Nos.: 1402.10, 1402.30, 
 
Defendant, 
  : 
  1403.30, 1802, 1803, 2001, 2501, 
 
 
  : 
 
    2907, 3001, 3002 
______________________________________________________________________ 
  
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
  
 
Raul Martinez Yanez, claimant, filed petitions in arbitration and seeks workers’ 
compensation benefits from defendants, Riumaldo Vazquez and Humberto Tolentino as 
the alleged employers. Evidentiary hearings were held on October 23, 2020, and June 
9, 2021, via CourtCall. Counsel filed post-hearing briefs on December 14, 2020, and 
July 16, 2021, at which time the cases were deemed fully submitted.   
  
 
In File No. 5066714, the evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 4, 
Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 4, and Defendant Vazquez’s Exhibits A and B.  All 
exhibits were received without objection.  
 
 
Claimant called three witnesses to testify, including Christine Martinez, Javier 
Perez, and claimant.  Defendant called Riumaldo Vazquez Mendez.  Mr. Martinez 
Yanez, Mr. Perez, and Mr. Vazquez Mendez testified using the services of a Spanish to 
English interpreter, Ernest Murcia.  The evidentiary record was left open for receipt of 
Defendant’s Exhibit C, Humberto Tolentino’s deposition transcript.   
  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-Dec-06  09:54:43     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MARTINEZ YANEZ V. VAZQUEZ 
MARTINEZ YANEZ V. TOLENTINO 
Page 2 
 
 
The parties submitted a hearing report prior to the commencement of the 
evidentiary hearing. On that hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations. 
Those stipulations were accepted and relied upon in this decision without further 
comment or factual findings. 
 
 
In File No. 5066714.01, the evidentiary record includes Claimant’s Exhibit 1. 
Claimant’s Exhibit 1 was received without objection.  The exhibits offered by Defendant 
Tolentino were not accepted into the evidentiary record.  This is because Defendant 
Tolentino’s Exhibits A through C were select portions of the December 14, 2020, 
hearing transcript.  Instead of accepting Exhibits A through C into the evidentiary record, 
the undersigned agreed to take official notice of the December 14, 2020, transcript.  File 
Nos. 5066714 and 5066714.01 were consolidated on June 9, 2021, without objection. 
 
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf.  Defendant called Humberto Tolentino.  Mr. 
Martinez Yanez and Mr. Tolentino testified using the services of a Spanish to English 
interpreter, Perla Alarcon-Flory. 
 
 
The parties submitted a hearing report prior to the commencement of the 
evidentiary hearing. On that hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations. 
Those stipulations were accepted and relied upon in this decision without further 
comment or factual findings. 
 
 
On the June 23, 2021, hearing report, claimant and defendant Tolentino 
stipulated that on July 5, 2018, Humberto Tolentino was not the employer of Raul 
Martinez Yanez.  
    
ISSUES 
  
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
 
 
1. Whether claimant was an employee of Riumaldo Vazquez on July 5, 2018, 
when he was injured; 
  
 
2. Whether claimant’s injury arose out of and in the course of his alleged 
employment with Riumaldo Vazquez on July 5, 2018; 
   
 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of temporary total disability, or 
healing period benefits between July 6, 2018, and August 31, 2018; 
  
 
4. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any; 
    
 
5. The proper weekly rate of compensation, including the claimant’s gross weekly 
earnings; 
  

MARTINEZ YANEZ V. VAZQUEZ 
MARTINEZ YANEZ V. TOLENTINO 
Page 3 
 
 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of medical expenses as outlined and 
summarized in Claimant’s Exhibit 1; and 
   
 
7. Costs.  
   
FINDINGS OF FACT 
  
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
  
 
Claimant, Raul Martinez Yanez, is a 44-year-old gentleman. Claimant attended 
school in Mexico until he was 17 years old. Mr. Martinez is able of read, write, and 
speak English; however, his English skills are limited.  He moved to the United States in 
1999 or 2000.  Since moving to the United States, Mr. Martinez has largely worked in 
the roofing industry. (Hearing Transcript, pages 13-17) 
 
 
Mr. Martinez first worked with Riumaldo Vazquez in approximately 2004. (Hr. Tr., 
p. 14)  He worked with or for Mr. Vazquez, intermittently, for the next 14 years. (See Hr. 
Tr., p. 16)  For his most recent stint, Mr. Martinez and his crew approached Mr. 
Vazquez in April of 2017 and asked him for work. (Hr. Tr., p. 16)  The crew consisted of 
claimant, Humberto Tolentino, Javier Perez, Abraham Cruz, and an individual that went 
by “Santos.” (Hr. Tr., p. 17)  Mr. Martinez and Mr. Perez both considered Mr. Vazquez 
to be their boss. (Hr. Tr., pp. 36, 71)  I find that claimant and Mr. Perez genuinely 
believed Mr. Vazquez was their boss.   
 
Mr. Martinez and his crew replaced shingles on two or three-story homes, and 
business buildings. (Hr. Tr., p. 21)  The crew typically worked Monday through 
Saturday.  The crew would also work Sundays if weather prevented them from working 
any of the other days of the week. (Hr. Tr., p. 25) 
 
 
Between April, 2017 and July 5, 2018, Mr. Martinez and his crew worked almost 
exclusively for Mr. Vazquez.  Likewise, Mr. Vazquez only utilized claimant’s crew during 
this period of time. (See Hr. Tr., p. 23)  There was a single instance in which Mr. 
Martinez performed work for another subcontractor. (Hr. Tr., p. 23)  Mr. Martinez and his 
crew accepted work from the other subcontractor because Mr. Vazquez “didn’t have the 
next house ready.” (Id.)  Upon hearing that Mr. Martinez was handling work for another 
individual, Mr. Vazquez became angry. (Id.)  According to Mr. Martinez and Mr. Perez, 
Mr. Vazquez was angry because he only wanted claimant and his crew to work for him. 
(Id.)  I find this testimony to be credible.  Mr. Perez testified that he had the freedom to 
work for other subcontractors if he wanted; however, “Humberto and Raul would have to 
wait for Riumaldo.” (Hr. Tr., p. 73)  According to Mr. Perez, Mr. Martinez and Mr. 
Tolentino were at Mr. Vazquez’s “beck and call.” (Hr. Tr., p. 74)   
 
 
Mr. Martinez asserts that he was paid on a weekly basis.  The amount of 
compensation, however, was calculated on a job-by-job basis. (Hr. Tr., pp. 72-73)  The 

MARTINEZ YANEZ V. VAZQUEZ 
MARTINEZ YANEZ V. TOLENTINO 
Page 4 
 
amount of pay the crew got was determined by Mr. Vazquez.  At the end of each week, 
Mr. Vazquez would issue a check to Mr. Tolentino.  This was because Mr. Tolentino 
was the only crewmember with an active bank account, not because Mr. Tolentino was 
the foreman or leader of the crew. (Hr. Tr., p. 22)  Mr. Tolentino would cash the check 
each week and distribute the money amongst the crewmembers. (Id.)  Claimant 
estimated that he received, on average, $900.00 per week. (Hr. Tr., p. 26) 
 
 
Mr. Martinez and his crew performed the work in the manner in which they were 
told to perform said work. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 20-21, 30, 72)  The crew received job 
assignments from Mr. Vazquez. (Hr. Tr., pp. 17-19)  Claimant’s crew was the only crew 
Mr. Vazquez worked with in the summer of 2018.  Claimant testified that his crew had 
the right to accept or reject assignments from Mr. Vazquez. (Hr. Tr., p. 51)  Claimant 
also testified that Mr. Vazquez could offer job assignments to other crews; however, 
according to claimant, no one wanted to work with Mr. Vazquez. (Id.)  The crew did not 
agree to separate contracts for each assignment. (See Hr. Tr., p. 40)  The crew was 
directed to jobsites by Mr. Vazquez. (Hr. Tr., p. 17)  The crew would ride to jobsites in 
Mr. Tolentino’s van. (Hr. Tr., pp. 42, 76)  Mr. Vazquez would present to the jobsite in the 
morning with the crew and instruct the crew as to how the owners/contractors wanted 
each roof done. (Hr. Tr., p. 38)  Mr. Vazquez would, at times, instruct the crew that he 
needed various homes completed in one day. (Hr. Tr. p. 39)  Mr. Vazquez would stay 
on the jobsite and help if he was needing to meet a deadline. (See Hr. Tr. pp. 39-40) 
 
 
In addition to directing the crew, Mr. Vazquez handled various on-site tasks, such 
as putting in a chimney or installing solar panels, while Mr. Martinez and his crew 
handled the roofing. (Id.)  If the crew ran into any issues with the job assignment, Mr. 
Vazquez would resolve them. (Hr. Tr., p. 24)  At times, this meant Mr. Vazquez would 
have to contact the people who retained his services to resolve problems. (Hr. Tr., p. 
23; see Hr. Tr., p. 95) (“Paul Butterfield would call me and then I would call Humberto 
about the job.”)   
 
The crew, as a group, purchased the tools that they used for roofing; however, 
Mr. Vazquez supplied the materials needed to complete each roofing job. (Hr. Tr., p. 29)  
Mr. Vazquez provided the roofing materials for every job. If the crew ran out of supplies, 
they would report the same to Mr. Vazquez and he would obtain more supplies. (Hr. Tr., 
p. 25)  Mr. Vazquez testified that he would obtain the materials from the companies or 
individuals that hired him.   
 
 
On July 5, 2018, Mr. Martinez was injured when a nail he was hammering 
deflected off a piece of ply board and hit him in the left eye. (Hr. Tr., p. 29)  After 
sustaining the injury, the crew called Mr. Vazquez. (Hr. Tr., pp. 30-31)  Mr. Vazquez had 
recently left the jobsite, after sending claimant up to work with the plywood. (Hr. Tr., p. 
31)  An ambulance eventually presented to the jobsite and took claimant to Mercy North 
Hospital in Mason City, Iowa. (See JE1, pp. 1-2)  The injury was initially diagnosed as a 
left ocular injury with probable lens displacement or fracture, posterior chamber 
hemorrhage and retinal detachment. (JE3, p. 7)  Mr. Vazquez drove home to pick up his 

MARTINEZ YANEZ V. VAZQUEZ 
MARTINEZ YANEZ V. TOLENTINO 
Page 5 
 
wife before presenting to the hospital. (Hr. Tr., p. 31)  According to Mrs. Martinez, while 
at the hospital, Mr. Vazquez told her husband that he would take care of everything. (Hr. 
Tr., pp. 60-61)  Mr. Martinez was subsequently transferred to Iowa City, Iowa. (See JE3, 
p. 14)   
 
 
Once in Iowa City, Iowa, claimant was immediately taken into surgery.  Mark A. 
Greiner, M.D. performed a repair of the open globe and corneal laceration. (JE4, p. 24)  
Stephen R. Russell, M.D. performed a pars plana vitrectomy, anterior chamber 
reconstruction, PFO, endolaser, air-fluid exchange, and placement of silicone oil on the 
left eye on July 17, 2018. (JE4, pp. 36-38)  Unfortunately, claimant’s vision did not 
drastically improve with surgery. (See JE4, p. 28)  Dr. Russell opined it was unlikely 
claimant’s vision would return in the left eye. (JE4, p. 46)   
 
 
Brenda Vazquez, Mr. Vazquez’s wife, drove claimant to his medical 
appointments. (See JE4, p. 31)   
 
 
Claimant incurred significant medical expenses as a direct result of his injury.  
Claimant’s medical expenses are summarized and contained in Exhibit 1.  Those 
expenses are found to be reasonable, necessary, and causally related to claimant’s 
work injury. 
 
 
Mr. Martinez was limited by restrictions between July 5, 2018, and August 31, 
2018. (See JE4, p. 45)  Mr. Martinez was not medically capable of returning to 
substantially similar work prior to August 31, 2018.  Mr. Martinez eventually returned to 
roofing work; however, he never returned to work for Mr. Vazquez. (See Hr. Tr., p. 33)  
He remained employed on the date of the evidentiary hearing. (Hr. Tr., p. 33)  I find 
claimant was in a healing period and under restrictions from July 5, 2018, through 
August 31, 2018. 
 
 
Mr. Vazquez testified he is the sole owner of his roofing business. (Hr. Tr., pp. 
80-81)  When discussing his business structure, Mr. Vazquez explained, “So people 
give me jobs, my bosses, the people who I know, and they pay for the materials.” (Hr. 
Tr., p. 82)  He would later provide, “I know a lot of contractors who are kind of big 
contractors.  I know a lot of farmers who also hire me.  People with businesses, people 
who have properties also know me here I get jobs from.” (Hr. Tr., p. 84)  Mr. Tolentino 
testified to his belief that Mr. Vazquez worked for Butterfield & Associates. (Ex. C, Depo. 
pp. 17-18)  Mr. Tolentino further testified that Mr. Vazquez would, “talk to the companies 
and give [the crew] work.” (Ex. C, Depo. p. 19)  Mr. Vazquez admitted Mr. Martinez’s 
crew was the only crew he was working with in 2018. (Hr. Tr. p. 94)  
 
 
In terms of payment, Mr. Vazquez told Mr. Martinez’s crew how much they would 
be paid for each job. (See Ex. C, Deposition Transcript, page 19) Mr. Vazquez testified 
that he was paid by the number of squares, the number of layers, and the slope of the 
roof, and that’s how he ultimately paid Mr. Tolentino and his crew. (Hr. Tr., p. 87)  For 
the July 5, 2018 job, Butterfield & Associates paid Mr. Vazquez $3,250.00. (Ex. A)  The 

MARTINEZ YANEZ V. VAZQUEZ 
MARTINEZ YANEZ V. TOLENTINO 
Page 6 
 
check provides that the client paid $2,750.00 for roofing and $500.00 for a “trip charge.” 
(Id.)  Mr. Vazquez paid Mr. Martinez and his crew $2,760.00. (Ex. B; See Hr. Tr., p. 92) 
(“The check from Paul Butterfield was for $3,250.  Paul Butterfield would pay me; and 
when he would pay me, Humberto and I would do the figures and then I would pay 
Humberto by the square.”)   
 
Mr. Vazquez testified that the July 5, 2018, job was contracted to him through 
Paul Butterfield of Butterfield & Associates. (Hr. Tr., p. 84) (“He was the contractor.”)  In 
terms of control over the July 5, 2018 job, Mr. Vazquez admitted that he told claimant’s 
crew, “what they were going to do because the owners sometimes want things done a 
certain way.” (Hr. Tr., p. 85)  During discovery, Mr. Vazquez asserted that he 
subcontracted the July 5, 2018, job to Humberto Tolentino, and that claimant was an 
employee of Mr. Tolentino. (Ex. 3, pp. 13, 15)  In Paragraph 10 of the hearing report for 
File No. 5066714.01, the parties stipulated that on July 5, 2018, Mr. Tolentino was not 
the employer of Mr. Martinez.  
 
 
Overall, Mr. Vazquez did not present as a credible witness.  When referring to 
Mr. Martinez and the other members of the crew, Mr. Vazquez appeared to assert he 
was only involved with, or worked closely with, Mr. Tolentino. (See Id.)  Mr. Vazquez 
testified, “I only speak to Humberto.  I don’t talk to these other people.  I didn’t hire 
them.  I didn’t know how they came to be working with Humberto.  Humberto is the one I 
hired.” (Id.)  He further testified, “I don’t know how they came to be with him or how they 
communicated.” (Hr. Tr., p. 88)  However, several other individuals testified that Mr. 
Vazquez knew, and worked with, Mr. Martinez for multiple years prior to the date of 
injury.  Additionally, according to Mr. Martinez, Mr. Vazquez placed Mr. Tolentino in the 
crew in 2018, sometime after he was released from jail. (6/9/2021 Hr. Tr., pp. 22-23, 31)  
Mr. Vazquez also made several statements that would indicate that he was relatively 
uninvolved once he assigned work to claimant’s crew.  Such an assertion is not 
supported by the evidentiary record.  
  
 
The primary factual disputes in this case revolve around whether Riumaldo 
Vazquez was claimant’s employer. In this respect, I find that Butterfield & Associates, 
LLC was the general contractor for the roofing project where claimant was injured on 
July 5, 2018. I find that Butterfield & Associates, LLC hired Riumaldo Vazquez as a 
subcontractor and that Butterfield & Associates, LLC paid Mr. Vazquez an agreed upon 
fee for his roofing services.   
 
Mr. Vazquez, through Butterfield & Associates, LLC provided the roofing 
materials but did not provide the tools necessary to install the roof.  Mr. Martinez and his 
crew supplied all necessary tools for the roofing project where he was injured.  The 
crew also provided their own transportation.  All communications, wages, and 
instructions to claimant were provided by Mr. Vazquez.  
 
I find that claimant was an employee of Mr. Vazquez on July 5, 2018. 
 

MARTINEZ YANEZ V. VAZQUEZ 
MARTINEZ YANEZ V. TOLENTINO 
Page 7 
 
 
The parties submitted a factual and legal dispute pertaining to the claimant’s 
average gross weekly earnings of claimant.  Claimant asserts an average weekly wage 
of $950.00.  Claimant’s assertion is based solely on his own testimony that he made 
between $900.00 and $1,000.00 each week.  Defendant(s) did not submit an alternate 
average weekly wage calculation.  The only other evidence in the record that could 
establish claimant’s average weekly wage is the paycheck from Mr. Vazquez to Mr. 
Tolentino.  According to claimant, this check would have been split equally between the 
five members of his crew.  In such a scenario, each crewmember would have received 
$552.00 ($2,760.00/5).  
 
 
According to Mr. Martinez and Mr. Perez, the crew was paid on a weekly basis. 
(Hr. Tr., pp. 25, 72)  Mr. Martinez testified that the pay he received varied each week, 
but it was typically around $900.00 per crewmember. (Hr. Tr., p. 26)  At the first hearing, 
no one individual provided a definitive answer to the question of how the crew was paid.  
However, at the second hearing, claimant testified,  
 
He will gather us when the season is started, like in April.  And in April he 
will always tell us how much we were going to make.  He will say that he 
will pay us $45 per square and then $10 more if we were working on two 
roofs.  If the roofs were tall, he was going to pay us ten more dollars. 
 
(6/9/2021 Hr. Tr., pp. 17-18)  It is unclear as to whether the above-mentioned numbers 
were purely an example, or if they were the actual numbers provided by Mr. Vazquez.  
Mr. Vazquez testified that he paid the crew by the square. (Hr. Tr., p. 92)  Mr. Martinez 
and Mr. Tolentino testified that the money was divided evenly amongst the 
crewmembers. (Hr. Tr., pp. 43-44; Ex. C, Depo. Tr., p. 8) 
 
 
In this case, there is very little evidence of claimant’s average weekly wage.  The 
parties did not submit any tax returns or documentation of the payment claimant earned 
on a weekly basis.  Claimant provided testimony estimating his average weekly wage.  
While the only check in the evidentiary record does not support claimant’s testimony, 
said check was representative of the wages claimant received for the week of his injury.  
Moreover, the check is only representative of wages claimant would have received for 
one job.  It is unknown how many jobs claimant’s crew would complete on a weekly 
basis.  It cannot be said that such a check is representative of claimant’s average 
weekly wage.  As such, for purposes of calculating claimant’s rate, I find claimant’s 
average weekly wage to be $900.00.  
 
 
Mr. Martinez asserts a claim for permanent partial disability benefits.  Mr. 
Martinez can no longer see out of his left eye as a direct result of the July 5, 2018, work 
injury. (See JE4, p. 46)  Dr. Russell opined it was unlikely that claimant’s vision would 
return.  As such, I find claimant has sustained a total loss of his left eye and he is 
entitled to 140 weeks of compensation. 
 
 
Mr. Martinez also asserts a claim for temporary disability, or healing period, 

MARTINEZ YANEZ V. VAZQUEZ 
MARTINEZ YANEZ V. TOLENTINO 
Page 8 
 
benefits from July 6, 2018, through August 31, 2018.  Claimant was on restrictions that 
limited his ability to return to substantially similar work following the date of injury.  
These restrictions were in place until August 31, 2018.  Defendant offered no evidence 
to establish otherwise.  Therefore, I find claimant was not medically capable of returning 
to substantially similar employment prior to August 31, 2018, and that he did not 
achieve maximum medical improvement until August 31, 2018. 
 
 
Costs will be addressed in the Conclusions of Law section. 
   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
 
The initial dispute between the parties is whether claimant has proven he was an 
employee at the time of the injury. Defendant contends that claimant was an independent 
contractor at the time of the injury. 
 
Section 85.61(11) provides in part: 
“Worker” or “employee” means a person who has entered into 
employment of, or works under contract of service, express or implied, or 
apprenticeship, for an employer .... 
 
It is claimant’s duty to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he was an 
employee within the meaning of the law. Where claimant establishes a prima facie case, 
defendants then have the burden of going forward with the evidence which rebuts 
claimant’s case. The defendants must establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, 
any pleaded affirmative defense or bar to compensation. Nelson v. Cities Serv. Oil Co., 
259 Iowa 1209, 146 N.W.2d 261 (1966). 
  
 
Factors to be considered in determining whether an employer-employee 
relationship exists are: (1) the right of selection, or to employ at will, (2) responsibility for 
payment of wages by the employer, (3) the right to discharge or terminate the 
relationship, (4) the right to control the work, and (5) identity of the employer as the 
authority in charge of the work or for whose benefit it is performed. The overriding issue 
is the intention of the parties. Where both parties by agreement state they intend to form 
an independent contractor relationship, their stated intent is ignored if the agreement 
exists to avoid the workers’ compensation laws, however. Likewise, the test of control is 
not the actual exercise of the power of control over the details and methods to be 
followed in the performance of the work, but the right to exercise such control. Also, the 
general belief or custom of the community that a particular kind of work is performed by 
employees can be considered in determining whether an employer-employee 
relationship exists. Caterpillar Tractor Co. v. Shook, 313 N.W.2d 503 (Iowa 1981); 
McClure v. Union et. al., Counties, 188 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa 1971); Nelson, 259 Iowa 
1209, 146 N.W.2d 261; Lembke v. Fritz, 223 Iowa 261, 272 N.W. 300 (1937); Funk v. 
Bekins Van Lines Co., I Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 82 (App. December 

MARTINEZ YANEZ V. VAZQUEZ 
MARTINEZ YANEZ V. TOLENTINO 
Page 9 
 
1980). 
  
The primary purpose of the workers' compensation statute is to benefit the worker 
insofar as the statute permits. The law is to be interpreted liberally to achieve that result. 
Additionally, the statute is intended to cast upon the industry in which the worker is 
employed a share of the burden resulting from industrial accidents with the ultimate cost 
to be borne by the consumer as part of the product cost. For that reason, “any worker 
whose services form a regular and continuing part of the costs of the product, and whose 
method of operation is not such [an] independent business that it forms in itself a separate 
route through which [the worker's] own costs of industrial accident can be channeled, is 
within a presumptive area of intended protection.” Shook at 506. 
 
 
The employer-employee relationship comes up in two scenarios in this case. The 
first is whether Riumaldo Vazquez was an employee of Butterfield & Associates, LLC 
such that his actions brought claimant within an employee-employer relationship with 
Butterfield & Associates, LLC as well. The second scenario is whether claimant was an 
employee of Riumaldo Vazquez. 
  
 
“In cases presenting a choice between categorizing a person as an employee or 
an independent contractor, the primary focus is on the extent of control by the employer 
over the details of the alleged employee’s work.” Iowa Mutual Ins. Co. v. McCarthy, 572 
N.W.2d 537, 542 (Iowa 1997). When these factors and Iowa Supreme Court precedent 
are applied to the facts of this case, it becomes evident that Riumaldo Vazquez was not 
an employee of Butterfield & Associates, LLC.  
  
 
Mr. Vazquez controlled the manner and method of the work to be performed by 
Mr. Martinez and his crew. Mr. Vazquez would stop at the work site to ensure that all 
materials were delivered and ensure that the roofers were able to proceed. He would 
also obtain any additional materials, if additional materials were needed.  Mr. Vazquez 
also monitored the crew’s work directly, and, at times, remained on the jobsite and 
handled various tasks. Mr. Vazquez was the identified authority in charge of the work.  
There is no indication that Butterfield & Associates supervised or monitored Mr. 
Vazquez or the crew’s work.  Mr. Vazquez has not asserted that he was an employee of 
Butterfield & Associates, LLC.  I conclude that Mr. Vazquez was an independent 
contractor and not an employee of Butterfield & Associates, LLC. Having reached that 
conclusion, I also conclude that Raul Martinez Yanez was not an employee of 
Butterfield & Associates, LLC. 
   
 
The next legal question to be answered is whether Raul Martinez Yanez was an 
employee of Riumaldo Vazquez. Under several of the common law indicia of an 
employment relationship, the claimant was an employee of Riumaldo Vazquez.  
 
Claimant was performing roofing duties on the house in question because Mr. 
Vazquez had contracted with Butterfield & Associates, LLC to provide the house with a 
new roof.  Claimant and his crew had no separate contract with Butterfield & Associates 

MARTINEZ YANEZ V. VAZQUEZ 
MARTINEZ YANEZ V. TOLENTINO 
Page 10 
 
to replace the roof and no authority from Mr. Vazquez to perform other specialized 
services at the house.  Claimant had to perform the roofing services in accordance with 
Mr. Vazquez’s contract with Butterfield & Associates.   
 
Mr. Vazquez solely utilized claimant’s crew for his roofing jobs.  There is 
evidence that Mr. Vazquez would become angry if Mr. Tolentino or claimant worked for 
other individuals.  Mr. Vazquez obtained all of the roofing jobs and directed where 
claimant and his crew should present for work.  In this respect, Mr. Vazquez would stop 
at the work site to ensure that all materials were delivered and ensure that the roofers 
were able to proceed. Mr. Vazquez monitored the crew’s work directly, and, at times, 
remained on the jobsite and handled various tasks.  Mr. Vazquez was the authority in 
charge of the work. 
 
Mr. Vazquez was responsible for the payment of wages.  Mr. Vazquez collected 
the entire fee for the roofing job and distributed a portion of those funds to claimant’s 
crew.  Mr. Vazquez made the check out to Mr. Tolentino because he was the only 
individual in the crew with a bank account.  Mr. Vazquez calculated the funds on a per 
square basis.  
 
While it is unclear the extent to which Mr. Vazquez was able to hire and fire the 
roofing workers, it is evident that Mr. Vazquez placed Mr. Tolentino into the original 
crew that Mr. Martinez worked with.  The roofing work claimant performed was for the 
benefit of Mr. Vazquez and helped to maintain Mr. Vazquez’s commitments to his 
customers.   
 
Claimant and his crew’s ability to remain employed and paid for work performed 
depended on Mr. Vazquez’s continuing willingness to engage the crew to perform 
services.  From this is can be inferred that claimant was an at-will employee of Mr. 
Vazquez. 
 
These facts are consistent with claimant being an employee of Mr. Vazquez and 
not a subcontractor for Mr. Vazquez.  At the very least, claimant produced sufficient 
evidence to establish a prima facie case that he was an employee of Riumaldo 
Vazquez.  
 
 
Defendant asserts claimant was an independent contractor.  Intent is gleaned 
from the actual facts of the relationship not simply a party's statement of intent.  The 
affirmative defense that claimant was an independent contractor is now addressed. 
 
An independent contractor is generally considered someone who carries on an 
independent business, contracts to do a specific piece of work according to the 
independent contractor's own methods, and that is subject to the control of the employer 
only as to determination of the final results to be obtained. Mallinger v. Webster City Oil 
Co., 234 N.W. 254, 257 (Iowa 1931). 
 

MARTINEZ YANEZ V. VAZQUEZ 
MARTINEZ YANEZ V. TOLENTINO 
Page 11 
 
There are eight factors to be considered in determining whether a worker is 
an independent contractor: 
 
(1) The existence of a contract for the performance by a person of a certain piece 
or kind of work at a fixed price; 
(2) Whether the worker is engaged in an independent business or a distinct calling; 
(3) The worker's employment of assistants, with a right to supervise their activities; 
(4) The worker's obligation to provide necessary tools, supplies, and materials; 
(5) The worker's right to control the progress of the work, except as to final results; 
(6) Whether there is a definitive time or the length of time for which the worker is 
employed; 
(7) The method of payment, whether by time or by the job; and 
(8) Whether the work is part of the regular business of the employer. 
 
(Id.) 
 
In this case, there is no evidence the parties entered into a written contract.  
There are no written documents to support the notion that claimant was a subcontractor.  
However, it is clear the parties entered into a verbal agreement that claimant and his 
crew would perform work for Mr. Vazquez.  Both claimant and Mr. Perez understood Mr. 
Vazquez to be their boss.  This factor weighs against a finding that Mr. Martinez was an 
independent contractor.   
 
Similarly, Mr. Vazquez testified he operated his own roofing business.  That 
business solely utilized Mr. Martinez’s crew in the summer of 2018.  Mr. Martinez did 
not operate his own, independent business; rather, he performed roofing services for 
the benefit of Mr. Vazquez.  This factor also weighs against a finding that Mr. Martinez 
was an independent contractor. 
 
With respect to the third Mallinger factor, the crew, presumably as a collective 
unit, maintained the ability to bring on additional members or assistants.  That being 
said, Mr. Martinez was not even supervising his own work on the date of injury; rather, 
he was working on a roof that he was directed to by Mr. Vazquez.  Moreover, Mr. 
Vazquez instructed claimant to work on the ply wood so he could leave the jobsite. (Hr. 
Tr., pp. 29, 31)  This factor reveals mixed results in determining whether claimant was 
an employee or independent contractor on the date of injury. 
 
Factor number four of the Mallinger test inquires about whether the worker 
provided his or her own tools. Claimant provided his own tools; however, it is 
undisputed that Mr. Vazquez provided claimant’s crew with the necessary supplies and 
materials to complete each roofing job, including, presumably, the nail that injured 
claimant’s eye.  One suspects that claimant provided only minimal tools of the trade.  I 
conclude that the general tools supplied by claimant were commonly supplied by 
employees within the construction industry.  The fact that Mr. Vazquez provided the 
supplies and materials weighs against a finding that Mr. Martinez was an independent 

MARTINEZ YANEZ V. VAZQUEZ 
MARTINEZ YANEZ V. TOLENTINO 
Page 12 
 
contractor. 
 
The undersigned has previously discussed the claimant’s right to control his 
work.  Mr. Vazquez directed claimant’s crew to various jobsites.  Mr. Vazquez directed 
the crew on the specifics of each job.  If there were problems with the work, Mr. 
Vazquez would work with the individual who retained him to resolve the problems.  Mr. 
Vazquez would also direct members of claimant’s crew to complete repairs.  While it 
does not appear as though there were set deadlines for every project, Mr. Martinez 
credibly testified that there were instances in which Mr. Vazquez set deadlines.  Given 
the type of work being performed, it is highly likely deadlines were implied.  Having 
worked with claimant and his crew for some time, it can reasonably be assumed Mr. 
Vazquez knew approximately how long a project would take claimant and his crew to 
complete.  Any deviations from the standard amount of time would undoubtedly 
inconvenience Mr. Vazquez’s interests.  I conclude this factor weighs against a 
conclusion that Mr. Martinez was an independent contractor. 
 
Factor six of the Mallinger test requires a determination of whether the worker 
was hired for a definitive time or definitive project.  Again, there is no evidence of an 
initial written contract for a specified period of time or a specified project.  That being 
said, roofing is a seasonal job, and it is clear both parties operated under the 
assumption that claimant’s crew would work for Mr. Vazquez throughout the 2018 
season as long as work was available.  There is evidence that claimant’s crew was the 
only crew Mr. Vazquez worked with throughout the 2018 season.  On the other hand, it 
could just as easily be argued that claimant was hired by the project.  While claimant 
was paid on a weekly basis, his pay was derived from the projects his crew completed 
during said week.  This factor reveals mixed results in determining whether claimant 
was an employee or independent contractor on the date of injury. 
 
With respect to factor seven outlined in Mallinger, Mr. Martinez’s pay was directly 
tied to the jobs he and his crew completed each week.  In other words, Mr. Martinez’s 
compensation was based upon the completion of individual jobs.  That being said, 
claimant was paid on a weekly basis, not upon the completion of each job. This factor 
reveals mixed results in determining whether claimant was an employee or independent 
contractor on the date of injury. 
 
The eighth and final factor to be considered is whether the work performed by 
Mr. Martinez was part of the regular business of Mr. Vazquez. Mr. Vazquez testified that 
he owned and operated a roofing business.  Claimant was performing roofing services 
for Mr. Vazquez, at a location he was directed to by Mr. Vazquez, at the time of his 
alleged injury.  The work claimant performed was part of the regular business of Mr. 
Vazquez and clearly furthered his interests.  I conclude this factor weighs strongly in 
favor of a conclusion that Mr. Martinez was an employee on the date of injury. 
 
Considering all of the factors noted above, I conclude that the employer did not 
prove its independent contractor defense.  Despite claimant’s pay being based on the 

MARTINEZ YANEZ V. VAZQUEZ 
MARTINEZ YANEZ V. TOLENTINO 
Page 13 
 
completion of a job or project, and a few other facts that could weigh in favor of a finding 
that Mr. Martinez was an independent contractor, I conclude that defendant failed to 
carry its burden of proof to establish that claimant was an independent contractor at the 
time of his injury.  
   
 
The issue of whether claimant’s injury arose out of and in the course of his 
employment was disputed at the time of hearing. The claimant has the burden of 
proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the alleged injury actually occurred 
and that it both arose out of and in the course of the employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. 
Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 
1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or source of the injury. The words 
“in the course of” refer to the time, place, and circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. 
Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995). An injury arises out of the employment when 
a causal relationship exists between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309. The injury must be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the 
employment and not merely incidental to the employment. Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 
N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309. An injury occurs “in the course of” 
employment when it happens within a period of employment at a place where the 
employee reasonably may be when performing employment duties and while the 
employee is fulfilling those duties or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 
N.W.2d 143. 
  
 
In this instance, claimant’s injury came as a direct result of a nail ricocheting and 
hitting claimant in the eye while he was performing roofing duties for Mr. Vazquez.  Mr. 
Martinez was expected to be performing roofing duties at the time of his injury. He was 
at a location and performing duties at a time where he was expected to be at the time of 
his injury. Therefore, I find his accident and injuries also occurred in the course of his 
employment. Having concluded that Mr. Martinez was an employee of Riumaldo 
Vazquez, I further conclude that his injury arose out of and in the course of his 
employment with Mr. Vazquez. 
  
 
Mr. Martinez asserts a claim for healing period benefits during a period of 
recuperation.  
 
 
Healing period compensation describes temporary workers’ compensation 
weekly benefits that precede an allowance of permanent partial disability benefits. 
Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440 (Iowa 1999). Section 85.34(1) provides 
that healing period benefits are payable to an injured worker who has suffered 
permanent partial disability until the first to occur of three events. These are: (1) the 
worker has returned to work; (2) the worker medically is capable of returning to 
substantially similar employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical 
recovery. Maximum medical recovery is achieved when healing is complete and the 
extent of permanent disability can be determined. Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 
Iowa App., 312 N.W.2d 60 (Iowa 1981).  
  

MARTINEZ YANEZ V. VAZQUEZ 
MARTINEZ YANEZ V. TOLENTINO 
Page 14 
 
 
I found that Mr. Martinez proved lost time from work from July 6, 2018, through 
August 31, 2018. I also found that claimant was not medically capable of returning to 
substantially similar employment prior to August 31, 2018, and that he did not achieve 
maximum medical improvement until August 31, 2018. Given these findings, claimant 
proved entitlement to healing period benefits from July 6, 2018, through August 31, 
2018. 
  
 
Claimant asserts that he has sustained a permanent disability as a result of this 
work injury.  Mr. Martinez has proven that he sustained permanent disability as a result 
of his injury. Specifically, he has proven a permanent injury to his left eye resulting in 
permanent disability in some amount. 
 
 
Permanent partial disabilities are divided into scheduled and unscheduled losses. 
Iowa Code § 85.34(2). If the claimant's injury is listed in the specific losses found in 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(a)-(u), the injury is a scheduled injury and is compensated 
by the number of weeks provided for the injury in the statute. See Second Injury Fund v. 
Bergeson, 526 N.W.2d 543, 547 (Iowa 1995) (under earlier version of Iowa Code 
section 85.34). “The compensation allowed for a scheduled injury ‘is definitely fixed 
according to the loss of use of the particular member.”’ Id. (quoting Graves v. Eagle Iron 
Works, 331 N.W.2d 116, 118 (lowa 1983)). If the claimant's injury is not listed in the 
specific losses in the statute, compensation is paid in relation to 500 weeks as the 
disability bears to the body as a whole. lowa Code § 85.34(2)(v). “Functional disability is 
used to determine a specific scheduled disability; industrial disability is used to 
determine an unscheduled injury.” Bergeson, 526 N.W.2d at 547. Under the schedule, 
the compensation for loss of an eye is 140 weeks. Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(q). 
 
 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) provides when determining functional disability 
under lowa Code section 85.34(2)(q), “the extent of loss or percentage of permanent 
impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing” the AMA Guides adopted by the 
Commissioner in rule 876 Iowa Administrative Code 2.4. The statute prohibits use of 
agency expertise or lay testimony in determining functional disability under the 
schedule. Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(x). 
 
 
No physician provided an impairment rating in this case.  This alone creates an 
issue with the express wording of Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x).  On one hand, Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(x) specifically provides that the extent of loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the AMA Guides.  On the 
other hand, it is clear the claimant in this case has sustained a total loss of the 
scheduled member.  While the undersigned is not a medical doctor, it stands to reason 
that a total loss of the left eye would garner a 100% impairment rating under the AMA 
Guides.  A finding that claimant receives nothing simply because he did not obtain an 
impairment rating for what is clearly a total loss, would be a harsh and unjust result.  As 
such, I find claimant sustained a total loss of the left eye, or 100% left eye impairment. 
 
 
Healing period benefits terminated on August 31, 2018. Therefore, I conclude 

MARTINEZ YANEZ V. VAZQUEZ 
MARTINEZ YANEZ V. TOLENTINO 
Page 15 
 
that permanent partial disability benefits commence on September 1, 2018, as 
stipulated by the parties. Iowa Code section 85.34(2). 
 
 
The parties disputed the proper weekly rate at which benefits should be awarded. 
Claimant asserts a rate of $646.36.  Claimant contends that his rate should be 
calculated utilizing his testimony that he received $900.00 to $1,000.00 per week 
working as a roofer for Mr. Vazquez.  Defendant offers no argument with respect to 
claimant’s average weekly wage or the correct rate to be applied in this case.  Rather, 
defendant’s post-hearing brief primarily focuses on the factors relating to the employee 
versus independent contractor analysis. 
  
 
Section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the 
employee at the time of the injury. The section defines weekly earnings as the gross 
salary, wages, or earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the 
employee worked the customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee 
was injured as the employer regularly required for the work or employment. The various 
subsections of section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings 
depending upon the type of earnings and employment. 
  
 
While claimant received his payment at the end of each week, his payment was 
based on output.  Theoretically, his wages could be calculated using subsection six of 
Iowa Code section 85.36.  However, claimant did not submit 13 weeks of wages.  There 
is not an established earning history in this record prior to the date of injury.  
Alternatively, Iowa Code section 85.36(8) could apply, since claimant’s earnings cannot 
be ascertained; however, the parties did not introduce any specific or significant 
evidence on this issue.  The evidentiary record does not include evidence of the usual 
earnings for similar services where such services are rendered by paid employees. 
   
 
Arguably, the best and most credible evidence in this record about claimant’s 
average weekly wage is the check from Mr. Vazquez to Mr. Tolentino in the amount of 
$2,760.00. (Exhibit B)  That being said, the check contained in Exhibit B is dated July 7, 
2018, or two days after claimant’s injury.  It cannot be said that the week in which 
claimant was injured is representative of his normal, average week.  While speculative, 
it is likely claimant and the crew would have completed additional work had claimant not 
sustained an injury.   
 
 
Instead, I find the best and most credible evidence in this record about the usual 
earnings of a similar roofer is claimant’s testimony that he typically earned nine hundred 
dollars ($900.00) per week.  I decline to accept claimant’s later testimony that he 
typically earned $1,000.00 per week.  Such testimony followed the initial $900.00 
estimate and was the result of leading questions from claimant’s attorney.  
  
 
Relying upon claimant’s testimony in this regard, I found that claimant’s 
applicable gross average weekly earnings immediately preceding this injury would be 
nine hundred dollars ($900.00). The parties stipulated that claimant was married and 

MARTINEZ YANEZ V. VAZQUEZ 
MARTINEZ YANEZ V. TOLENTINO 
Page 16 
 
entitled to six exemptions on the date of injury.  Utilizing the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Manual with effective dates of July 1, 2018, through June 30, 2019, I find 
claimant’s applicable weekly worker’s compensation rate is six hundred sixteen and 
27/100 dollars ($616.27). 
  
 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers’ compensation law. The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services. The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury. Section 85.27. Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
  
 
Claimant introduced his unpaid medical bills at Exhibit 1. Having found those 
medical bills to be medically reasonable and necessary and having found those medical 
expenses to be causally related to claimant’s work injury on July 5, 2018, I conclude 
that the medical expenses contained in Exhibit 1 are the responsibility of claimant’s 
employer, Riumaldo Vazquez. 
   
 
Claimant seeks an assessment of costs. Costs are assessed at the discretion of 
the agency. Iowa Code section 85.40. Claimant has proven his claims against Mr. 
Vazquez. Exercising the agency’s discretion, I conclude that claimant’s costs should be 
assessed against Mr. Vazquez. 
  
 
Claimant seeks assessment of his filing fee ($100.00) as a cost of this 
proceeding. Agency rule 876 IAC 4.33(7) specifically permits the assessment of the 
filing fee. Claimant’s filing fee shall be assessed against Mr. Vazquez. 
    
ORDER 
  
 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
  
 
Defendant, Humberto Tolentino is dismissed with prejudice and owes no benefits 
to claimant. 
  
 
Defendant Riumaldo Vazquez shall pay healing period benefits to claimant from 
July 6, 2018, through August 31, 2018. 
  
 
Defendant Riumaldo Vazquez shall pay one-hundred forty (140) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits to claimant commencing on September 1, 2018. 
  
 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the rate of six hundred sixteen and 27/100 
dollars ($616.27). 
  

MARTINEZ YANEZ V. VAZQUEZ 
MARTINEZ YANEZ V. TOLENTINO 
Page 17 
 
 
All accrued weekly benefits shall be paid in lump sum with applicable interest due 
pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.30. 
  
 
Defendant Riumaldo Vazquez shall be responsible for paying to claimant, to the 
medical providers, or otherwise satisfying and holding claimant harmless for all medical 
expenses contained in Claimant’s Exhibit 1. 
   
 
Claimant’s costs totaling one hundred dollars ($100.00) are assessed against 
Riumaldo Vazquez. 
  
 
Defendant Riumaldo Vazquez shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as 
required by this agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2), and 876 IAC 11.7. 
  
Signed and filed this ____6th ____ day of December, 2021. 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Mary Hamilton (via WCES) 
William Habhab (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following addres s: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
