Case Number: 5052893.02
Case Title:  HANSEN, CRYSTAL V. ALLENDAN SEED COMPANY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Hansen Crystal-5052893.02R.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
CRYSTAL HANSEN, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                     File No. 5052893.02 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
ALLENDANSEED COMPANY, 
  : 
  REVIEW-REOPENING DECISION 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
WESTERN AGRICULTURAL INS. CO.,   :    Head Note Nos.:  2905, 2500, 2502, 1108  
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Crystal Hansen, has filed a review-reopening petition seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits against Allendan Seed Company, employer, and Western 
Agricultural Insurance Company, insurer, both as defendants.  
In accordance with agency scheduling procedures and pursuant to the Order of 
the Commissioner in the matter of Coronavirus/COVID-19 Impact on Hearings, the 
hearing was held via Zoom on October 14, 2022, and considered fully submitted upon 
the simultaneous filing of briefs on November 11, 2022.  
The record consists of Joint Exhibits 1-5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-5, Defendants’ 
Exhibits A-I, and the testimony of the claimant.  
ISSUES 
 
1. Whether there has been a substantial change in circumstances or condition that 
was not anticipated at the time of the original arbitration hearing for a 
reassessment of the extent of the claimant’s permanent partial disability, and if 
so, the extent of industrial disability.  
2. Whether or not the claimant is entitled to healing period disability benefits.  
3. Whether the claimant is entitled to reimbursement of medical expenses.  
4. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of IME under Iowa Code section 
85.39;  
5. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate care;  
6. Costs. 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Jan-26  09:54:52     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HANSEN V. ALLENDAN SEED COMPANY 
Page 2 
STIPULATIONS 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision and no factual 
or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed in this 
decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Prior to the hearing, the claimant was paid 165 weeks of compensation at the 
rate of $202.80 per week. There is no change in her benefit rate.  
FINDING OF FACTS 
The crux of this suit is whether claimant has sustained a change in her 
circumstances warranting a review-reopening of the February 17, 2017, decision 
awarding claimant 33 percent industrial loss. Claimant asserts her existing condition has 
worsened since the December 9, 2016, hearing, and that she had sustained a sequelae 
injury arising out of the original workers compensation injury of September 16, 2014. 
She further asserts she has suffered material change in her economic conditions.  
The factual findings made in the February 17, 2017, decision are incorporated 
herein.  
At the time of the December 9, 2016, hearing, claimant asserted she was 
permanently and totally disabled as a result of her work injuries. The undersigned found 
that claimant was not able to return to her work at Allendan Seed Company due to the 
defendants being unable to accommodate her restrictions nor provide her with an 
alternate position. Heavy manual labor positions were foreclosed to claimant because of 
physical limitations; however, claimant could do medium demand labor. (Ex B:4) 
Claimant’s independent medical examiner, Robin Sassman, M.D., found that claimant 
sustained a 3 percent upper extremity impairment due to loss of flexion and loss of 
internal rotation. (Ex A:2) 
It was found that she sustained a 33 percent industrial loss. There was no 
appeal.  
On September 22, 2016, claimant was seen by Allen J. Eckhoff, M.D., for 
“continuing right shoulder pain.” (JE 1:1) Claimant described the pain as a constant 
ache that was tolerable but that any movement worsened the pain. (Id.) At the time 
claimant was taking Cyclobenzaprine 10 mg, 1 tablet at night and Gralise 600 mg three 
tablets once a day. (Id.) On October 16, 2017, Dr. Eckhoff ceased the Cyclobenzaprine 
due to claimant’s reports of sleepiness and switched claimant to Baclofen 10 mg po TID 
for muscle spasms. (Id.) 
In the February 17, 2017, decision, it was ordered that claimant be allowed to 
seek additional care. On February 14, 2017, claimant was seen by James Nepola, M.D., 
at University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC). (JE 4:31) Claimant presented with 

HANSEN V. ALLENDAN SEED COMPANY 
Page 3 
“arm pain, arm weakness, muscle weakness, joint pain and joint stiffness.” (Id. at p. 32)  
On examination, she had right range of motion as follows: 
active elevation of 160 degrees 
active extension 50 degrees 
active abduction 150 degrees 
external rotation 100  
internal rotation T6 
He found her to have multidirectional instability on the right. The left was normal 
with full motion and strength as was the cervical spine. (JE 4:33) However, he 
determined that she had bilateral instability and posterior instability and inferior 
instability and expected discomfort with range of motion. (JE 4:35) 
He found that she had a genetic predisposition that was exceeded by her activity 
on the job. (Id.) Surgery would not help her but instead, she needed physical therapy to 
stabilize and strengthen the shoulder. (JE 4:34) Her shoulder would not be normal but 
could be stabilized.  
Claimant was seen again at Dr. Eckhoff’s pain clinic on July 10, 2018, for follow 
up of her right shoulder pain and a medication check. (Id.) She was taking Baclofen 10 
mg TID as needed. (JE 1:7) Her condition did not appear to be different than she 
presented at the September 22, 2016, visit. Her pain was tolerable and she had good 
and bad days. (JE 1:7) She relayed to Dr. Eckhoff that she had a five-pound lifting 
restriction. In the examination portion, claimant did not demonstrate more than 90 
degrees of active range of motion but her passive range of motion was 170 degrees. 
(Id.) Dr. Eckhoff felt she was at maximum medical improvement (MMI) and 
recommended that she return for more physical therapy to improve function. (Id.)  
On August 1, 2018, claimant was seen at physical therapy for right shoulder pain. 
(JE 2:20) She stated her pain was present in both shoulders and that it was aching, 
acute, tender and worsening. (Id.) The medical records document that the symptoms 
started three months ago. (Id.) On examination, she had decreased abduction of both 
shoulders and overall somatic dysfunction. (Id. at 21) She had right shoulder pronation, 
left shoulder tenderness at the trapezius, and left sided hip dysfunction. (Id.)  
On August 8, 2018, physical therapy visit, it was noted that the imaging of 
claimant’s shoulder showed no structural damage but that she did present with multi 
directional instability of the right shoulder contributing to the chronic pain in the right 
shoulder. She also had impaired posture, range of motion, and strength due to this 
issue. (JE 3:28)  
On March 28, 2019, claimant was seen by Dr. Eckhoff with conditions largely the 
same as she presented on September 16, 2022, and the July 10, 2018, visit. (JE 1:9) 
She had right shoulder pain that worsened with activity. (JE 1:9) She shared she was 
unable to find employment due to her five-pound lifting restriction. (Id.) Dr. Eckhoff 

HANSEN V. ALLENDAN SEED COMPANY 
Page 4 
referred claimant for an EMG. (Id.) The EMG was normal but because claimant 
continued to endorse right shoulder pain with intermittent pain down her right arm and 
numbness into three fingers, Dr. Eckhoff added Diclofenac 50 mg to her prescription 
regimen. (JE 1:11; 4:45)  
On March 11, 2020, claimant returned to Dr. Eckhoff for a general medication 
checkup. (JE 1:13) She continued to have right shoulder pain but said that her condition 
was greatly improved by the medications. (Id.) “She is stable and happy with her pain 
control at this time.” Dr. Eckhoff documented. (Id.) He continued her on Gralise, 
Baclofen and Diclofenac as she was reaching 70 percent of overall relief with this 
prescription regimen. (Id.)  
During the follow up visit of December 3, 2020, claimant reported right sided 
neck pain and numbness into the right hand, pinky, ring and middle fingers. (JE 1:14) 
Dr. Eckhoff referred claimant for a surgical consult at UIHC.  
On March 25, 2021, claimant was seen by Dr. Eckhoff reporting of left elbow pain 
for the first time. (JE 1:16) Claimant believed the pain might be associated with overuse 
and described the pain as stabbing, shooting, spasming, throbbing, and aching. (Id.) 
She had tenderness over the medial epicondyle and Dr. Eckhoff believed she had left 
ulnar inflammation or irritation and recommended she seek out an orthopaedic opinion. 
(JE 1:16)  
In her May 2022 deposition, claimant stated that “overuse” was explained “to” 
her. (DE F:23) When asked who “they” was she said it was Dr. Kruse. (DE F: 25) Her 
overuse was explained as follows: 
My elbow was having issues due to, I guess, overuse, is the way they 
explained it to me. Because when I go to pull stuff out of the washing 
machine, being short like I am, you’ve got two options. You have to find a 
stepstool or you jump and reach your arm down there and grab it out. 
Well, it hurts to do that with my right shoulder, so I’d been doing it with my 
left.  
I always carry the laundry baskets on my left side of my body now 
instead of on my right. I also tend to use the left side of my body more 
towards sweeping the floors, running vacuum cleaners, anything at home 
that needs to be done, because the pain in the right.  
(DE F:24-25)  
On June 23, 2021, she was seen for the left lateral elbow pain by Lindsey 
Caldwell, M.D. (JE 4:37) She had tenderness to palpation along the triceps insertion 
and just posterior to the lateral epicondyle and medial epicondyle. Sensibility was 
slightly decreased along the ulnar border of the hand and small finger. (JE 4:38) She 
had full range of motion. Dr. Caldwell diagnosed claimant with left medial and lateral 

HANSEN V. ALLENDAN SEED COMPANY 
Page 5 
epicondylitis with contributing ulnar nerve irritation at the elbow. (Id.) Claimant was 
referred to physical therapy and to a sports tendinopathy clinic. (Id.)  
On August 2, 2021, claimant was seen by Ryan Kruse, M.D., who noted that the 
four weeks of physical therapy was not helpful for the left elbow. He performed a 
diagnostic ultrasound that revealed mild common extensor tendinosis and moderate 
elbow joint effusion. (JE 4:40) He also performed a radiocapitellar joint injection. (Id.) 
Post treatment notes indicate that the injection worsened claimant’s pain. She also 
wanted Dr. Kruse to know that she had been kayaking on July 31, 2021, prior to her 
medical visit.  
At the November 16, 2021, medication checkup, claimant reported right sided 
shoulder pain and left elbow pain. (JE 1:18) She maintained Gralise and Baclofen 
helped to control her pain and provide mild relief. It appears that she inquired about 
marijuana because Dr. Eckhoff wrote “I discussed that work comp likely not cover 
medical cannabis and that she would have to pay for it herself.” (JE 1:18) She did not 
want to pay out of pocket. Dr. Eckhoff started her on a compounding cream and noted 
that her cervical MRI was unremarkable. (JE 1:19) He placed her at MMI. (Id.)  
Claimant sought out physical therapy at Athletico Physical Therapy. See Ex. I. At 
her first physical therapy appointment, claimant advised her elbow was in pain as a 
result of cleaning out her house and moving boxes around. (Id. at 27) Claimant in total 
attended 25 physical therapy sessions. Throughout her care, claimant reported various 
activities that exacerbated her condition including lifting heavy groceries (Id. at 28), 
casting a fishing rod (Id. at 30), pulling weeds (Id. at 32), working new job at childcare 
facility (Id. at 34), lifting bags of charcoal (Id. at 36) and doing pushups (Id. at 38) Still, 
her elbow condition improved with time. At her October 5, 2021, physical therapy 
appointment, claimant advised that she had no exacerbated elbow pain and that she 
had obtained maximum treatment with physical therapy. (Id. at 41) Just over a month 
later on November 16, 2021, Dr. Eckhoff agreed stating claimant had reached MMI as 
to her left elbow. (JE 1:18-19)  
Following the appointment with Dr. Eckhoff in November 2021, defendant denied 
responsibility for further care. Claimant then sought care on her own, including 
treatment at Athletico Physical Therapy. (Ex. I)  
Dr. Kuhnlein, claimant’s IME physician, found that claimant was not at maximum 
medical improvement for her left elbow condition on August 2, 2021.  
Ms. Hansen was evaluated by John Kuhnlein, D.O, an occupational health 
physician, on July 21, 2022. (CE 1) Dr. Kuhnlein opined that claimant suffered from a 
congenital condition known as hyperlaxity in the shoulders and that the hyperlaxity 
meant she would develop symptoms with less stressor exposure than other individuals. 
(CE 1:8) He concluded that it was more likely than not that her current right shoulder 
symptoms were related to the September 16, 2014, injury and that the left medial and 
lateral epicondylitis developed from overuse related to compensating for her right 

HANSEN V. ALLENDAN SEED COMPANY 
Page 6 
shoulder and thus sequela to the September 16, 2014, injury. (CE 1:8) However, he 
also documented that claimant believed her right shoulder symptoms are about the 
same intensity, same location, and same pattern since the hearing several years ago. 
(CE 1:4) At hearing, claimant denied saying this to Dr. Kuhnlein and suggested that Dr. 
Kuhnlein misunderstood her subjective oral history. (Hr. Tr. at 35-36) He wrote: Ms. 
Hansen does not believe that her restrictions have changed since 2016. She does not 
describe any significant differences in function since the arbitration hearing.  (Id.) 
(emphasis added). This statement is consistent with her deposition testimony  
So is it fair to say then that your right shoulder generally is about 
the same as it was in 2016 at the time of the hearing?  
I would say so, yeah.  
(DE F:40)  
Dr. Kuhnlein noted that claimant did not have any changes in the treatment for 
her right shoulder following the hearing other than to change claimant’s medication to 
baclofen (which was done due to the previous medication, Flexeril, causing sleepiness). 
(CE 2:3) Dr. Kuhnlein records claimant’s left shoulder injury etiology as follows: 
Ms. Hansen says that she suddenly developed left elbow pain several 
years ago, although she is unsure exactly when.  She says that she went to 
catch something that was going to drop because of her right shoulder 
problem, developing left elbow pain in the anconeus area.  She states that 
she told Dr. Eckhoff about this.  The records indicate that on March 25, 
2021, Dr. Eckhoff noted that she complained about left elbow pain with 
numbness and tingling radiating along the outside of the forearm into the 
hand.  He felt she might have left ulnar nerve entrapment at the elbow, 
making an orthopedic referral. 
(CE 1:3)  
He recorded that in addition to the left elbow pain, she reported the gradual onset 
of right elbow pain about two months prior to the July 21, 2022, examination as a result 
of grabbing laundry. (CE 1:4) At the appointment with Dr. Kuhnlein, she described her 
pain as not significant enough to seek medical care. (Id.)  
On examination, she had reduced range of motion in her right shoulder in the 
areas of flexion, extension, abduction and slight reduction in external rotation. (CE 1:6) 
She complained of posterior and scapular pain in the right biceps, right elbow pain, left 
elbow pain, mild medial right epicondylar and left medial capitellar tenderness and mild 
tenderness in the left medial epicondylar area.  (CE 1:7)  
For future care, Dr. Kuhnlein recommended that she continue to see Dr. Eckhoff. 
(CE 1:8) Dr. Kuhnlein set her date of MMI at or about February 14, 2017, for the 

HANSEN V. ALLENDAN SEED COMPANY 
Page 7 
shoulder and August 2, 2021, for the elbow. (CE 1:8) Dr. Kuhnlein’s section on 
impairment is confusing.  
Turning to Figures 16-40, 16-43, and 16-46, and when comparing the 
right to the unaffected left shoulder, there is a total of 5% left upper extremity 
impairment for deficits in range of motion.  Turning to Table 16-35, page 
510, there is a 1% right upper extremity impairment for the motor deficits.    
Turning to the Combined Values Chart on page 604, when these values 
are combined (5% ×1%), this is a 6% right upper extremity impairment.  
Turning to Table 16-3, page 439, this would convert to a 4% whole person 
impairment.  
Turning to Section 16.7d, page 507, no impairment would be assigned 
for the epicondylitis.  No sensory deficits were noted consistent with an ulnar 
nerve distribution, so no impairment would be assigned for ulnar neuritis. 
(CE 1:9)  
The left shoulder is described as unaffected and thus when Dr. Kuhnlein goes on 
to say that there is a total of 5 percent left upper extremity impairment for deficits in 
range of motion, he must mean a 5 percent right upper extremity impairment as his test 
results show only deficits in range of motion on the right. (CE 1:6) In the subsequent 
paragraph, he combines two values for the motor deficits and the range of motion 
deficits to give a combined 6 percent right upper extremity impairment. (emphasis 
added) This is significant because Dr. Kuhnlein provides no impairment rating for the 
left elbow.  
No restrictions are recommended.  
Defendants obtained the opinions of Dr. Eckhoff and Dr. Caldwell regarding the 
left elbow causation issue. Neither doctor would opine to a reasonable degree of 
medical certainty that the left elbow symptoms were related to the claimant’s right 
shoulder injury. (Ex C:6-7, Ex D:9)  
Both doctors agreed that if claimant were to have developed issues with her left 
elbow due to overuse stemming from the right shoulder injury, claimant should have 
developed symptoms within six months after her initial right shoulder injury that 
occurred in 2014 as opposed to 6 years later in March 2021. (Ex C:7; Ex. D:9). Dr. 
Caldwell agreed to a statement that: 
The fact that Crystal Hansen did not report left elbow pain until almost 
6.5 years after the September 2014 work injury to her right shoulder, as 
opposed to soon after the injury, supports the conclusion that Ms. Hansen’s 
left elbow pain is NOT causally related to her September 2014 right 
shoulder injury. 

HANSEN V. ALLENDAN SEED COMPANY 
Page 8 
(Ex C:7) Dr. Eckhoff signed off on a similar statement. (Ex D:9)  
Given the time-lapse and specifically that Crystal Hansen did not report 
left elbow pain until March 2021, nearly 6.5 years after the initial right 
shoulder injury, you have a difficult time associating her left elbow pain with 
the work injury to her right shoulder in September 2014.  In other words, 
you CANNOT state with a reasonable degree of medical certainty that Ms. 
Hansen’s recent reports of left elbow pain are causally related to her 
September 2014 shoulder injury. 
(Ex D:9)  
At hearing, claimant acknowledged that she only has elbow pain a few times a 
week as she learned to avoid behaviors that would aggravate it and that she is not 
aware of ever having any work or activity restrictions pertaining to her left elbow. (Hr. Tr. 
at 50-51) Claimant also testified in her May 17, 2022, deposition that her elbow pain is 
occasional and is alleviated by home exercises and medications. (DE F:55)   
At her deposition in May 2022, she mistakenly identified her lifting restrictions at 
15 to 20 pounds. (DE F: 11) She is a mother of five and as the caregiver for those 
children and therefore must undertake some tasks such as laundry, dishes, sweeping, 
household chores. (DE F:10) Claimant’s current employment is a dog walker.  
Claimant requests reimbursement for the filing fee, medical records, and Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s IME of $4,242.50 as a cost.  
She reported she applied for a total of six different jobs in the approximate six 
years since the initial hearing. (Hr. Tr. at 42-43) She applied at Kum & Go, Dollar 
General, Hy-Vee, and Fareway but their lifting requirements of 45 pounds exceeded her 
restrictions. (DE F:34-35) At Hy-Vee, she was turned away because the kitchen job 
required a college education. (Id.)  
Claimant was hired by a daycare, Hundred Acre Woods, where she worked until 
sustaining an injury while lifting a child and dislocating her right shoulder. (Ex. 19-21) 
She then obtained employment as a dog walker/caregiver for a dog training facility 
where she has continued to work up until present. While at the dog training facility, she 
explained she is able to work within her restrictions and modified the leashes so that 
they are attached to her waist. (Hr. Tr. at 25) She earns around $10.00 per hour and 
works 24 hours per week.  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 

HANSEN V. ALLENDAN SEED COMPANY 
Page 9 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Upon review-reopening, claimant has the burden to show a change in condition 
related to the original injury since the original award or settlement was made.  The 
change may be either economic or physical.  Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 
N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Henderson v. Iles, 250 Iowa 787, 96 N.W.2d 321 (1959).  A 
mere difference of opinion of experts as to the percentage of disability arising from an 
original injury is not sufficient to justify a different determination on a petition for review-
reopening.  Rather, claimant's condition must have worsened or deteriorated in a 
manner not contemplated at the time of the initial award or settlement before an award 
on review-reopening is appropriate.  Bousfield v. Sisters of Mercy, 249 Iowa 64, 86 
N.W.2d 109 (1957).  A failure of a condition to improve to the extent anticipated 
originally may also constitute a change of condition.  Meyers v. Holiday Inn of Cedar 
Falls, Iowa, 272 N.W.2d 24 (Iowa App. 1978). 
Causation is the purview of experts. This decision reviews the expert opinions 
and selects the one best supported by the evidence. In this case, the opinions that are 
most reliable and consistent with claimant’s course of treatment, onset of symptoms, 
and claimant’s own behavior are that of Dr. Caldwell and Dr. Eckhoff. Dr. Caldwell was 

HANSEN V. ALLENDAN SEED COMPANY 
Page 10 
a medical provider chosen by claimant and Dr. Eckhoff is one that she has continued to 
see since the 2014 injury for pain management.   
First, claimant’s right shoulder has not changed since the December 2016 
hearing. She testified that the shoulder is unchanged in symptoms. She stated this to 
Dr. Kuhnlein. It is evident in her medical records. While claimant does have a change in 
prescriptions from Cyclobenzaprine to Baclofen, this is due to complaints of sleepiness 
on Cyclobenzaprine rather than a worsening of condition. On March 28, 2019, Dr. 
Eckhoff did add Diclofenac to her prescription regimen. However, no doctor changed 
claimant’s restrictions including Dr. Kuhnlein although he did find claimant’s right 
shoulder to have greater range of motion deficits than in her examination of 2016 with 
Dr. Sassman.  
The evidence supporting that a change in circumstances warrants a review-
reopening, include increased range of motion deficits measured by Dr. Kuhnlein and the 
added prescription of Diclofenac. A mere difference in percentage of disability is not 
enough to warrant a review-reopening. On the other, claimant herself testified that her 
shoulder is unchanged in symptomatology. She stated this in her deposition. She 
reported it to her chosen independent medical examiner, Dr. Kuhnlein. “She believes 
her right shoulder symptoms are about the same intensity, same location and same 
pattern since the hearing several years ago.” (CE 1:4) No doctor, including Dr. Kuhnlein, 
has imposed new restrictions. Dr. Eckhoff also documented unchanging right arm 
symptoms.  
Thus the greater weight of the evidence supports a finding that the condition of 
claimant’s right shoulder has not worsened or deteriorated in a manner not 
contemplated at the time of the December 2016 hearing.  
Claimant also asserts she has sustained a new sequela injury to her left elbow 
from overuse of the left side due to her right shoulder injury.  The claimant’s theory rests 
primarily on a temporal connection. The claimant’s left elbow did not hurt prior to her 
injury in 2014 but did after her injury. However, the elapsed time is significant. She was 
injured in 2014 with what she describes as a totally disabling injury but her left elbow 
overuse symptoms did not develop until 2021, over six years later. 
Claimant is unsure of the cause of the left elbow injury. To Dr. Eckhoff she stated 
that it was due to overuse. At her deposition, she said that Dr. Kruse told her that it was 
overuse; however, there are no mentions of that in her medical records with Dr. Kruse 
and she did not appear to have a consultation with Dr. Kruse in the spring of 2021. 
Claimant sought out care with Dr. Kruse on August 2, 2021, at the referral of Dr. 
Caldwell. (See JE 4:39) When claimant developed her left elbow pain, her care provider 
was Dr. Eckhoff.  
Claimant reported to Dr. Kuhnlein that she developed left elbow pain after she 
dropped something due to right shoulder pain and that she caught it with her left hand. 
That is more of a traumatic incident than an overuse symptoms. In her physical therapy 

HANSEN V. ALLENDAN SEED COMPANY 
Page 11 
records, she reports elbow pain arising from lifting heavier grocery items, casting a 
fishing rod, work at a new childcare place, and lifting charcoal. At hearing and at 
deposition, she described reaching into a washing machine with her left arm instead of 
the right and using her left arm to hold laundry baskets and do more household chores. 
Admittedly, many of these incidents, if not all, fall into the category of “use” of the left 
arm.  
However, the significant time lapse between the initial injury and the alleged 
overuse symptoms give more credence to the opinions of Dr. Eckhoff and Dr. Caldwell 
who did not find the left elbow symptomatology to be connected to the original right 
shoulder injury of 2014. Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinion that did tie the two together also did not 
provide any impairment due to the epicondylitis or ulnar neuritis. 
While claimant did use her left arm for household chores, she also engaged in 
leisure activities such as kayaking. It is difficult to pinpoint the etiology of the left elbow 
pains and based on the opinions of Dr. Eckhoff and Dr. Caldwell along with the lengthy 
time lapse and various activities claimant engaged in during the period between 2014 
and 2021, it is found that claimant did not carry her burden to prove that the left elbow 
was sequelae to the original 2014 right shoulder injury.  
Claimant also asserts that she has suffered an economic change. At the 2016 
hearing, claimant asserted she was completely and totally disabled. The undersigned 
adopted the work restrictions imposed by the functional capacity evaluation which 
placed claimant in the medium physical demand category. The restrictions were similar 
to those imposed by the claimant’s expert, Dr. Sassman. While it is true that claimant 
did not have employment but for a brief stint as a day care provider and presently as a 
dog walker, claimant only applied for a handful of jobs—maybe as many as six. She 
presented to these prospective employers that she had lifting restrictions. It is not clear 
what lifting restrictions she shared with the prospective employers. She twice told Dr. 
Eckhoff that she had a five-pound lifting restriction and she testified in the 2016 hearing 
that she could not lift things like a gallon of milk on the right. Her work restrictions in 
2016 were a 30-pound lifting restriction and those restrictions remain unchanged at the 
2022 hearing. Claimant evinced little motivation to return to work at the 2016 hearing 
and that remains the same in the present hearing. Six applications, possible 
misapplication of work restrictions, and two attempted jobs in six years are not signs of 
an individual motivated to return to work. Claimant does undertake physical hobbies 
such as kayaking and fishing which do not appear to be consistent with her self-
professed disabled condition.  
Even if the medication change was sufficient to warrant a review-reopening, her 
work restrictions remain unchanged. Dr. Kuhnlein assigned no new restrictions and 
neither have any of claimant’s other medical providers. Dr. Kuhnlein provided no 
impairment rating for the left elbow. His only impairment rating was dedicated to the 
right shoulder. Claimant’s work history, or lack thereof, is the same in 2022 as it was in 
December 2016. The FCE recommendations still apply. Thus, claimant has not shown 
an increase in disability since the December 2016 hearing.  

HANSEN V. ALLENDAN SEED COMPANY 
Page 12 
Claimant is not entitled to additional healing period benefits.  
Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an injured 
worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has returned to 
work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 
Iowa App 312 N.W.2d 60 (1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or 
intermittent.  Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
Part of the stipulations of the December 2016 hearing was that claimant was at 
MMI as of March 9, 2016, as that was the agreed upon date for the commencement of 
permanent partial disability benefits. Permanent partial disability benefits begin when 
claimant has returned to work, medically capable of returning to similar employment or 
claimant has reached MMI. Claimant neither returned to work nor was she able to return 
to employment substantially similar to the work she had performed prior to her injury of 
2014. Therefore, claimant had reached MMI as of March 9, 2016.  
Healing period can be intermittent or interrupted but there is no medical 
testimony to support this. Claimant’s treatment with Dr. Eckhoff has been primarily 
medical management. Claimant sees Dr. Eckhoff approximately once every six months. 
The post December 2016 care she has received is primarily palliative. Claimant’s belief 
regarding the efficacy of physical therapy varied from no help, worsening the condition, 
to alleviating the pain. Dr. Eckhoff wrote in his medical notes that claimant had achieved 
MMI on November 16, 2021. (JE 1:19) Dr. Kuhnlein placed claimant at MMI as of 
February 14, 2017, the date upon which claimant saw Dr. Nepola and that she had 
reached MMI on or about August 2, 2021, for the left elbow. (CE 1:9)  
It is the burden and duty of the claimant to prove the elements by a 
preponderance of the evidence and there is no medical testimony that claimant 
transitioned from her MMI to a healing period because of the right shoulder injury.  
The record does not support a finding that claimant had a worsening condition 
that warranted additional healing period benefits.  
Claimant seeks alternate care. Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant 
part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish 
reasonable services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the 
right to choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly and 
be reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such dissatisfaction 
to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the employer and 

HANSEN V. ALLENDAN SEED COMPANY 
Page 13 
the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited to treat the 
injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such alternate care, 
the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
It is unclear what alternate care she is seeking. Alternate care claims require a 
party seeking alternate care to prove that the care provided by the employer is not 
reasonable to meet the medical needs of the injured worker. Claimant still sees Dr. 
Eckhoff every six months for medication management. There is no evidence that 
claimant is unhappy with this and would like additional or different care. There is no 
written rejection of the care being proffered.  
Claimant has not met the elements of an alternate care claim.  
Claimant seeks reimbursement of the physical therapy appointments and 
appointments with UIHC. Unauthorized medical care is subject to the standards set 
forth by the Iowa Supreme Court in Bell Bros v. Gwinn. An employer can be ordered to 
pay for unauthorized care received by the employee only if the employee “prove[s] ‘by a 
preponderance of the evidence that such care was reasonable and beneficial’ under the 
totality of the circumstances,” with “beneficial” defined as “provid[ing] a more favorable 
medical outcome than would likely have been achieved by the care authorized by the 
employer.” Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193 204 (Iowa 
2010) 
To the extent that she needs ongoing care for her shoulder injury, such as 
treatment with Dr. Eckhoff, claimant is entitled to that as she has a shoulder injury 
arising out of a work incident in 2014. Claimant seeks out of pocket expenses related to 
the shoulder appointments at the University of Iowa. Those visits are the February 14, 
2017, visit with Dr. Nepola, the June 23, 2021, visit with Dr. Caldwell and the August 2, 
2021, visit with Dr. Kruse. While the outcome of these visits did not change the 
trajectory of claimant’s course of healing, the visit with Dr. Nepola was expressly 
ordered by the February 14, 2017, injury. During that visit, claimant was diagnosed with 
multidirectional instability as a result of a genetic condition that pre-disposed claimant to 
injury in her right shoulder. The visit to Dr. Caldwell and Dr. Kruse are related to the left 
elbow.   
The left elbow has been found to not be related to the work injury and thus the 
causation link between the claimant’s medical bills and the work injury has not been 
established.  Defendants shall pay the medical bills associated with Dr. Nepola’s visit in 
February 2017. The other UIHC visits are related to the left elbow and are not awarded. 
Claimant seeks reimbursement of costs including the filing fee, medical records 
and the reimbursement of Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME.  
Iowa Code section 85.39 is the sole method for reimbursement of an exam by a 
physician of the employee's choice. If an injured worker seeks reimbursement for 

HANSEN V. ALLENDAN SEED COMPANY 
Page 14 
an IME, the provisions established by the legislature, under Iowa Code section 85.39, 
must be followed. Only the costs associated with preparation of the written report of a 
claimant's IME can be reimbursed as a cost at hearing under rule 876 IAC 4.33. Des 
Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 846-847 (Iowa 2015). 
Dr. Kuhnlein's  IME fees do not qualify for reimbursement under Iowa Code 
section 85.39. The only reimbursable costs that can be potentially assessed would be 
for the preparation of a written report by Dr. Kuhnlein. 
There is no itemized billing for Dr. Kuhnlein and it is unknown what portion of the 
$4,242.50 bill is for the written report and what portion was for the examination. 
Therefore, the costs of Dr. Kuhnlein are not awarded. Claimant shall also remain 
responsible for the costs of the filing fee and medical records as she did not prevail in 
this matter.  
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED 
Defendants shall reimburse or pay directly the fees of Dr. Nepola related to the 
February 17, 2017, medical visit.  
On all other issues, claimant shall take nothing.   
Each party shall pay their own costs incurred prior to hearing. Defendants shall 
be responsible for the hearing transcript cost.  
Signed and filed this _26th _ day of January, 2023. 
   ________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JENNIFER S. GERRISH-LAMPE  
 
 
 
 
 
                   DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
         COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Robert Gainer (via WCES) 
James Russell (via WCES) 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
