Case Number: 22003841.01
Case Title:  RODAS, MIRIAM V. SUMMIT PRODUCTS
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Rodas Miriam-22003841.01M.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
MIRIAM RODAS, 
File No. 22003841.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
SUMMIT PRODUCTS, 
ALTERNATE CARE 
DECISION 
 
Employer, 
FIRSTCOMP INS. CO., 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
STATEMEN T OF TH E C AS E 
On July 28, 2022, Miriam Rodas filed an application for alternate care under Iowa 
Code section 85.27 and agency rule 876 IAC 4.48 relating to an alleged work injury to 
her mouth in the form of authorization to see an occupational medicine specialist to 
manage medication. The defendants, employer Summit Products and insurance carrier 
Firstcomp Insurance Co., filed an answer in which they accepted liability for the alleged 
mouth injury. At hearing, Rodas also requested an order requiring the defendants to 
schedule an appointment with a neurologist as quickly as possible. The defendants 
contend no treating physician has recommended Rodas see an occupational medicine 
specialist and they have already arranged care with a neurologist, whose office has yet 
to schedule the authorized appointment with Rodas. 
The undersigned presided over an alternate care hearing that was held by 
telephone and recorded on April 9, 2022. That recording constitutes the official record of 
the proceeding under agency rule 876 IAC 4.48(12). Rodas participated personally and 
through attorney Andrew M. Giller. The defendants participated through attorney L. 
Tyler Laflin. The record consists of: 
 Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 3; 
 Defendants’ Exhibits A and B; and 
 Hearing testimony by Rodas. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Aug-09  15:11:02     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

RODAS V. SUMMIT PRODUCTS 
Page 2 
 
ISSU E  
The issue under consideration is whether Rodas is entitled to alternate care in 
the form of: 
1) Authorization of care with an occupational medicine specialist; and 
 
2) Prompt scheduling of an appointment with a neurologist. 
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T  
On March 7, 2022, Rodas sustained an injury to her mouth that required multiple 
surgeries by an orthodontist and may require another surgery. Her pain has continued 
despite these procedures. Her orthodontist believes the pain may be nerve-related and 
referred Rodas to her personal physician so she could get a referral to a neurologist 
before undergoing any additional surgery. (Testimony; Ex. 1, p. 1) 
Rodas attempted to see her personal physician, but he has retired. She saw 
Sherry Vesely, A.R.N.P., who prescribed carbamazepine, the label for which warned of 
possible dizziness. (Ex. 2, p. 2; Ex. 4, pp. 1–2) The medication caused Rodas to feel 
dizzy. She attempted to work but was sent home because of the dizziness caused by 
her medication. Vesely was unwilling to give Rodas a note excusing her from work due 
to the dizziness caused by the carbamazepine. (Testimony) 
Rodas took the carbamazepine as instructed. She ran out of the medication and 
was still experiencing pain. Rodas took the remainder of some pain medication her 
orthodontist prescribed after one of her surgeries, which alleviated her pain and allowed 
her to return to work.  
Claimant’s counsel emailed the claims examiner assigned to Rodas’s claim, 
Karen Lugo, and informed her that the pain medication was making Rodas dizzy, it was 
not safe for her to work given her dizziness, and she needed to be placed on temporary 
total disability until she completed the medicine or sent to an occupational medicine 
specialist to better manage her medication. (Ex. 3, p. 3) Lugo rejected the request 
because three doctors cleared Rodas to work. (Ex. 3, p. 2) The record makes it unclear 
the doctors to whom Lugo was referring and whether they were all aware of the 
medication she was prescribed. 
At the time of hearing, Rodas had used all of the medication doctors had 
prescribed for her for the pain relating to the work injury. The pain was ongoing. She 
had no more medicine to take for it and did not have an appointment scheduled with a 
doctor to address it even though the defendants had authorized care with a neurologist 
at Mercy pursuant to her orthodontist’s referral. Mercy schedules its appointments with 
patients, not the defendants, and had not scheduled an appointment with Rodas as of 
the time of hearing. (Testimony) 

RODAS V. SUMMIT PRODUCTS 
Page 3 
 
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW 
“Iowa Code section 85.27(4) affords an employer who does not contest the 
compensability of a workplace injury a qualified statutory right to control the medical 
care provided to an injured employee.” Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 
N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016) (citing R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 
195, 197 (Iowa 2003)). Under the law, the employer must “furnish reasonable medical 
services and supplies and reasonable and necessary appliances to treat an injured 
employee.” Stone Container Corp. v. Castle, 657 N.W.2d 485, 490 (Iowa 2003) 
(emphasis in original). Such employer-provided care “must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.” 
Iowa Code § 85.27(4).  
An injured employee dissatisfied with the employer-furnished care (or lack 
thereof) may share the employee’s discontent with the employer and if the parties 
cannot reach an agreement on alternate care, the agency “may, upon application and 
reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care.” Id. 
“Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.” Long v. 
Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 123 (Iowa 1995); Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. 
Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 436 (Iowa 1997). As the party seeking relief in the form of 
alternate care, the employee bears the burden of proving that the authorized care is 
unreasonable. Id. at 124; Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d at 209; Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d at 436; 
Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124. Because “the employer’s obligation under the statute turns on 
the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” an injured employee’s 
dissatisfaction with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough to find such 
care unreasonable. Id. 
Rodas is out of pain medication to alleviate her ongoing symptoms. Her 
orthodontist recommended she see a neurologist about her ongoing pain to make sure 
it is not nerve related. The defendants have acted on this referral by authorizing care 
with a neurologist at Mercy. However, Rodas does not have an appointment scheduled 
for additional care despite her ongoing symptoms because Mercy has not acted and 
Vesely does not want to get involved with workers’ compensation. The fighting issue is 
whether the defendants have acted reasonably in response to the referral for Rodas to 
see a neurologist about her ongoing pain. 
Under the circumstances, the defendants have acted reasonably. There is no 
indication in the record that Mercy’s failure to schedule the authorized appointment is 
due to any action or inaction by the defendants. The delay in care has been caused by 
Mercy. While such a delay could become unreasonable, the facts at present do not 
support such a conclusion. 
Rodas also seeks care with an occupational medicine or pain management 
specialist to manager her pain medication. No treating physician has recommended 
care with either type of specialist. Instead, her treating orthodontist recommended a 
referral to a neurologist because of her ongoing pain. The defendants have authorized 
this care. At this point in time, the physicians authorized to treat Rodas for her work 

RODAS V. SUMMIT PRODUCTS 
Page 4 
 
injury have opined that seeing a neurologist for her ongoing pain is the appropriate care. 
The defendants arranging for this recommended care instead of another type of 
specialist is reasonable in the current case. 
With respect to Vesely, the record is unclear what made her uncomfortable about 
Rodas’s ongoing care. Vesely was willing to prescribe pain medication to address 
Rodas’s symptoms from the work injury with authorization from the defendants. It 
appears most likely she balked at taking Rodas off work after she experienced dizziness 
from the medication. There is an insufficient basis in the record from which to conclude 
Vesely has refused to manage Rodas’s pain medication. Under the current record, the 
defendants maintaining Vesely as an authorized provider is reasonable. 
OR D ER  
Under the above findings of facts and conclusions of law, it is ordered that the 
application for alternate care is DENIED. 
On February 16, 2015, the Iowa workers’ compensation commissioner issued an 
order delegating authority to deputy workers’ compensation commissioners, such as the 
undersigned, to issue final agency decisions on applications for alternate care. 
Consequently, there is no appeal of this decision to the commissioner, only judicial 
review in a district court under the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Iowa Code 
chapter 17A.  
Signed and filed this 9th day of August, 2022. 
 
 
 
BEN HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Andrew M. Giller (via WCES) 
L. Tyler Laflin (via WCES) 
 
 
