Case Number: 5055313.01
Case Title:  ROBINSON, HERMAN V. RECKER INC
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Robinson, Herman-5055313.01.District Court Decision.PDF
========================================================================

1 
 
IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT IN AND FOR LINN COUNTY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
RECKER, INC. AND PROTECTIVE 
) 
INSURANCE COMPANY,  
 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
Case No. EQCV094006 
 
Plaintiffs, 
 
 
 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS 
 
 
vs. 
 
 
 
) 
OF LAW, AND RULING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
 
HERMAN T. ROBINSON,   
 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
) 
 
Defendant. 
 
 
 
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This matter came before the undersigned for a bench trial on June 24, 2021.  Plaintiffs 
were represented by attorney Chandler Surrency.  Defendant was personally present, and was 
self-represented.  The Court heard testimony and received exhibits as stated in the record.  The 
Court has considered all of the evidence, but will focus herein on the evidence it finds most 
relevant to its ruling.   
 
Having considered the evidence and the arguments of counsel, and having also 
considered the relevant law, the Court enters the following findings of fact, conclusions of law, 
and ruling. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
Plaintiffs filed a Petition for Specific Performance on October 10, 2019.  The Petition 
alleged that the parties, through their attorneys, had negotiated a settlement of a workers’ 
compensation case filed by Defendant against the Plaintiffs for alleged injuries sustained in 
2014.  Specifically, the Petition alleges that a settlement was reached in a telephone conversation 
in November 2018.  The Petition alleges that the parties agreed to settle the case for the amount 
of $20,000, and that Plaintiffs would also reimburse defense counsel for costs in the amount of 
$2,512.50.  According to the Petition, Plaintiffs’ counsel sent a letter to counsel for Defendant, 
E-FILED                    EQCV094006 - 2021 AUG 09 09:22 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 1 of 14

2 
 
confirming the terms of the settlement.  In a letter dated February 28, 2019, counsel for 
Defendant filed a document with the Office of the Workers’ Compensation Commissioner noting 
that Defendant “was not going to follow through with the terms of the settlement.”  Plaintiffs 
request an order requiring Defendant to specifically perform the terms of the settlement 
agreement by signing the settlement documents. 
 
Defendant was represented in the Workers’ Compensation action by attorney Matthew 
Petrzelka.  Because Mr. Petrzelka knew that he may be a witness in any attempt by Plaintiffs to 
enforce the alleged settlement, he withdrew as counsel for the Defendant. 
Mr. Petrzelka testified at trial on behalf of Plaintiffs.1  He is an Iowa licensed attorney 
who has been practicing since 1985.  His practice primarily consists of personal injury and 
representing claimants in workers’ compensation actions.  As to his workers’ compensation 
cases, he testified that the majority of them settle and do not proceed to trial.  In helping his 
clients determine whether to settle a case, he testified that, generally, his practice is to educate 
his clients on the relevant law and the various options available to the client.  Mr. Petrzelka 
testified that settlement is the client’s decision, and not the attorney’s decision.   
While indicating that he was not talking about Defendant’s workers’ compensation case 
specifically, Mr. Petrzelka testified that if a client informs him that the client wishes to settle a 
case, he will ask the client if the client wishes to think about it more, before that decision is 
conveyed to opposing counsel.  He testified that his clients frequently have had “buyer’s 
                                                          
1 Defendant objected to Mr. Petrzelka’s testimony on the basis that the testimony violated 
the attorney-client privilege.  The Court ruled on this objection on the record at trial, finding that 
the privilege had been waived to some extent, and did not apply in other regards, and the Court 
instructed Mr. Petrzelka to testify accordingly.  Additional analysis on this issue is set forth in 
the Conclusions of Law section below.      
E-FILED                    EQCV094006 - 2021 AUG 09 09:22 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 2 of 14

3 
 
remorse,” regardless of whether they chose to settle the case or pursue trial.  He testified that, 
excluding this case, he had never been accused of settling a case without his client’s permission.   
As to the underlying workers’ compensation case, on May 31, 2018, Mr. Petrzelka’s 
office notified the Workers’ Compensation Commissioner that Defendant requested a hearing on 
his workers’ compensation claim.  (Exhibit A).  A hearing was scheduled for November 21, 
2018.  (Exhibit B).     
Mr. Petrzelka testified that, on November 13, 2018 (about one week before the scheduled 
hearing), Defendant gave him permission to communicate with opposing counsel to settle 
Defendant’s workers’ compensation case.  Based on what Defendant told him, Mr. Petrzelka 
testified that it was his understanding that the underlying workers’ compensation case was 
settled.   
Exhibit 1 is a letter from Matthew Grotnes (Plaintiffs’ counsel for the workers’ 
compensation claim) to Mr. Petrzelka, dated November 13, 2018.  The letter indicates that 
“[p]ursuant to our negotiated settlement, [Plaintiffs] will pay [Defendant] $20,000 new money in 
a lump sum in exchange for a Compromise Settlement of his workers’ compensation claim of 
November 26, 2014.”  The letter continued, noting that “[i]n addition, [Plaintiffs] will reimburse 
your office for the IME with Dr. Taylor in the amount of $2,512.50.”  (Exhibit 1).  Mr. Petrzelka, 
understood this letter to reflect the terms of the settlement agreement.   
Exhibit 2 contains an email dated November 16, 2018, from Mr. Grotnes to the Division 
of Workers’ Compensation, informing the agency that “Matt Petrzelka and I have settled the 
case.”  (Exhibit 2).  The agency responded, confirming receipt of the email.  (Id.).  Mr. Petrzelka 
was copied on the email from Mr. Grotnes (and on the agency’s responsive email).  (Id.).  Mr. 
Petrzelka did not respond to either email to indicate that there was no settlement agreement.  Mr. 
E-FILED                    EQCV094006 - 2021 AUG 09 09:22 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 3 of 14

4 
 
Petrzelka testified that he did not respond to either email because he understood that the case was 
settled.    
 
Exhibit 4 is a copy of the settlement documents.   Mr. Grotnes signed the settlement 
agreement on November 13, 2018 – just three days before he emailed the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation, and the same date as the phone call with Mr. Petrzelka.  He sent the documents, 
with a cover letter that has been admitted as Exhibit E, to Mr. Petrzelka that same date.2   
Upon receiving the settlement documents from Mr. Grotnes, Mr. Petrzelka sent a copy of 
the documents to Defendant on November 19, 2018.  (See Exhibit G).  In his email to Defendant, 
Mr. Petrzelka told Defendant that he would “appreciate [Defendant] reviewing these documents 
in detail and thereafter contacting me for the purpose of discussing any questions you have.”  
(Exhibit G).  Mr. Petrzelka’s email also instructed Defendant to sign the documents if Defendant 
did not have any questions.  (Id.).  Defendant’s Exhibit D is a copy of the last page of the 
settlement documents, and contains a “Sign and Date” sticker pointing to Defendant’s signature 
block.  (Exhibit D).  The settlement documents were not signed by either Mr. Petrzelka or 
Defendant.   
Mr. Petrzelka and his staff made attempts to contact Defendant “to discuss signing the 
settlement documents.”  (Exhibit 3).  Mr. Petrzelka met with Defendant on or about February 21, 
2019.  (Id.).  According to a document filed by Mr. Petrzelka with the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner, when Defendant met with Mr. Petrzelka at the February 21, 2019, 
meeting, Defendant told Mr. Petrzelka that “he was not going to follow through with the terms of 
the settlement.”  (Exhibit 3).  Mr. Petrzelka did not testify at trial regarding what Defendant told 
                                                          
2  Mr. Petrzelka testified he believed that the settlement documents (as reflected in 
Exhibit 4) accurately reflected the terms of the settlement agreement that was reached with 
opposing counsel. 
    
E-FILED                    EQCV094006 - 2021 AUG 09 09:22 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 4 of 14

5 
 
him during this meeting,3 but he did testify that he would not put anything into a pleading that he 
did not believe to be true.  The Court finds that Mr. Petrzelka and Defendant did have a 
conversation on or about February 21, 2019, and that Mr. Petrzelka’s impression from that 
conversation was that Defendant “was not going to follow through with the terms of the 
settlement.” 
 
Defendant called Carissa Gericke to testify on his behalf.  In his direct examination, 
Defendant asked Mr. Gericke the following: 
[In] April 2018, we went to see Mr. Matt Petrzelka to discuss the settlement with Matt 
Petrzelka at that time.  Would you agree that there was no settlement agreement on - - in 
April of 2018 when we met with Matt Petrzelka? 
 
Counsel for Plaintiffs objected that the question was a leading question on direct examination.  
Since the matter was being heard in equity, the Court allowed the witness to answer subject to 
the objection.  However, the question was a leading question, and Plaintiffs’ objection is valid.  
Further, the Court warned Defendant that, if the evidence indicates that a third party was present 
during any conversations Defendant had with Mr. Petrzelka, it could be possible that the 
attorney-client privilege is waived for those statements.  Mr. Gericke testified that there was no 
agreement to settle during the April 2018 meeting.  Defendant then decided to ask Mr. Gericke 
no further questions. 
 
Defendant testified on his own behalf.  Defendant testified that he did not agree to the 
settlement, citing Exhibit C and the lack of his signature.  Defendant testified that he met with 
                                                          
3  Citing attorney-client privilege, Mr. Petrzelka refused to answer a question whether 
Defendant told him that he would not follow through with the settlement.  The information being 
elicited did not clearly fall within the Court’s pretrial ruling regarding the attorney-client 
privilege and Mr. Petrzelka’s testimony.  Counsel for Plaintiffs instead asked Mr. Petrzelka if he 
would include any information in a pleading that was not true, and Mr. Petrzelka testified that he 
would not.  This record is sufficient to establish that Mr. Petrzelka believes that the information 
in Exhibit 3 is accurate.  
E-FILED                    EQCV094006 - 2021 AUG 09 09:22 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 5 of 14

6 
 
Mr. Petrzelka in April 2018 and that Ms. Gericke was also present.  Defendant requested a 
hearing on his workers’ compensation claim, and was notified by Mr. Petrzelka’s office that the 
hearing was set for November 21, 2018. 
 
Defendant testified that, on November 20, 2018, Mr. Petrzelka told Defendant that the 
November 21 hearing was cancelled.  Defendant testified that he later received settlement papers 
in the mail at the end of November 2018, and he did not sign the settlement papers. 
 
According to Defendant, he met with Mr. Petrzelka in February 2019, and told Mr. 
Petrzelka that he was not in agreement with the settlement.  Defendant testified that Mr. 
Petrzelka reached this settlement agreement without his consent. 
 
On cross-examination, Defendant claimed that, prior to November 13, 2018, Defendant 
had never been told that there was an offer to settle the case for $20,000.  Defendant testified that 
the settlement offer was never conveyed to Defendant prior to Defendant’s receipt of the 
settlement documents in the mail. 
 
Additional factual findings are set forth in the Court’s analysis below. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW AND ANALYSIS 
Attorney-Client Privilege 
 
The Court first addresses Defendant’s claim that Mr. Petrzelka’s testimony violated his 
attorney-client privilege.  The Court ruled on this issue on the record, but provides additional 
information in this Order.   
“Our law recognizes that a confidential communication between an attorney and the 
attorney’s client is absolutely privileged from disclosure against the will of the client.”  Fenceroy 
v. Gelita USA, Inc., 908 N.W.2d 235, 242-43 (Iowa 2018).  “Under Iowa law, the privilege is 
created by statute.”  Progressive Cas. Ins. Co. v. F.D.I.C., 302 F.R.D. 497, 500 (N.D. Iowa 2014) 
E-FILED                    EQCV094006 - 2021 AUG 09 09:22 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 6 of 14

7 
 
(citing Iowa Code § 622.10).  “The party seeking to assert the privilege bears the burden to show 
an attorney-client relationship existed and that the communication was made in confidence.”  
Keefe v. Bernard, 774 N.W.2d 663, 669 (Iowa 2009).  “Because it impedes the full and free 
discovery of the truth, the attorney-client privilege is strictly construed.”  Miller v. Cont’l Ins. 
Co., 392 N.W.2d 500, 504 (Iowa 1986).    
“[V]oluntary disclosure of the content of a privileged communication constitutes waiver 
as to all other communications on the same subject.”  Id. at 504-05.  An individual “waived 
objection to an attorney’s testimony when the client testifies to the communications.”  Kantaris 
v. Kantaris, 169 N.W.2d 824, 830 (Iowa 1969).   
There is no dispute in this case that Mr. Petrzelka had an attorney-client relationship with 
Defendant.  At the trial in this matter, the Court ruled prior to the presentation of evidence that 
Mr. Petrzelka could testify about any matters that were said to him by his client that were 
intended to be transmitted to a third party.  Because Defendant intended these communications to 
be passed along by Mr. Petrzelka to a third-party, the communication are not privileged.  See 
Bailey v. Chicago, B & Q.R. Co., 179 N.W.2d 560, 564 (Iowa 1970) (finding that “no privilege 
protection ordinarily attends when a client imparts information to his attorney, (1) for transmittal 
to others; or (2) which the attorney is duty bound to make public; or (3) which is contained in 
any pleading or other document publicly filed or in some manner publicized for and on behalf of 
the communicant.”).  Any information that Defendant provided Mr. Petrzelka “for transmittal to 
others” (including opposing counsel) is not protected.   
In addition, the Court also found that Defendant had waived the privilege in a couple of 
regards.  First, Defendant offered Exhibit G, which is a letter emailed to him by Mr. Petrzelka.  
Defendant concedes that he waived any privilege as to Exhibit G.   
E-FILED                    EQCV094006 - 2021 AUG 09 09:22 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 7 of 14

8 
 
The Court also found that Defendant had implicitly waived privilege as to other matters.  
First, the Court permitted Mr. Petrzelka to testify as to his “opinions and impressions.”  The 
Court noted that it was not confident that such matters were covered by the privilege.  But even 
if they were, Defendant denied that he ever told Mr. Petrzelka that he was interested in settling 
the case.  This denial is an affirmative defense raised by Defendant that Mr. Petrzelka acted 
without his authorization.  The Court found that Mr. Petrzelka was permitted to testify as to his 
belief that he had authorization, based on what Defendant told him.   
The Iowa Court of Appeals has cited three criteria in determining if a client implicitly 
waives the attorney-client privilege.  See B&F Jacobson Lumber & Hardware, L.L.P. v. Acuity, 
912 N.W.2d 500 (Table), 2017 WL 6513961 *5 (Iowa App. Dec. 20, 2017) (citing Hearn v. 
Rhay, 68 F.R.D. 574, 578-82 (E.D. Wash. 1975).  First, the Court looks at whether assertion of 
the privilege was a result of an affirmative act, such as raising an affirmative defense.  As set 
forth above, Defendant raised a defense that Mr. Petrzelka proceeded to settlement without his 
authorization.  This “put the protected information at issue by making it relevant to the case.”  Id.  
Finally, “application of the privilege would have denied the opposing party access to information 
vital” to the case.  Id.  
The Court found that Defendant’s testimony placed at issue the communications between 
Defendant and Mr. Petrzelka related to whether the settlement offer was conveyed by Mr. 
Petrzelka to Defendant and (to the extent they were covered by the privilege, anyway), Mr. 
Petrzelka’s impressions and opinions based on what Defendant told him.  The Court also notes 
that, through his testimony, Defendant also waived any privilege relating to his conversation 
with Mr. Petrzelka in April 2018, because he conceded that a third party (Ms. Gericke) was 
present during the conversations. 
E-FILED                    EQCV094006 - 2021 AUG 09 09:22 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 8 of 14

9 
 
For all the reasons cited above, the Court affirms the rulings it made at trial regarding the 
attorney-client privilege, waiver, and Mr. Petrzelka’s testimony.     
Claim for Specific Performance of Settlement Agreement 
 
Turning to the underlying claim, Plaintiffs seek an order requiring Defendant to sign the 
settlement documents.  “The plaintiff’s burden in a suit for specific performance is to prove by 
clear, satisfactory, and convincing evidence the terms of the contract declared upon in his or her 
pleadings.”  H & W Motor Express v. Christ, 516 N.W.2d 912, 913 (Iowa App. 1994).  A 
settlement agreement need not be in writing or signed in order to be valid.  “When the terms of 
an agreement are definitely fixed so that nothing remains except to reduce them to writing, an 
oral contract will be upheld.”  Id. at 914.  “Whether preliminary negotiations ripened into an oral 
contract depends on the intention of the parties as gleaned from the facts of the case.”  Id.   
 
“The making of a settlement offer is an act generally within the scope of authority of an 
attorney handling personal injury litigation for a client.”  Kirk Gross Co. v. Schwab, 728 N.W.2d 
60 (Table), 2006 WL 3436464 *2 (Iowa App. Nov. 30, 2006).  “However, an attorney cannot 
settle or compromise a claim of his or her client without special authority.”  Id.  “Although an 
attorney is presumed to act with authority, the presumption is not conclusive and may be 
rebutted.”  Id.  “The presumption is overcome only be clear and satisfactory proof.”  Id. 
 
Based on the evidence presented and the Court’s evaluation of the credibility of the 
witnesses, the Court finds that Plaintiffs have met their burden to establish by clear, satisfactory, 
and convincing evidence that Defendant agreed to the terms of the settlement that are set forth in 
Exhibit 4.  The evidence establishes that, as of April or May 2018, Defendant desired to proceed 
to a hearing on his workers’ compensation claim.  Consistent with Defendant’s desire, Mr. 
Petrzelka requested that a hearing be set.  A hearing was set for November 21, 2018.  Mr. 
E-FILED                    EQCV094006 - 2021 AUG 09 09:22 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 9 of 14

10 
 
Petrzelka testified that, about one week prior to this hearing, Defendant provided authorization 
for Mr. Petrzelka to settle the matter.  Mr. Petrzelka’s testimony directly contradicts Defendant’s 
testimony that there were no settlement communications between Mr. Petrzelka and Defendant, 
prior to Defendant’s receipt of the settlement documents.  Having observed the parties testify, 
and considering the other evidence, the Court finds Mr. Petrzelka’s testimony to be credible on 
this issue. 
 
First, Mr. Petrzelka has not been accused, prior to this case, of settling a matter without 
client approval throughout his lengthy career.  If Mr. Petrzelka was in the habit of cancelling 
hearings and settling cases without any communication with his client, it would be difficult to 
believe that no prior claims of an unauthorized settlement have been made against him.  Mr. 
Petrzelka also testified that he never settles a case without client approval, and that testimony is 
supported by the fact that he has never before been accused of settling a case without client 
approval.   
 
Second, the letter sent from Mr. Petrzelka to Defendant on November 19, 2018, is not 
consistent with Defendant’s claim that he had not discussed any possible settlement prior to 
receipt of the letter.  The letter simply states that the settlement documents are enclosed, as if 
they were to be expected.  For example, the letter does not say “Good news, we have received an 
offer to settle this case for $20,000” or anything to that effect.  Yet, despite receiving these 
documents in November 2018, the record does not reflect that Defendant objected to them at any 
point prior to February 2019.   
 
Third, Mr. Petrzelka acted consistent with Defendant’s desire in May 2018, when he 
requested a hearing on Defendant’s behalf.  The record does not reflect any motive on Mr. 
Petrzelka’s part to schedule a hearing in May 2018, at his client’s request, but then a week before 
E-FILED                    EQCV094006 - 2021 AUG 09 09:22 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 10 of 14

11 
 
the hearing, settle the matter and cancel the hearing without any authorization by his client.  
Indeed, the documents in evidence support the timeline outlined by Mr. Petrzelka’s testimony. 
 
Fourth, Mr. Petrzelka’s prior filing with the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commission 
(Exhibit 3) supports his testimony.  In that filing, Mr. Petrzelka stated that Defendant indicated 
he was “not going to follow through with the terms of the settlement.”  This language 
demonstrates an understanding that an agreement had been reached, and that the terms were 
certain.  Mr. Petrzelka also noted that he may be called upon to enforce a settlement, again 
indicating his understanding that his client has agreed to the settlement.  Mr. Petrzelka’s 
understanding that Defendant agreed to the settlement is genuine and supported by this earlier 
documentary evidence.  Yet he would not have had this understanding if he had not, as 
Defendant claims, even talked with Defendant about settlement prior to sending Defendant the 
settlement documents. 
 
Fourth, the evidence does not overcome the presumption that “an attorney is presumed to 
act with authority.”  Kirk Gross Co. v. Schwab, 728 N.W.2d 60 (Table), 2006 WL 3436464 *2 
(Iowa App. Nov. 30, 2006).  Defendant’s complete denial that Mr. Petrzelka discussed the 
settlement with him at any time prior to his receipt of the settlement documents is difficult to 
believe, and does not overcome the presumption.  This would be a closer case if Defendant had 
conceded that he met with Mr. Petrzelka to discuss settlement, but that Mr. Petrzelka had 
misinterpreted Defendant’s statements to provide authorization for settlement.  But Defendant’s 
testimony completely denies that such a meeting took place.  Therefore, this is not a case where a 
client met with his attorney to discuss settlement, and the attorney misunderstood the client’s 
statements.  Either (1) Defendant met with Mr. Petrzelka to discuss settlement in November 
2018, as Mr. Petrzelka testified; or (2) Defendant never met with Mr. Petrzelka to discuss 
E-FILED                    EQCV094006 - 2021 AUG 09 09:22 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 11 of 14

12 
 
settlement, and Defendant simply received the settlement documents in the mail, as Defendant 
testified.  Having observed the demeanor of the witnesses, and considered the rest of the 
evidence, the Court has little trouble concluding that Mr. Petrzelka’s testimony is far more 
credible on that point.  Defendant’s lack of credibility in his denial about meeting with Mr. 
Petrazelka regarding settlement in November 2018 also impacts the Court’s view of the rest of 
his testimony. 
 
Defendant appears to be of the mindset that a contract is not complete until it is signed.  
In his direct examination, when noting that he did not agree to the settlement, Defendant cited 
the lack of his signature or the signature of a notary.  Defendant then argued that the timeline 
supports his claims.  However, as set forth above, the relevant documents that were admitted into 
evidence all support a finding that, in the week prior to the hearing, the parties reached a 
settlement.    
 
For all these reasons, the Court finds that Defendant reached an agreement to be bound 
by the terms set forth in the Settlement Agreement (Exhibit 4).  Plaintiffs are entitled to an order 
requiring Defendant to specifically perform under that contract, i.e., to sign the settlement 
documents. 
 
Accordingly: 
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED that judgment on the 
Petition for Specific Performance is entered in favor of Plaintiffs and against Defendant.  The 
Court shall order specific performance of the contract.    
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Defendant Herman T. Robinson shall, within thirty 
calendar days of today’s date, specifically perform under the contract by signing his name to the 
Settlement Documents, a copy of which was entered into this case as Exhibit 4, and delivering 
E-FILED                    EQCV094006 - 2021 AUG 09 09:22 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 12 of 14

13 
 
the signed documents to counsel for Plaintiffs.  Defendant shall not interfere with the submission 
of the signed documents to the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner.  Plaintiffs’ counsel 
shall provide information to Defendant regarding the method for delivery of the signed 
documents to Plaintiffs’ counsel.      
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that costs of this action are assessed to Defendant. 
Clerk to Notify. 
 
     
 
 
E-FILED                    EQCV094006 - 2021 AUG 09 09:22 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 13 of 14

State of Iowa Courts
Case Number
Case Title
EQCV094006
RECKER INC ETAL VS HERMAN T ROBINSON
Type:
ORDER FOR JUDGMENT
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2021-08-09 21:22:11
E-FILED                    EQCV094006 - 2021 AUG 09 09:22 PM             LINN    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 14 of 14
