Case Number: 22700064.01
Case Title:  MARTINEZ, EVANGELINA V. MCDONALD'S RESTAURANTS OF IOWA, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Martinez Evangelina- 22700064.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
EVANGELINA MARTINEZ, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
   File No. 22700064.01 
 
 
  :  
 
 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
MCDONALD’S RESTAURANTS OF  
  : 
IOWA, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :                  ARBITRATION DECISION  
 
Employer, 
  :                           
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
AMERICAN ZURICH INSURANCE 
  : 
COMPANY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :                    Headnote Nos.: 1402.40,  
 
Defendants. 
  : 
1402.60, 1803, 4000.2 
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Evangelina “Angel” Martinez, filed a petition in arbitration seeking 
workers’ compensation benefits against defendants McDonald’s Restaurants of Iowa, 
Inc., employer, and American Zurich Insurance Company, insurer. In accordance with 
agency scheduling procedures and pursuant to the Order of the Commissioner in the 
matter of the Coronavirus/COVID-19 Impact on Hearings, the hearing was held on April 
10, 2023, via Zoom. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing. In the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
The evidentiary record consists of Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 6 and 
Defendants’ Exhibits A through C. Claimant testified on her own behalf. No other 
witnesses were called to testify. The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the 
evidentiary hearing. All parties filed their post-hearing briefs on or before May 22, 2023, 
at which time the case was deemed fully submitted to the undersigned. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Nov-15  13:26:47     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MARTINEZ V. MCDONALD’S RESTAURANTS OF IOWA, INC.  
Page 2 
 
1. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to temporary disability and/or 
healing period benefits; 
 
2. Whether the alleged injury caused permanent disability and, if so, the 
extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits, if any; 
 
3. The commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any are awarded; 
 
4. Whether claimant is entitled to payment of medical expenses;  
 
5. Penalty benefits; and 
 
6. Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in 
what amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
The claimant at the center of this case is Angel Martinez (hereinafter “Martinez”). 
At the time of the hearing, Martinez was 22 years old. (Hearing Transcript, page 9). She 
graduated from high school in California before moving to Iowa in June 2018. (Hr. Tr., 
pp. 9-10) Martinez started working for McDonald’s Restaurants of Iowa, the defendant 
employer, in the beginning of December 2021. (Hr. Tr., pp. 10-11) She was hired to 
work as a cashier at one of the drive-thru windows. Her job duties consisted of greeting 
customers, processing payments, packaging orders, and passing completed orders to 
customers through the drive-thru window. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 11-12) 
Martinez worked at McDonald’s until February 2022, when she accepted a part-
time position as a health aide at Silver Oaks Nursing and Rehabilitation Center. (See 
Hr. Tr., pp. 41-42; Ex. 5, Depo. p. 26) As a health aide, Martinez delivered food, filled 
drinks, folded silverware, and washed dishes. (Ex. 5, Depo. p. 26) According to 
Martinez, she only worked at Silver Oaks for approximately one month before turning in 
her two-week notice. (Ex. 5, Depo. pp. 32-33) She told her manager that she could not 
handle the job duties required of a health aide. (Id.)  
Despite her concerns with the health aide position at Silver Oaks, Martinez 
accepted a health aide position at Linn Manor Care Center on a part-time basis. (Ex. 5, 
Depo. p. 34) Martinez asserts the job duties at Linn Manor were similar to the job duties 
at Silver Oaks; however, she testified she did not have to wash dishes at Linn Manor. 
(Ex. 5, Depo. pp. 34-35) Martinez was interested in working a full-time position with Linn 
Manor; however, the position would have required her to work mornings, and she did 
not have transportation available until the afternoon. (Ex. 5, Depo. pp. 35-36) Martinez 
believes she worked at Linn Manor for approximately six months. (Ex. 5, Depo. p. 35)  

MARTINEZ V. MCDONALD’S RESTAURANTS OF IOWA, INC.  
Page 3 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was working as a cashier at a Casey’s General 
Store. (Hr. Tr., pp. 41-43; Ex. 5, Depo. p. 38) She works approximately 22 hours per 
week. (Ex. 5, Depo. p. 39) 
 
In the instant case, Martinez is alleging she sustained an injury to her left upper 
extremity when she slipped and fell while working for the defendant employer on 
December 24, 2021. More specifically, Martinez was walking out of the bathroom when 
she slipped on a recently mopped floor. (Hr. Tr., pp. 13-14) Martinez fell backwards, 
extending her left arm to catch herself. (Id.) Upon impact, claimant felt immediate pain 
radiating up into her left shoulder and down into her left wrist. (Id.) After her co-workers 
helped her stand, claimant reported the injury to her shift manager. (Hr. Tr., pp. 15-16) 
She was unable to finish her shift. (Hr. Tr., p. 16) 
Martinez’s grandmother picked her up from work and drove her to Hiawatha 
Mercy Emergency Medical Center for treatment. (Hr. Tr., pp. 18-19) After describing the 
work injury, claimant complained of pain in her left elbow, left forearm, and left wrist. 
(Claimant’s Exhibit 1, page 3) X-rays of the left arm revealed a closed nondisplaced 
radial neck fracture. (Ex. 1, p. 8) Claimant’s left arm was splinted, and she was provided 
a sling for comfort. (Ex. 1, pp. 5, 7) She was also scheduled to present to Lisa Coester, 
M.D. for an orthopedic evaluation. (Ex. 1, p. 7) 
The following day, Martinez contacted her manager and told her what had 
happened. (Ex. 5, Depo. p. 17)  At some point she also provided her manager with a 
doctor’s note from the emergency room for the days she was taken off work. (Id.) 
 
Dr. Coester performed an initial evaluation of Martinez on December 28, 2021. 
(Ex. 2, p. 9) She reviewed the x-rays from Mercy and confirmed the nondisplaced radial 
neck fracture. (Id.) Dr. Coester provided claimant with a removable wrist splint, and 
instructed her to remove the sling and splint three times each day and gently move her 
elbow and wrist around. (Ex. 2, p. 10) Dr. Coester then restricted Martinez from working 
until January 12, 2022. (Ex. 2, p. 11) 
 
The next day, a representative from Physician’s Clinic of Iowa (“PCI”) contacted 
the insurance company PCI had listed for McDonald’s and was told a search of 
Martinez’s name did not return a valid claim. (Ex. 2, p. 7) On January 3, 2022, the same 
representative contacted the defendant employer and spoke with “Laura” who is 
believed to be Martinez’s manager. According to Laura, a claim was filed for Martinez; 
however, it was filed as an “incident” and not a workers’ compensation injury as 
Martinez had finished her shift and was leaving when she slipped on the wet floor. (Id.) 
Laura provided the representative with contact information for an individual with 
McDonald’s corporate office. (Id.) The representative subsequently reached out to the 
corporate office and requested workers’ compensation information. (Id.)  
 
Martinez returned to see Dr. Coester on January 12, 2022. (Ex. 2, p. 3) At the 
evaluation, claimant reported that her wrist was no longer bothering her, but she was 
concerned about the limited range of motion in her elbow. (Id.) Dr. Coester referred 
claimant for physical therapy and provided she could return to work with no use of the 
left arm. (Ex. 2, p. 4) 

MARTINEZ V. MCDONALD’S RESTAURANTS OF IOWA, INC.  
Page 4 
 
 
On January 13, 2022, the PCI representative spoke with Laura and McDonald’s 
corporate office and obtained contact information for James West with Gallagher 
Bassett, a third-party administrator. (Ex. 2, p. 7) The PCI representative left Mr. West 
voicemails on January 13, January 21, and January 28. (Ex. 2, pp. 7-8) When no one 
from McDonald’s or Gallagher Bassett returned her calls, the PCI representative ceased 
attempts to obtain workers’ compensation information on May 3, 2022. (Ex. 2, p. 8) 
 
Martinez returned to work on January 15, 2022. (Hr. Tr., p. 23) She did not 
receive workers’ compensation benefits during the three-week period that she was off 
work. (Hr. Tr., pp. 23-24) Martinez asserts that she contacted the defendant employer 
on multiple occasions to inquire about workers’ compensation benefits; however, her 
manager never followed up with her. (Hr. Tr., pp. 23-25) Martinez further asserts she 
never received a formal denial letter from defendants. (Hr. Tr., p. 25)  There is no 
evidence defendants provided a factual or legal explanation of their investigation or the 
basis for their denial. 
 
The defendants have stipulated that claimant sustained an injury, which arose 
out of and in the course of her employment, on December 24, 2021. (Hearing Report, p. 
1) Dr. Coester returned claimant to work with restrictions on January 12, 2022. (Ex. 2, p. 
11) Claimant’s first day back to work was January 15, 2022. (Hr. Tr., p. 23) I find 
claimant was off work and in a period of recovery between December 25, 2021, and 
January 14, 2022. 
 
Physical therapy was initiated on January 26, 2022. (Ex. 3, p. 1) At the initial 
session, claimant reported pain in the left elbow, left wrist, left shoulder, and neck. (Id.) 
She demonstrated decreased range of motion and strength. (Id.) She also conveyed 
that the work being assigned to her at McDonald’s exceeded her then-current 
restrictions. (Id.) It was recommended that claimant attend rehabilitative therapy twice 
per week for approximately 8 weeks. (Ex. 3, p. 4) 
 
Claimant ultimately presented for physical therapy between January 26, 2022, 
and February 18, 2022. (Ex. 3, pp. 1-21) She demonstrated steady improvement with 
each appointment. For instance, by her second appointment, claimant was only lacking 
nine degrees of elbow extension and she demonstrated full active supination. (Ex. 3, p. 
11) Unfortunately, she also demonstrated “very poor” grip strength. (Id.) Claimant’s left 
elbow extension appeared to be equal to her right elbow extension at her February 18, 
2022, appointment. (Ex. 3, p. 21) Despite recommendations to continue, claimant could 
not return to physical therapy following her February 18, 2022, session for financial 
reasons. (See Ex. 3, p. 22)  
 
Martinez has not received any treatment for her left arm since the February 18, 
2022, physical therapy appointment. However, she testified she continued to experience 
ongoing symptoms in her left arm.  She testified she did not obtain additional treatment 
because her insurance denied her requests, citing that the care requested was related 
to a work comp injury. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 29-30, 32)  She is requesting an order 
instructing defendants to authorize ongoing medical care, including physical therapy. 
(Hr. Tr., pp. 30-31) 

MARTINEZ V. MCDONALD’S RESTAURANTS OF IOWA, INC.  
Page 5 
 
 
As of the date of hearing, Martinez’s self-imposed restrictions consist of not lifting 
anything weighing more than 20 pounds with her left hand. She asserts that she does 
not have full range of motion in her left arm, and her left arm is now significantly shorter 
than her right arm due to the lack of treatment she received. (Hr. Tr., pp. 26-27) 
 
Martinez first seeks an award of temporary disability, or healing period benefits, 
for the time she was off work between December 25, 2021, and January 14, 2022. 
Claimant was clearly taken off work and placed on restrictions by Dr. Coester on 
December 28, 2021. (Ex. 2, p. 11) Martinez was off work from December 25, 2021, until 
she returned to work on January 15, 2022. Defendants dispute entitlement to temporary 
benefits, but stipulate that claimant was off work during this period of time.  I find that 
claimant established she was not working, was not at maximum medical improvement, 
and was not capable of substantially similar employment between December 25, 2021, 
and January 14, 2022. 
 
In addition to temporary benefits, Martinez seeks an award of past medical 
expenses. The expenses are located at Claimant’s Exhibit 1, page 9 and Claimant’s 
Exhibit 6. Martinez is requesting reimbursement of $745.00 owed to Physician’s Clinic 
of Iowa, P.C. for treatment she received between December 28, 2021, and January 15, 
2022. She is also requesting reimbursement for $30.00 owed to Mercy Medical Center 
in Hiawatha, Iowa for treatment she received on December 24, 2021. (Ex. 1, p. 9) The 
care claimant received was for the alleged left arm condition. I find the medical 
expenses are causally related, reasonable, and necessary. 
Martinez argues that she requires ongoing and future medical treatment and that 
she has not yet achieved maximum medical improvement.  In doing so, claimant implies 
that the issue of permanency is not ripe for determination.  Indeed, no physician has 
placed claimant at maximum medical improvement or provided an impairment 
assessment.  The evidentiary record supports a finding that claimant is not at maximum 
medical improvement as it relates to the left arm condition.  It is currently unknown 
whether the injury to the left arm will result in permanent impairment.  As such, I find the 
issue of permanency is not ripe for adjudication. 
Martinez is not seeking alternate medical care under Iowa Code section 85.27; 
however, she is requesting the authorization of ongoing medical treatment. (Hr. Tr., p. 
28) This is a recently accepted claim and no physician has placed claimant at maximum 
medical improvement. As such, the employer shall furnish reasonable medical services 
for the left arm condition. 
Lastly, Martinez asserts a claim for penalty benefits, contending that defendants 
delayed or denied weekly benefits. Martinez established conclusively that defendants 
denied liability and have paid no weekly benefits in this claim.  Therefore, I find that 
Martinez has proven a delay or denial of weekly benefits. 
Defendants contend they were aware of Martinez’s slip and fall; however, they 
were unaware that she was claiming the same was a work-related injury until Martinez 
filed a petition for workers’ compensation benefits.  Defendants further contend they 
were initially prevented from conducting any additional investigation due to claimant 
refusing to present for a deposition or respond to discovery requests.  Because 

MARTINEZ V. MCDONALD’S RESTAURANTS OF IOWA, INC.  
Page 6 
 
claimant’s deposition was not conducted until February 28, 2023, ten days before the 
30-day deadline, defendants argue they were never given an opportunity to conclude 
their investigation.  
Defendants’ allegations regarding claimant’s cooperation with discovery are 
certainly concerning; however, they do not excuse the initial lack of investigation 
following the work-related injury.   
Martinez testified she reported the injury to her assistant manager shortly after 
the injury occurred.  She further testified that between the date of injury and December 
28, 2021, she contacted her store manager and relayed that she was scheduled to 
present to the Physicians’ Clinic of Iowa for her work injury. (Hr. Tr., pp. 20-21)  The 
medical records from the Physicians’ Clinic of Iowa detail a conversation between a PCI 
representative and an individual alleged to be claimant’s manager.  The records support 
a finding that claimant’s manager was aware of the slip and fall on December 24, 2021.  
The manager filed the claim as an “incident” and not a workers’ compensation injury as 
Martinez had finished her shift and was leaving when she slipped on the wet floor. (Ex. 
2, p. 7)  The medical records further indicate that the PCI representative communicated 
with defendants on a number of occasions regarding the alleged work injury.   
Despite the above communications, there is no evidence defendants conducted 
an investigation of Martinez’s claim.  If defendants conducted an investigation, I identify 
no evidence in this record demonstrating the defendants contemporaneously conveyed 
the basis for their denial of benefits to Martinez. 
I find defendants failed to prove they had a reasonable basis for the denial or 
delay of benefits.  I find that the employer failed to produce any evidence of having 
conducted a reasonable investigation of this claim.  I find defendants produced no 
evidence of communication of their alleged basis or bases for denying Martinez’s claim.  
Ultimately, I find the defendants failed to prove a reasonable basis for delay or denial as 
well as failed to prove they communicated the alleged basis for denial. 
Costs will be addressed in the conclusions of law section. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue to be decided is whether claimant has reached maximum medical 
improvement for her left arm condition. The Iowa Supreme Court has described MMI as 
“stabilization of the condition or at least a finding that the condition is ‘not likely to remit 
in the future despite medical treatment.’” Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 
779 N.W.2d 193, 200 (Iowa 2010) (citation omitted). 
In the matter at hand, no physician has placed claimant at MMI with respect to 
the left wrist or left arm conditions. As a result, I found claimant has not reached MMI for 
her condition. I therefore conclude claimant's claim for permanent disability is not yet 
ripe for determination. Claimant has not received the care she needs and desires. Such 
treatment should be undertaken before a determination of claimant's permanent 
disability occurs. 

MARTINEZ V. MCDONALD’S RESTAURANTS OF IOWA, INC.  
Page 7 
 
The next issue to be addressed is whether claimant is entitled to temporary 
disability benefits. 
The Iowa Supreme Court has specifically noted that a claimant's healing period 
terminates whenever the first of three factors in Iowa Code section 85.34(1) is met. 
Evenson v. Winnebago Industries. Inc., 881 N.W.2d 360 (Iowa 2016). The factors are 
whether (1) “the employee has returned to work,” (2) “it is medically indicated that 
significant improvement from the injury is not anticipated” (MMI), or (3) “the employee is 
medically capable of returning to employment substantially similar to the employment in 
which the employee was engaged at the time of injury.” Iowa Code § 85.34(1). 
It is well settled in Iowa that a healing period may be intermittent. Waldinger 
Corp. v. Mettler, 817 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2012); Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 
1986). Healing period may terminate and then begin again. Willis v. Lehigh Portland 
Cement Co., I-2 Iowa Ind. Comm'r Decisions 485 (Review Reopening 1984); Clemens 
v. Iowa Veterans Home, I-1 Iowa Industrial Comm'r Decisions 35 (Review Reopening 
1984); Riesselman v. Carroll Health Center, III Iowa Ind. Comm'r Report 209 (App. 
1982); Junge v. Century Engineering Corp., II Iowa Industrial Comm'r Report 219 (App. 
1981). In multiple healing period scenarios, permanent partial disability is due and 
payable after the end of the first healing period and this is the time interest on unpaid 
benefits begins. Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
The defendants stipulate that claimant sustained a left arm injury, which arose 
out of and in the course of her employment, on December 24, 2021. (Hearing Report, p. 
1) Dr. Coester returned claimant to work with restrictions on January 12, 2022. (Ex. 2, p. 
11) Claimant’s first day back to work was January 15, 2022. (Hr. Tr., p. 23) I find 
claimant was off work and in a period of recovery between December 25, 2021, and 
January 14, 2022.   
Martinez quit working for the defendant employer shortly after returning to work 
from her injury.  She subsequently worked for Silver Oaks, Linn Manor, and Casey’s 
General Store. Claimant does not qualify for additional temporary total, temporary 
partial, or healing period benefits at this time.  Unfortunately, Martinez is in a unique 
position where she is not at MMI, but she is also not entitled to a running award of 
temporary benefits.   
In the hearing report, the parties stipulated that claimant’s gross earnings were 
$237.77 per week.  Martinez was single and entitled to one exemption at the time of her 
injury.  According to the Commissioner’s Ratebook spreadsheet for injuries occurring 
between July 1, 2021, and June 30, 2022, Martinez’s applicable weekly workers’ 
compensation rate is $208.39.  I conclude all weekly compensation benefits should be 
awarded at this rate. 
Martinez asserts that defendants unreasonably delayed and/or denied her 
weekly benefits in this case and that defendants should be ordered to pay penalty 
benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 86.13.  More specifically, claimant contends 
defendants denied her claim and have not established they conducted a timely and 
reasonable investigation or that they contemporaneously conveyed the basis for their 

MARTINEZ V. MCDONALD’S RESTAURANTS OF IOWA, INC.  
Page 8 
 
denial. Defendants contend claimant’s claim was fairly debatable because she did not 
cooperate with their investigation into her allegations.  
Under Iowa's worker's compensation scheme, penalty benefits may be imposed 
against an employer pursuant to Iowa Code section 86.13(4) under certain 
circumstances. 
Under the statute's plain language, if there is a delay in payment absent “a 
reasonable or probable cause or excuse,” the employee is entitled to penalty benefits, 
of up to fifty percent of the amount of benefits that were denied, delayed, or terminated 
without reasonable or probable cause or excuse. Iowa Code § 86.13(4); see also 
Christensen v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 260 (Iowa 1996) (citing earlier 
version of the statute). “The application of the penalty provision does not turn on the 
length of the delay in making the correct compensation payment.” Robbennolt v. Snap-
On Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229, 236 (Iowa 1996). If a delay occurs without a 
reasonable excuse, the commissioner is required to award penalty benefits in some 
amount to the employee. (Id.) 
The statute requires the employer or insurance company to conduct a 
““reasonable investigation and evaluation” into whether benefits are owed to the 
employee, the results of the investigation and evaluation must be the “actual basis” 
relied on by the employer or insurance company to deny, delay, or terminate benefits, 
and the employer or insurance company must contemporaneously convey the basis for 
the denial, delay, or termination of benefits to the employee at the time of the denial, 
delay, or termination of benefits. Iowa Code § 86.13(4). An employer may establish a 
“reasonable cause or excuse” if “the delay was necessary for the insurer to investigate 
the claim,” or if “the employer had a reasonable basis to contest the employee's 
entitlement to benefits.” Christensen, 554 N.W.2d at 260. “A ‘reasonable basis' for 
denial of the claim exists if the claim is ‘fairly debatable.”’ Burton v. Hilltop Care Ctr., 813 
N.W.2d 250, 267 (Iowa 2012). “Whether a claim is ‘fairly debatable’ can generally be 
determined by the court as a matter of law.” (Id.) The issue is whether the employer had 
a reasonable basis to believe no benefits were owed to the claimant. (Id.) “If there was 
no reasonable basis for the employer to have denied the employee's benefits, then the 
court must ‘determine if the defendant knew, or should have known, that the basis for 
denying the employee's claim was unreasonable.’” (Id.) 
Benefits must be paid beginning on the eleventh day after the injury, and “each 
week thereafter during the period for which compensation is payable, and if not paid 
when due,” interest will be imposed. Iowa Code § 85.30. In Robbennolt, the Iowa 
Supreme Court noted, “[i]f the required weekly compensation is timely paid at the end of 
the compensation week, no interest will be imposed .... As an example, if Monday is the 
first day of the compensation week, full payment of the weekly compensation is due the 
following Monday.” Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 235. A payment is “made” when the 
check addressed to the claimant is mailed, or personally delivered to the claimant. 
Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502, 505 (Iowa 1996) (abrogated by 
Keystone Nursing Care Ctr. v. Craddock, 705 N.W.2d 299 (Iowa 2005) (concluding the 
employer's failure to explain to the claimant why it would not pay permanent benefits 

MARTINEZ V. MCDONALD’S RESTAURANTS OF IOWA, INC.  
Page 9 
 
upon the termination of healing period benefits did not support the commissioner's 
award of penalty benefits)). 
Despite stipulating to the December 24, 2021, work injury, there is no evidence 
that defendants paid any TTD benefits prior to the evidentiary hearing.  Defendants did 
not provide argument regarding claimant’s entitlement to TTD benefits in their post-
hearing brief. Therefore, I find claimant has established a delay in the payment of 
benefits as required by section 86.13(4). 
Pursuant to section 86.13(4)(b)(2), the burden therefore shifts to the defendants 
to establish a reasonable or probable cause or excuse for the delay. Section 86.13(4)(c) 
sets forth the elements defendants must satisfy in order to establish the existence of a 
reasonable or probable cause or excuse for the delay. 
Defendants contend they were aware of Martinez’s slip and fall; however, they 
were unaware that she was claiming the same was a work-related injury until Martinez 
filed a petition for workers’ compensation benefits.  Defendants further contend they 
were initially prevented from conducting any additional investigation due to claimant 
refusing to present for a deposition or respond to discovery requests.  Defendants 
assert claimant’s lack of cooperation with discovery mitigates or excuses the delay in 
this case.  Notably, the administrative record is devoid of any motions to compel 
discovery filed on behalf of defendants.  
I find defendants did not establish that a timely and reasonable investigation 
occurred after claimant’s report of injury. Claimant testified there were witnesses to her 
injury and she reported the injury to her manager immediately after it occurred. The 
defendant employer reported the incident to its insurer. In any event, representatives of 
the defendants were made aware that Martinez was reporting the incident as a work-
related injury on January 13, 2022, at the latest. Nevertheless, no investigation was 
undertaken until claimant filed her petition. Without an investigation, including any 
medical opinions or evidence to support their denial, I find defendants had no 
reasonable cause or excuse for the denial of payment of benefits. 
Additionally, defendants did not contemporaneously convey a basis for the delay 
or denial of benefits to Martinez. Iowa Code section 86.13(4)(c)(3). Defendants offer no 
evidence of the manner or timing of any investigation or conveyance of their denial to 
claimant. Defendants have failed to establish the existence of a reasonable or probable 
cause or excuse for their delay. I conclude that defendants failed to carry their burden of 
proof on the penalty issues, and a penalty award is appropriate in some amount. Iowa 
Code section 86.13.  
The purpose of Iowa Code section 86.13 is both punishment for unreasonable 
conduct but also deterrence for future cases. (Id.) at 237. In this regard, the 
Commission is given discretion to determine the amount of the penalty imposed with a 
maximum penalty of 50 percent of the amount of the delayed, or denied, benefits. 
Christensen v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254, 261 (Iowa 1996). 

MARTINEZ V. MCDONALD’S RESTAURANTS OF IOWA, INC.  
Page 10 
 
Penalty benefits are applicable for the TTD benefits in question at the rate of 50 
percent given the length of delay and the lack of investigation. Fifty (50) percent of 
$625.17 is $312.59. 
Finally, claimant also seeks assessment of her costs. Assessment of costs is a 
discretionary function of the agency. Iowa Code section 86.40. Claimant has 
established she sustained a work-related injury and has recovered benefits in this 
contested case proceeding. Therefore, I conclude that it is appropriate to assess 
claimant's costs in some amount. 
Martinez requests assessment of her filing fee ($100.00). This request is 
reasonable and is assessed pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(7). 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendants shall pay claimant temporary total disability benefits from December 
25, 2021, through January 14, 2022. 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the rate of two hundred eight and 39/100 
dollars ($208.39) per week. 
All accrued weekly benefits shall be paid in lump sum with interest pursuant to 
Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendants shall pay claimant penalty benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 
86.13(4) in the amount of three hundred twelve and 59/100 dollars ($312.59). 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for any out-of-pocket medical expenses she 
paid, satisfy any outstanding medical expenses directly with the medical providers, and 
hold claimant harmless for all medical expenses contained in Exhibit 1 and Exhibit 6. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant's costs. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this ___15th __ day of November, 2023. 
 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 

MARTINEZ V. MCDONALD’S RESTAURANTS OF IOWA, INC.  
Page 11 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Matthew Petrzelka (via WCES) 
Stephen William Spencer (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
