Case Number: 20011489.01
Case Title:  SEARS, CHARLES V. CONCRETE TECHNOLOGIES, INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Sears Charles-20011489.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
CHARLES SEARS, 
  : 
 
 
  :                   File No. 20011489.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
CONCRETE TECHNOLOGIES, INC., 
  : 
 
 
  :   
 
Employer, 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :   
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
FEDERATED INSURANCE COMPANY,   : 
 
 
  :            Head Note Nos.:  1800, 1803 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
The claimant, Charles Sears, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Concrete Technologies, Inc., (“CTI”) and its insurer 
Federated Insurance Company.  Michael Norris appeared on behalf of the claimant.  
Michael Kuehner appeared on behalf of the defendants.   
 
The matter came for hearing on November 18, 2021, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips.  Pursuant to an order of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner related to the COVID-19 pandemic, the hearing 
occurred via CourtCall.  The hearing proceeded without significant difficulty.   
 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-4, and 
Defendants’ Exhibits A-G.  The claimant testified on his own behalf.  Emily Maiers was 
appointed the official reporter and custodian of the notes of the proceeding.  The 
evidentiary record closed at the end of the hearing, and the matter was fully submitted 
on January 7, 2022, after briefing by the parties.   
STIPULATIONS 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged 
injury. 
  
2. The claimant sustained an injury arising out of, and in the course of, 
employment, on September 14, 2020.   
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Feb-14  08:37:14     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SEARS V. CONCRETE TECHNOLOGIES, INC. 
Page 2 
 
3. That the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery.   
 
4. That, if the injury is a cause of permanent disability, the disability is an 
industrial disability.   
 
5. That the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if any 
are awarded is March 15, 2021.   
 
6. That the claimant was single and entitled to one exemption, and has a 
weekly rate of compensation of eight hundred seventy two and 59/100 
dollars ($872.59).    
 
7. That prior to the hearing, the claimant was paid five weeks of compensation 
at the rate of eight hundred seventy two and 59/100 dollars ($872.59).   
 
8. That the defendants would pay the claimant’s filing fee, costs of the hearing, 
and an invoice in the exhibits.   
Entitlement to temporary disability and/or healing period benefits is no longer in dispute.  
Medical benefits are also no longer in dispute.  The defendants waived their affirmative 
defenses.   
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
  
2. The extent of permanent partial disability, should any be awarded.   
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Charles Sears, the claimant, was 41 years old at the time of the hearing.  
(Testimony).  He resides in Windsor Heights, Iowa, with his brother.  (Testimony).  He 
has lived in the Des Moines, Iowa, area for his entire adult life.  (Testimony).  He has 
one minor child.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Sears graduated from Barry Goldwater High School in Mesa, Arizona, in 
1999.  (Testimony).  He did not attend college or pursue any additional education after 
graduation.  (Testimony).  He began his working career by working in landscaping.  
(Testimony).  He laid sod, built walls, and transported rocks, for about five years.  
(Testimony).  He then worked intermittently in construction on concrete driveways, and 
ceiling tile demolition.  (Testimony).   

SEARS V. CONCRETE TECHNOLOGIES, INC. 
Page 3 
Mr. Sears then moved to central Iowa.  (Testimony).  He worked for Kirk Welden 
performing underground cable boring for six to seven years.  (Testimony).  Finally, Mr. 
Sears worked for CTI.  (Testimony).  He moved to CTI because he wanted to have 
more of a chance for upward mobility and advancement.  (Testimony).  When he started 
work at CTI, he earned nineteen and 50/100 dollars ($19.50) per hour.  (Testimony).  At 
the time of the incident, he earned twenty five and 00/100 dollars ($25.00) per hour.  
(Testimony).  His work at CTI was seasonal.  (Testimony).  He would be laid off during 
the winter, claim unemployment, and then CTI would call him back in the spring.  
(Testimony).   
On September 14, 2020, the claimant was working for CTI in the Waukee, Iowa, 
area.  (Testimony).  He was unloading concrete for a wall.  (Testimony).  He finished 
unloading concrete, cleaned his truck, and climbed the ladder.  (Testimony).  The hose 
caught his foot, and he fell off the ladder from a height of about 8 to 10 feet.  
(Testimony).  He did not lose consciousness, but was dazed and confused subsequent 
to the fall.  (Testimony).  A coworker rendered aid.  (Testimony).  His supervisor 
eventually called him.  (Testimony).  He described the situation to his supervisor, and 
told him that his lower back was sore.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Sears testified that he wanted to see a medical provider, but CTI sent him 
home to rest, instead.  (Testimony).  Three days after the injury, he sought out his own 
care for continued pain in his middle and lower back.  (Testimony).  Adam Andrews, 
D.O., examined Mr. Sears on September 17, 2020.  (Joint Exhibit 1:1-4).  Mr. Sears 
reported his fall, and complained of sharp pain in his left lumbar area.  (JE 1:1).  Dr. 
Andrews ordered and reviewed x-rays of the thoracic, lumbar, and sacral regions, which 
he indicated were normal.  (JE 1:2).  Dr. Andrews diagnosed Mr. Sears with midline 
thoracic back pain, and left-sided low back pain.  (JE 1:2).  Dr. Andrews prescribed 
Naproxen and a muscle relaxer.  (JE 1:2).    
Eventually, Mr. Sears spoke to the owner of CTI, and was sent to Concentra on 
October 9, 2020.  (Testimony; JE 4:1-4; Defendant’s Exhibit D:1-4).  Nicholas Warnken, 
DPT, provided physical therapy for “spondylosis w/out [sic] myelopathy or 
radiculopathy.”  (JE 4:1; DE D:1).  Mr. Sears reported feeling sore upon his arrival.  (JE 
4:1; DE D:1).  He also told the therapist that he had difficulty getting out of bed.  (JE 4:1; 
DE D:1).  Mr. Sears rated his pain 6 out of 10 in the thoracic spine.  (JE 4:1; DE D:1).  
His pain worsened in the morning, and at times included shooting and tingling “superior 
to the left iliac crest.”  (JE 4:1; DE D:1).  Mr. Warnken opined that the claimant was 
recovering as expected, and that he showed improved range of motion and better 
control of his movement.  (JE 4:3; DE D:1).   
On December 9, 2020, Mr. Sears reported to Iowa Ortho.  (JE 2:1-3; DE A:1-3).  
Thomas Klein, D.O., performed a medial branch block injection at L3-4, L4-5, and L5-
S1.  (JE 2:1; DE A:1-3).  Dr. Klein diagnosed Mr. Sears with spondylosis of the 
lumbosacral region and lumbar spondylosis.  (JE 2:2; DE A:1-3).  Dr. Klein provided no 
new restrictions for the claimant.  (JE 2:3; DE A:1-3).   Mr. Sears testified that these 
injections provided him with relief for “a week or two.”  (Testimony).   
Mr. Sears returned to Iowa Ortho on December 10, 2020.  (JE 2:4-6; DE A:4-7).  
Brett Rosenthal, M.D., examined him.  (JE 2:4-6; DE A:4-7).  Mr. Sears reported mild-
moderate daily symptoms to his lower back.  (JE 2:4; DE A:4).  He had injections the 

SEARS V. CONCRETE TECHNOLOGIES, INC. 
Page 4 
day prior, which provided temporary relief; however, his low back pain continued.  (JE 
2:4; DE A:4).  Mr. Sears reported to Dr. Rosenthal that he wanted to address his work 
restrictions.  (JE 2:4; DE A:4).  Dr. Rosenthal diagnosed Mr. Sears with low back pain, 
multilevel lumbar spondylosis, and a history of opioid abuse with methadone usage.  
(JE 2:5; DE A:5).  Dr. Rosenthal observed that Mr. Sears had a benign neurologic 
examination with “no red flag signs.”  (JE 2:6; DE A:6).  Mr. Sears was uncomfortable 
advancing his precautions due to his pain, and Dr. Rosenthal recommended that Mr. 
Sears continue his work restrictions as provided.  (JE 2:6-7; DE A:6-7).  Dr. Rosenthal 
told Mr. Sears that he should begin work conditioning after a planned medial branch 
block and radiofrequency ablation.  (JE 2:6; DE A:6-7).   
On December 15, 2020, and December 17, 2020, providers declined to change 
Mr. Sears’ restrictions.  (JE 2:8-9; DE A:8-9).  Mr. Sears reported to Mercy River Hills 
Surgery Center on December 17, 2020.  (JE 3:1-2; DE B:1-2).  Dr. Klein performed 
radiofrequency ablation to the right L3-4, L4-5, and L5-S1.  (JE 3:1; DE B:1).  He also 
provided a right L2, L3, and L4, medial branch block.  (JE 3:1; DE B:1).  Dr. Klein noted 
diagnoses of lumbar and lumbosacral spondylosis without radiculopathy.  (JE 3:1; DE 
B:1).  Mr. Sears opined that he received a week to several weeks of relief from the 
injections and ablations.  (Testimony).   
I observed video surveillance evidence presented by the defendants as Exhibit E.  
Mr. Sears testified that the individual shown in the surveillance video is him.  
(Testimony).  The first video was taken on December 16, 2020.  (DE E:1).  Mr. Sears is 
seen parking his truck at a Walgreen’s, prior to entering the store.  (DE E:1).  He exited 
the store, and walked with no gait issues.  (DE E:1).  He also had no issues twisting to 
look back while backing out of a parking spot.  (DE E:1).  He is later seen assisting an 
older man into a residence.  (DE E:1).  He then entered a pickup truck and drove away.  
(DE E:1).   
On December 18, 2020, Dr. Rosenthal issued a referral to a work conditioning 
program.  (JE 2:10). 
CTI presented another round of surveillance performed on December 21, 2020.  
(DE E:1).  Mr. Sears ran several errands, and walked into a Dollar General with no 
apparent gait issues.  (DE E:1).  He pushed a cart filled with bags, and loaded his 
vehicle.  (DE E:1).  He returned to a residence and removed items from his vehicle.  
(DE E:1).  He opened the tailgate of his pickup truck, and removed a large, heavy 
appearing box.  (DE E:1).  He placed the box on the ground, entered the residence, and 
closed the tailgate.  (DE E:1).  He then lifted the large box from the ground, and carried 
it into the residence.  (DE E:1).  He did not appear to have any difficulty lifting the box, 
nor did he appear to be in any pain while doing so.   
CTI performed additional surveillance on December 22, 2020.  (DE E:1).  This is 
perhaps the most consequential surveillance footage provided in evidence.  The video 
commences with the claimant removing what appears to be an 8-foot to 10-foot ladder 
out of the back of his pickup truck.  (DE E:1).  He picked up the ladder and slung it over 
his shoulder.  (DE E:1).  He then took the ladder into a residence.  (DE E:1).   
Later, the claimant is seen carrying what appears to be a queen sized mattress 
out of the residence.  (DE E:1).  He opened the back of his pickup truck, and moved 

SEARS V. CONCRETE TECHNOLOGIES, INC. 
Page 5 
what appears to be heavy tubes of sand located in the bed of the truck.  (DE E:1).  He 
then loaded the mattress into the bed of the truck.  (DE E:1).  He climbed into the bed of 
the pickup truck with no issues or discomfort.  (DE E:1).   
The claimant is next seen at a used car dealership.  (DE E:1).  He opened a 
dumpster enclosure, unloaded the queen sized mattress, and deposited it in the 
dumpster.  (DE E:1).  He displayed no apparent issues while unloading the mattress.  
(DE E:1).  He then left the used car dealership.  (DE E:1).   
Mr. Sears testified that he still had discomfort while doing this, but that it occurred 
“later.”  (Testimony).  He also noted that these actions were “no more than I was doing 
in physical therapy.”  (Testimony).   
Mr. Sears proceeded to Hy-Vee where he shopped.  (DE E:1).  He was seen 
bending over to get items off lower shelves.  (DE E:1).  He left the store, slipped, and 
his cart fell.  (DE E:1).  He picked up his grocery cart to about waist level and threw it 
several feet in what appeared to be a fit of frustration.  (DE E:1).  He picked up his 
groceries and loaded his vehicle.  (DE E:1).   
The claimant is next observed on December 23, 2020.  (DE E:1).  He walked out 
of CTI, entered his vehicle, and went to a business.  (DE E:1).  He placed his hand on 
his lower back at one time, but there was no obvious indication of pain.  (DE E:1).   
Mr. Sears returned to Mercy River Hills Surgery Center on January 4, 2021.  (JE 
3:3-4; DE B:3-4).  Dr. Klein performed a left L2, L3, and L4 medial branch block.  (JE 
3:3; DE B:3).  He also performed a radiofrequency ablation at the left L3-4, L4-5, and 
L5-S1 facets.  (JE 3:3; DE B:3).  Dr. Klein reiterated diagnoses of lumbar and 
lumbosacral spondylosis without radiculopathy.  (JE 3:3; DE B:3).   
On January 5, 2021, CTI surveilled the claimant again, but there was nothing of 
note to discuss.  (DE E:2).    
CTI surveilled the claimant again on January 6, 2021.  (DE E:2).  He took some 
items from a business, and brought them to a vehicle.  (DE E:2).  As he returned to the 
business, the claimant placed his hand on his lower back and stretched a bit before 
entering the business.  (DE E:2).  He exited the business again and upon approaching 
the door for re-entry, he again placed his hand on his lower back.  (DE E:2).  Mr. Sears 
opined that doctors told him that his restrictions at this time were to stop activity if he felt 
pain in his back.  (Testimony).   
On January 25, 2021, Mr. Sears reported for his fifth session of physical therapy 
with Athletico Physical Therapy.  (JE 5:1-2; DE C:1-2).  He complained of continued 
soreness, with more pain in the upper back.  (JE 5:1; DE C:1).  He told the therapist that 
“the shots help,” but that his pain continued in a less intense way.  (JE 5:1; DE C:1).  
The therapist provided Mr. Sears with work conditioning.  (JE 5:1; DE C:1).  Mr. Sears 
was observed leaning on the rails of a treadmill while performing that exercise.  (JE 5:1; 
DE C:1).  The therapist planned to progress therapy as Mr. Sears was able to tolerate it 
until the claimant was able to return to full duty work pursuant to a doctor’s 
recommendation.  (JE 5:1-2; DE C:1-2).   

SEARS V. CONCRETE TECHNOLOGIES, INC. 
Page 6 
Mr. Sears returned to Athletico Physical Therapy on January 26, 2021, for 
continued work conditioning.  (JE 5:3-4; DE C:3-4).  Mr. Sears reported that his legs 
were increasingly sore, and that he noticed more pain in his upper back.  (JE 5:3; DE 
C:3).  The therapist again observed Mr. Sears leaning forward on the rails of the 
treadmill and walking at a very slow pace during his therapy session.  (JE 5:3; DE C:3).   
Mr. Sears had another session of work conditioning at Athletico Physical Therapy 
on January 27, 2021.  (JE 5:5-6; DE C:5-6).  He complained of increased pain in his 
back, which he rated 5 out of 10.  (JE 5:5; DE C:5).  He also expressed concern as to 
having “so much pain.”  (JE 5:5; DE C:5).  Mr. Sears told the therapist that he had 
difficulty walking on the treadmill, so an alternate exercise was provided.  (JE 5:5; DE 
C:5).  Mr. Sears completed “all of the work circuit” with modifications to certain lower 
body strengthening exercises.  (JE 5:5; DE C:5).   
Janelle Bailey, PT, MPT, of Athletico Physical Therapy provided a “Work 
Conditioning Functional Status Report” to Dr. Rosenthal on January 28, 2021.  (JE 5:7-
11; DE C:7-11).  Mr. Sears attended seven appointments as of the time of the report.  
(JE 5:7; DE C:7).  He met 44.44 percent of his reported job demands as a ready mix 
and material truck driver.  (JE 5:7; DE C:7).  Since Mr. Sears had not yet demonstrated 
the ability to meet all of the reported job demands, the therapist recommended that he 
continue daily work conditioning for four weeks, along with working one half day of work.  
(JE 5:7; DE C:7).  As of the writing of the report, Mr. Sears demonstrated that he could 
only work in the medium physical demand level, while the job description provided by 
CTI indicated that the job demand level was “heavy.”  (JE 5:7; DE C:7).   
Dr. Rosenthal authored a missive to defendants’ attorney dated January 29, 
2021.  (DE F:1).  Dr. Rosenthal reviewed surveillance footage provided as Defendants’ 
Exhibit E.  (DE F:1).  Dr. Rosenthal recounts observing Mr. Sears performing “heavy 
lifting, twisting, and bending.”  (DE F:1).  Dr. Rosenthal further observed that Mr. Sears 
had no indication of pain throughout the surveillance videos.  (DE F:1).  Based upon the 
information, Dr. Rosenthal stated, “I do not believe Mr. Sears requires any work 
restrictions, nor does he require any limitation to the hours of work he is able to perform 
per day.”  (DE F:1).   
On February 1, 2021, Mr. Sears returned to Athletico Physical Therapy for 
continued work conditioning.  (JE 5:12-13; DE C:12-13).  He told the therapist that he 
felt better, especially with rest over the weekend; however, he still had pain in his upper 
back.  (JE 5:12; DE C:12).  Mr. Sears was able to progress his work conditioning during 
this appointment.  (JE 5:12; DE C:12).   
Dr. Klein issued a letter to CTI’s counsel dated February 1, 2021.  (DE G:1).  Dr. 
Klein reviewed the surveillance footage as provided by CTI’s counsel.  (DE G:1).  Based 
upon his review of the videos, Dr. Klein noted that he saw no significant abnormalities, 
nor did he believe that the claimant required significant further treatment.  (DE G:1).  Dr. 
Klein noted that he would examine Mr. Sears on February 2, 2021, and would further 
evaluate if Mr. Sears needed further treatment.  (DE G:1).   
Dr. Klein, examined Mr. Sears on February 2, 2021, for his continued complaints 
of lower back pain.  (JE 2:13-16; DE A:13-16).  Mr. Sears indicated that his pain was a 
persistent burning and aching, and rated it 4 out of 10.  (JE 2:13).  Walking relieved his 

SEARS V. CONCRETE TECHNOLOGIES, INC. 
Page 7 
symptoms.  (JE 2:13; DE A:13).  However, his back pain improved since the recent 
radiofrequency ablation.  (JE 2:13; DE A:13).  He noted that trigger point injections 
helped for a short time, but that his pain returned.  (JE 2:13; DE A:13).  Dr. Klein 
recommended that Mr. Sears continue his work conditioning program, and use over-the-
counter Aspercreme several times per day.  (JE 2:14; DE A:14).  Dr. Klein also provided 
refills of Lidoderm patches, meloxicam, and baclofen.  (JE 2:14; DE A:14).  Dr. Klein 
opined that the claimant achieved maximum medical improvement (“MMI”), and that the 
claimant should follow up on an as needed basis.  (JE 2:14; DE A:14).  Dr. Klein 
provided no new restrictions.  (JE 2:16; DE A:16).   
Mr. Sears continued work conditioning at Athletico Physical Therapy on February 
3, 2021.  (JE 5:14; DE C:14).  He complained of soreness, and told the therapist that Dr. 
Klein was “done seeing him.”  (JE 5:14; DE C:14).  The therapist observed the claimant 
slouching while using a Nustep.  (JE 5:14; DE C:14).  The therapist instructed the 
claimant on proper core strength exercises for his home exercise plan.  (JE 5:14; DE 
C:14).   
Pursuant to a doctor’s recommendations, Athletico Physical Therapy discharged 
the claimant from work conditioning on February 5, 2021.  (JE 5:15; DE C:15).  Mr. 
Sears reported that his back was still sore, “but the doctor told him that it was muscles 
[sic].”  (JE 5:15; DE C:15).  The therapist reviewed a home exercise plan with Mr. 
Sears, and Mr. Sears completed his exercises without difficulty.  (JE 5:15; DE C:15).  
He was also able to increase his lifting amount to 35 pounds.  (JE 5:15; DE C:15).   
Dr. Rosenthal issued a letter to the defendants’ attorney dated February 16, 
2021.  (DE A:17).  He opined that the claimant achieved MMI, and sustained no 
permanent injury.  (DE A:17).  Based upon this opinion, Dr. Rosenthal provided a 
permanent impairment rating of zero percent based upon the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  (DE A:17).   
Mr. Sears testified during the hearing that his personal physician provided a letter 
to CTI indicating that he could engage in all of his normal work activities and duties at 
CTI.  (Testimony; CE 4).  This letter was allegedly provided to CTI on March 14, 2021.  
(Testimony).  However, Mr. Sears noted that he was never offered return employment 
by CTI after this letter was provided.  (Testimony).  The letter in question indicates that 
Mr. Sears was engaged in medication assisted treatment for opioid use disorder.  (CE 
4).  The letter further states that the claimant was stable, and that his current 
medications “should not prevent the patient from performing all of his work activities.”  
(CE 4).   
Sunil Bansal, M.D., a provider who is board certified in occupational medicine, 
conducted an independent medical evaluation (“IME”) of the claimant on March 23, 
2021.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 1:1-8).  Dr. Bansal reviewed the claimant’s medical records 
and history.  (CE 1:1-4).  It does not appear that Dr. Bansal reviewed the surveillance 
footage obtained on behalf of the defendants.  Mr. Sears provided Dr. Bansal with a 
recounting of the incident and his symptoms immediately after his fall.  (CE 1:4-5).  Mr. 
Sears told Dr. Bansal that he continued to have severe pain in the evenings, and when 
he stood to wash dishes.  (CE 1:5).  He also occasionally had pain radiating down his 
left leg, pain with bending, and pain with driving for long periods of time.  (CE 1:5).  
Upon physical examination, there was a loss of sensory discrimination over the right 

SEARS V. CONCRETE TECHNOLOGIES, INC. 
Page 8 
lower extremity.  (CE 1:6).  Dr. Bansal also observed decreased range of motion in the 
spine.  (CE 1:6).  Dr. Bansal diagnosed Mr. Sears with lumbar facet disease.  (CE 1:7).  
Dr. Bansal opined that the lumbar facet disease was caused by the impact from the fall 
from the cement truck which resulted in the synovial facet joints to fill with fluid and 
distend.  (CE 1:7).  This resulted in pain from stretching of the joint capsule.  (CE 1:7).   
Dr. Bansal opined that Mr. Sears achieved MMI on February 2, 2021.  (CE 1:7).  
Dr. Bansal referred to Table 15-3 from the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, and placed Mr. Sears into a DRE Lumbar Category II.  (CE 
1:8).  Due to Mr. Sears’ radicular pain, loss of range of motion, and guarding, Dr. Bansal 
provided Mr. Sears with a 5 percent permanent impairment of the body as a whole.  (CE 
1:8).  Dr. Bansal provided permanent restrictions to include no frequent bending or 
twisting, and no lifting greater than 30 pounds.  (CE 1:8).  Dr. Bansal concluded by 
opining that Mr. Sears could benefit from additional, intermittent, radiofrequency 
ablation.  (CE 1:8).   
Dr. Bansal is the only physician who provided the claimant with any work 
restrictions, as Dr. Rosenthal provided no restrictions, opined that the claimant had no 
permanent injury, and provided a zero percent impairment rating.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Sears testified that he was told he could come back to work light duty.  
(Testimony).  However, Mr. Sears is a methadone user.  (Testimony).  He used 
methadone while employed at CTI.  (Testimony).  He testified that he was unaware of 
CTI’s policy that its employees not use methadone.  (Testimony).  He testified that his 
supervisor and dispatcher knew that he used methadone.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Sears had his last session of physical therapy on February 5, 2021, as his 
doctor recommended ceasing physical therapy.  (Testimony).  He continued to have 
neck and back pain after that time.  (Testimony).  He has had no medical care since 
February 5, 2021.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Sears testified that he continues to have numbness in the lower back to the 
left leg, along with a sharp, throbbing pain.  (Testimony).  He described his pain as a 
“shock” from his mid back to his lower back.  (Testimony).  His pain persists on a daily 
basis, but the level depends on how much he moves around during the day.  
(Testimony).  If he performs more strenuous activity, his pain increases and sometimes 
lasts overnight.  (Testimony). 
Mr. Sears testified that he could probably work in landscaping with some 
restrictions to avoid heavy lifting.  (Testimony).  He also testified that he could do 
construction work, but he would be limited by how much he could lift.  (Testimony).  He 
also could not repetitively bend or lift.  (Testimony).  He testified that he could no longer 
perform the cable laying job, as it required a lot of heavy lifting and digging holes.  
(Testimony).   
He has not attempted to find alternate employment since February of 2021.  
(Testimony).  He collected unemployment for a time, but that has since run out.  
(Testimony).  He lives with this brother at this time, and his brother helps him out 
monetarily and with costs of living.  (Testimony).   

SEARS V. CONCRETE TECHNOLOGIES, INC. 
Page 9 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3). 
Permanent Injury 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is 
probable, rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 
148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); 
Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).   
 
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156.  When considering 
the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination 
occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the 
nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and 
practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  
Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985).  Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994).  Supportive lay testimony may be used 
to buttress expert testimony, and therefore is also relevant and material to the causation 
question.   
Iowa employers take an employee subject to any active or dormant health 
problems, and must exercise care to avoid injury to both the weak and infirm and the 
strong and healthy.  Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 176 N.W. 823 (1920).  While a 
claimant must show that the injury proximately caused the medical condition sought to 
be compensable, it is well established that a cause is “proximate” when it is a 
substantial factor, or even the primary or most substantial cause to be compensable 
under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation System.  Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 
N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 
1980).   
Based upon my review of the record, the claimant suffered a permanent 
impairment as a result of his fall on September 14, 2020, while working for CTI.  The 
defendants argue that the surveillance videos are effectively a “silver bullet” when taken 
in conjunction with the opinions of Drs. Rosenthal and Klein.  The problem with this 
argument is that, as the claimant points out, the surveillance videos were taken in time 
periods that were shortly after the claimant received injections and/or radiofrequency 
ablation to his back.  He consistently testified that the injections and radiofrequency 
ablation treatments provided him with between one and several weeks of relief from his 
pain.  For example, on January 25, 2021, the claimant mentioned to his therapist that 
“the shots help” control his pain.   

SEARS V. CONCRETE TECHNOLOGIES, INC. 
Page 10 
Moreover, the letters from Drs. Rosenthal and Klein make no mention of recent 
appointments or examinations of the claimant in conjunction with the surveillance video 
that appears to be the basis for their opinions.  Dr. Klein indicated in his letter that he 
wanted to see the claimant one more time, despite the opinions in his letter.  In the 
subsequent appointment, Dr. Klein recommends continued work hardening even though 
he opined that the claimant achieved MMI.   
Dr. Bansal, after examining the claimant, opined that the fall on September 14, 
2020, caused the permanent impairment to the claimant.  This conclusion is also 
apparent when reviewing the claimant’s medical records and listening to his testimony.  
Since I conclude that the fall on September 14, 2020, is a cause of permanent 
impairment, I then must determine the extent of permanent impairment.   
The parties in this matter stipulated that, if the injury was found to be a cause of 
permanent disability, that the disability is an industrial disability.  The claimant has not 
sustained a disability to a scheduled member.  Rather, the claimant sustained a 
disability to the body as a whole.  Since the claimant has an impairment to the body as 
a whole, an industrial disability has been sustained.  Industrial disability was defined in 
Diederich v. Tri-City R. Co., 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) as follows: “[i]t is 
therefore plain that the Legislature intended the term ‘disability’ to mean ‘industrial 
disability’ or loss of earning capacity and not a mere ‘functional disability’ to be 
computed in terms of percentages of the total physical and mental ability of a normal 
man.”   
 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability, which is the reduction of earning capacity.  Consideration must also be given 
to the injured employee’s age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, loss of 
earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted, and the employer’s offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.S.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961).   
A loss of earning capacity due to voluntary choice or lack of motivation to return 
to work is not compensable.  Malget v. John Deere Waterloo Works, File No. 5048441 
(Remand May 23, 2018); Rus v. Bradley Puhrmann, File No. 5037928 (App. December 
16, 2014); Gaffney v. Nordstrom, File No. 5026533 (App. September 1, 2011); Snow v. 
Chevron Phillips Chemical Co., File No. 5016619 (App. October 25, 2007); Copeland v. 
Boone’s Book and Bible Store, File No. 1059319 (App. November 6, 1997); See also 
Brown v. Nissen Corp., 89-90 IAWC 56, 62 (App. 1989)(no prima facie showing that 
claimant is unemployable when claimant did not make an attempt for vocational 
rehabilitation).   
 
Compensation for permanent partial disability shall begin at the termination of the 
healing period.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the disability 
bears to the body as a whole.  Iowa Code 85.34.   
 
The claimant was 41 years old at the time of the hearing.  His highest level of 
education is graduation from high school in Arizona.  Subsequent to high school, Mr. 
Sears worked in landscaping, construction, laying driveways, performing underground 

SEARS V. CONCRETE TECHNOLOGIES, INC. 
Page 11 
boring work, and then at the defendant as a cement truck driver.  These jobs had some 
degree of physical demand that many would consider to be moderate to heavy.  Mr. 
Sears injured his lower back after falling 8 to 10 feet from a cement truck.  He suffered 
from either lumbar and lumbosacral spondylosis or lumbar facet disease.   
Dr. Bansal assigned the claimant a 5 percent body as a whole impairment rating.  
No other doctor provided an impairment rating.  Dr. Bansal also provided permanent 
restrictions of no frequent bending or twisting, and no lifting greater than 30 pounds.  It 
appears that his job with CTI required lifting above these levels based upon the records 
from Athletico Physical Therapy.  The employer did not offer to bring Mr. Sears back to 
work after their physicians declared him at MMI with no work restrictions.  They claimed 
that this was due to his methadone usage and certain Department of Transportation 
restrictions.  These are not discussed much in the record, and no testimony was 
provided by CTI on this issue.  Mr. Sears provided a letter from his physician indicating 
the medication would not affect his ability to work.  Mr. Sears also testified that CTI was 
aware of his methadone usage.  Mr. Sears further testified that CTI would dismiss 
employees in the winter, and then rehire them in the spring.  It is unclear as to the 
reason that Mr. Sears was not brought back to employment with CTI; however, his 
methadone usage is a plausible reason.  Finally, I would note my concern with Mr. 
Sears’ motivation to return to work.  He has not sought, or applied for, any job since 
February of 2021.  This was given considerable weight in my determination below.   
Based upon all of the factors considered in an industrial disability analysis, I find 
that the claimant sustained a 20 percent industrial disability.  This represents 100 
weeks.  (.20 x 500 weeks = 100 weeks).   
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
That the defendants are to pay unto claimant one hundred (100) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits at the rate of eight hundred twenty seven and 
59/100 dollars ($827.59) per week from the agreed upon commencement date of March 
15, 2021. 
That the defendants are entitled to a credit for five weeks of permanent disability 
benefits at eight hundred twenty seven and 59/100 dollars ($827.59) per week.   
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest on past due weekly compensation benefits at an annual rate equal to the one-
year treasury constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 
report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  See Gamble v. AG Leader 
Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018).    
 
 

SEARS V. CONCRETE TECHNOLOGIES, INC. 
Page 12 
That the defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by 
this agency pursuant to 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7.   
Signed and filed this _14th _ day of February, 2022. 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Michael Norris (via WCES) 
Michael Kuehner (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The ap peal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
   ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
