Case Number: 5042527
Case Title:  GREEN, ALEVIA V. NORTH CENTRAL IOWA REGIONAL SOLID WASTE AGENCY
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Green Alevia-5042527R.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ALEVIA GREEN, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
      File No. 5042527 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                       
NORTH CENTRAL IOWA REGIONAL,   : 
 
  REVIEW-REOPENING  
SOLID WASTE AGENCY, 
  :                   
DECISION 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                      
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
IMWCA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
            Head Note No.:  2905 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :              
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Alevia Green, filed a petition in review-reopening seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from North Central Iowa Regional Solid Waste Agency, 
employer (North Central), and IMWCA, insurer, both as defendants.  This matter was 
heard on May 17, 2024, with a final submission date of June 28, 2024.   
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 5, Claimant’s Exhibits 
1 through 17, Defendants’ Exhibits A through U, and the testimony of claimant. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the review-reopening 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this review-
reopening decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will 
be raised or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
ISSUES 
1. Whether claimant is entitled to permanent partial disability benefits under a 
review-reopening proceeding, and if so, 
2. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits. 
3. Commencement date of benefits. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Oct-25  13:43:43     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

GREEN V. NORTH CENTRAL IOWA REGIONAL SOLID WASTE AGENCY 
Page 2 
 
4. Whether there is a causal connection between the injury and the claimed 
medical expenses. 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
evaluation (IME) under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care. 
7. Is claimant’s claim for benefits under review-reopening proceeding barred by 
issue of preclusion. 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Claimant was 48 years old at the time of hearing.  Claimant has a GED.  At the 
time of hearing claimant was attending a community college and studying human 
services.  (Hearing Transcript, pages 19, 43) 
 
On April 30, 2012, claimant was working at defendant-employer’s recycling 
center when she was struck from behind by a large door of a roll-off recycling truck.  
(Appeal Decision, page 2)  Claimant fell to the floor and was briefly rendered 
unconscious.  (Id.)  When EMS staff arrived at the accident, claimant was alert and 
oriented.  (Id.) 
A CT scan of claimant’s head taken on the date of injury was questionable for an 
intracranial frontal lobe hemorrhage.  (App. Dec., p. 2)  A second CT scan taken on May 
1, 2012, showed no hemorrhage and no other abnormalities.  (Id.)   
On May 2, 2012, claimant was evaluated by Robert Rondinelli, M.D.  Claimant 
was assessed as having a post grade 3 concussion and symptom magnification.  (App. 
Dec., p. 3) 
Immediately following that evaluation, claimant was evaluated by Ryan 
Thoreson, D.O.  Dr. Thoreson noted non-physiological complaints and signs of 
symptom magnification.  (App. Dec., pp. 4, 17) 
Claimant was evaluated by Charles Mooney, M.D., on May 29, 2012, and August 
8, 2012.  Dr. Mooney found no evidence of a permanent brain injury or permanent 
physical injury.  (App. Dec., p. 17) 
Claimant was evaluated by Michael Kitchell, M.D., on June 8, 2012, and August 
30, 2012.  Dr. Kitchell found no indication of permanent brain damage and noted 
symptom magnification.  (App. Dec., p. 17) 
Claimant underwent neuropsychological testing with Jim Andrikopoulos, Ph.D., 
on June 27, 2012.  Dr. Andrikopoulos also reported evidence of symptom magnification 
on the part of claimant.  (App. Dec., pp. 5-6, 17) 

GREEN V. NORTH CENTRAL IOWA REGIONAL SOLID WASTE AGENCY 
Page 3 
 
Dr. Mooney again evaluated claimant on February 5, 2013.  Dr. Mooney again 
found symptom magnification and nonphysiological complaints.  (App. Dec., p. 17) 
Claimant underwent an IME with Robin Sassman, M.D., on April 23, 2013.  Dr. 
Sassman found that claimant had a permanent impairment for the April 30, 2012, date 
of injury, and found that claimant had a combined permanent impairment of 20 percent 
to the body as a whole.  (App. Dec., pp. 12-13) 
Claimant had a neuropsychological evaluation with Dan Rogers, Ph.D., on 
December 16, 2013.  Dr. Rogers opined that claimant suffered a significant brain injury 
based on his understanding that claimant had a small hemorrhage on both sides of the 
frontal lobes of claimant’s brain.  (App. Dec., p. 13) 
Based, in part, on the opinions of Drs. Rondinelli, Thoreson, Mooney, Kitchell, 
and Andrikopoulos that claimant showed signs of symptom magnification, the arbitration 
decision found that claimant failed to carry her burden of proof her injury resulted in a 
permanent disability regarding her closed head injury and her neck, back and right 
shoulder injuries.  Claimant was found not to be entitled to any temporary benefits 
beyond that which she had already been paid.  (App. Dec., p. 19) 
The arbitration decision was affirmed on intra-agency appeal on April 11, 2016.   
Claimant filed a petition for judicial review in Iowa District Court.  The district 
court remanded this matter back to the commission only for the issue of medical 
benefits.  In a March 8, 2018, remand decision, this agency found the defendants were 
liable for medical expenses incurred regarding the injury. 
On or about June 4, 2018, claimant filed a petition for review-reopening.  
Defendants filed a motion for summary judgment.  The motion for summary judgment 
was based on the argument that claimant did not sustain a permanent disability that 
could be evaluated in a review-reopening proceeding.  Claimant resisted the motion.  In 
an October 11, 2018 ruling, defendants’ motion for summary judgment was granted.  
The ruling was affirmed on intra-agency appeal. 
This matter was eventually appealed to the Iowa Supreme Court.  In an April 14, 
2023 decision, the Supreme Court remanded the matter back to the commission to give 
claimant the opportunity to present evidence whether her condition warranted an 
increase in compensation under review-reopening proceeding. 
On April 28, 2015, claimant was evaluated by Shahnawaz Karim, M.D., for daily 
migraines.  Claimant indicated she had migraines since a work incident where she was 
struck on the back with a recycling bin.  Claimant was prescribed Topamax.  (Joint 
Exhibit 3, pages 210-213) 
On June 9, 2015, claimant was evaluated at the Berryhill Center for counseling.  
Claimant received counseling with Lori Ohrt, MSW, LISW.  Claimant was assessed as 
having a major depressive disorder.  Claimant had issues with her daughter being 

GREEN V. NORTH CENTRAL IOWA REGIONAL SOLID WASTE AGENCY 
Page 4 
 
arrested and losing her job.  Claimant also had issues with her son not providing for his 
baby.  Claimant was recommended to have continued counseling.  (JE 1, p. 1) 
On September 15, 2015, claimant returned to counseling with Ms. Ohrt.  
Claimant suffered from depression and migraines following an injury at a shelter 
workshop.  (JE 1, pp. 2-6) 
Claimant returned to Counselor Ohrt in October and December of 2015.  
Claimant had sadness due to deaths of family members.  (JE 1, p. 7)  Claimant had 
depression over the holidays and her inability to give presents to her grandkids.  (JE 1, 
p. 9) 
Claimant received counseling with Ms. Ohrt on March 22, 2016.  Claimant had 
problems with headaches.  Claimant was found to have hit a stable point.  (JE 1, p. 10) 
Claimant continued to receive counseling from Ms. Ohrt from April 19, 2016, 
through October 28, 2016.  Claimant had problems with headaches.  Claimant also had 
anxiety and depression due to a trial court update (JE 1, pp. 14-17); her workers’ 
compensation case (JE 1, p. 18); her family (JE 1, p. 18); and the death of a brother and 
her own fear of dying (JE 1, p. 19). 
Claimant returned to Dr. Karim on May 25, 2016, for a follow up.  Claimant was 
assessed as having migraine headaches.  (JE 3, p. 223) 
Claimant was evaluated at Community Health on May 31, 2016.  Claimant had  
right shoulder and neck pain radiating down to her arm.  Claimant also had complaints 
of dizziness.  Claimant was assessed as having benign positional vertigo and right 
shoulder pain.  (JE 2, pp. 141-142) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Karim on July 8, 2016.  Claimant had continued 
headaches.  Claimant battled with depression and poor self-esteem.  Claimant was 
assessed as having migraine headaches, major depressive disorder, and PTSD.  
Claimant was to continue with her therapist and continue Prazosin.  (JE 3, pp. 224-227) 
Claimant was evaluated by Michelle Ubben, ARNP, on January 18, 2017, for 
shoulder pain.  Claimant began hurting recently with the right shoulder.  Claimant was 
treated with Tramadol and referred to physical therapy.  (JE 2, pp. 146-149) 
Claimant returned for counseling with Ms. Ohrt from January 17, 2017, through 
September 12, 2017.  Claimant had continued headaches.  Claimant also had 
depression, anxiety and distress due to her friend’s illness (JE 1, pp. 22-23); her 
workers’ compensation appeal (JE 1, p. 24); fireworks (JE 1, p. 28); a friend’s poor 
health (JE 1, p. 30); and pain from a toothache and a bad shoulder (JE 1, p. 32).  
On September 12, 2017, Ms. Ohrt noted, “she has shown significant 
improvement over the last four years but continues to request therapy to help her deal 
with her symptoms.”  (JE 1, p. 32) 

GREEN V. NORTH CENTRAL IOWA REGIONAL SOLID WASTE AGENCY 
Page 5 
 
Following her September 12, 2017, counseling with Ms. Ohrt, claimant did not 
seek counseling until July 13, 2021.  (JE 1, pp. 34-35) 
Claimant returned to Nurse Practitioner Ubben on June 20, 2017, with complaints 
of shoulder pain.  Claimant’s shoulder pain had worsened in the last 3-4 days.  Claimant 
was prescribed Tramadol.  (JE 2, pp. 153-156) 
On June 25, 2017, claimant was seen by Lisa Chase, FNP, for neck and right 
shoulder pain.  Notes indicated, “Reports pain since she was in a car accident approx. 
two years ago.”  (JE 2, p. 158)  She was recommended to go to a pain clinic for possible 
injections.  (JE 2, p. 159) 
On September 15, 2017, claimant was evaluated by Bushra Nauman, M.D., at 
FDT Pain Management for neck pain.  Claimant had pain beginning in 2013 [sic] when a 
trash truck door hit her.  Claimant was given trigger point injections in the right shoulder 
and upper back.  (JE 5, pp. 307-311) 
On October 26, 2017, claimant returned to Dr. Nauman with complaints of pain in 
the base of the skull shooting into the forehead and temples and shoulder pain.  
Claimant was given occipital nerve blocks and trigger point injections in the right 
posterior neck and in the right shoulder.  (JE 5, pp. 312-316) 
On February 2, 2018, claimant returned to Dr. Nauman with similar complaints of 
pain.  Claimant declined further injections and was put on gabapentin.  (JE 5, pp. 318-
321) 
Claimant was evaluated by Ann Feser, ARNP, for right shoulder pain on June 12, 
2018.  Claimant had pain in her right shoulder after being hit by a garbage truck.  
Claimant had pain off and on since that time.  Claimant was treated with medication.  
(JE 2, pp. 162-164) 
Claimant returned to Nurse Practitioner Feser on August 16, 2019.  Claimant was 
taking meloxicam and cyclobenzaprine for her right upper extremity pain and for sleep.  
Claimant’s pain was well controlled with meloxicam.  Claimant was found to have early 
signs of carpal tunnel syndrome.  Claimant was treated with medication.  (JE 2, pp. 181-
182) 
Claimant saw Nurse Practitioner Feser on August 7, 2020, with complaints of 
right shoulder pain.  Claimant was referred to physical therapy and told to use heat and 
stretching and was refilled on medication.  (JE 2, pp. 183-186) 
Claimant returned for mental health counseling with Ms. Ohrt between July 13, 
2021, and December 2, 2021.  During those counseling sessions, claimant had suicidal 
ideation and grieved for the loss of an old boyfriend.  (JE 1, pp. 36-39)  Notes dated 
November 2, 2021, note that claimant showed significant improvement, but requested 
ongoing treatment.  (JE 1, pp. 40-45) 

GREEN V. NORTH CENTRAL IOWA REGIONAL SOLID WASTE AGENCY 
Page 6 
 
On March 9, 2022, claimant returned in follow-up with Nurse Practitioner Feser.  
Claimant had right shoulder and neck pain.  Claimant was again referred to physical 
therapy.  (JE 2, pp. 195-197) 
On July 10, 2023, claimant underwent an FCE with Daryl Short, DPT.  Claimant 
gave valid effort in the FCE.  The FCE found, in part, that claimant’s physical abilities 
fell in the lower medium category and limited her lifting up to 25 pounds occasionally.  
Physical Therapist Short also limited claimant to only occasionally lifting up to shoulder 
height on an occasional basis.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 1) 
In an August 7, 2023 report, Dr. Kitchell gave his opinions of claimant’s condition 
following a records review.  Dr. Kitchell evaluated claimant in June 2012 and August 
2012.  He opined claimant did not have permanent disability due to her April 30, 2012 
accident.  He opined claimant’s problem with migraine headaches and photophobia 
were not caused by her minor concussion.  (Defendants’ Exhibit B, pages 26-27) 
In a September 5, 2023 letter written by defendants’ counsel, Dr. Mooney opined 
that claimant reached maximum medical improvement (MMI) as of August 8, 2012, and 
that claimant had no evidence of a permanent disability.  He also indicated claimant did 
not need permanent restrictions, and did not require further medical treatment beyond 
February 5, 2013.  (Ex. F) 
In an October 10, 2023 report, John Kuhnlein, D.O., gave his opinions of 
claimant’s condition following an IME.  Claimant indicated that since October of 2014 
her migraine headaches had continued.  Claimant said she was more capable of coping 
with her condition.  Claimant’s depression and anxiety had increased.  (Ex. 2, p. 11) 
Claimant had headaches associated with photophobia.  Claimant had ongoing 
right shoulder pain and neck pain radiating down to her right arm.  (Ex. 2, p. 16)  
Claimant was assessed as having depression and anxiety, posttraumatic migraine 
headaches, vertigo, chronic myofascial cervical spine pain and chronic right shoulder 
pain.  (Ex. 2, p. 19) 
Dr. Kuhnlein found claimant at MMI as of May 19, 2023, claimant’s last mental 
health visit.  He found that claimant had a 3 percent permanent impairment for her 
headaches, an 8 percent permanent impairment for her cervical issue, and a 4 percent 
permanent impairment for her right upper extremity.  This resulted in a combined 
permanent impairment under the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment (Fifth Edition) for 15 percent to the body as a whole.  Dr. Kuhnlein limited 
claimant, in part, to lifting 30 pounds occasionally from floor to waist and from waist to 
shoulder.  Claimant should be allowed to walk, stand or sit as needed.  Claimant was 
also restricted from working on ladders or at heights.  (Ex. 2, pp. 21-22) 
In a November 18, 2023 report, Daniel Tranel, Ph.D., gave his opinions of 
claimant’s condition following a neuropsychological evaluation.  Dr. Tranel indicated that 
neuropsychological testing did not indicate claimant had any cognitive deficits attributed 
to the April of 2012 work accident.  (Ex. C, p. 42)  

GREEN V. NORTH CENTRAL IOWA REGIONAL SOLID WASTE AGENCY 
Page 7 
 
Dr. Tranel opined it was highly unlikely that a mild concussion, which claimant 
sustained in April of 2012, would lead to permanent neurological dysfunction 
approximately 10 years after the accident.  (Ex. C, p. 43) 
Dr. Tranel indicated claimant sustained a minor concussion that did not cause 
any permanent brain injury.  (Ex. C, p. 44)  He indicated there was no indication from 
testing claimant that she sustained dementia or was suffering from any chronic brain 
disorder.  He opined there was no basis to relate claimant’s mental health issues to the 
April 30, 2012 injury.  (Ex. C, p. 44) 
In a December 22, 2023 letter, Counselor Ohrt gave her opinions of claimant’s 
mental health condition.  Ms. Ohrt indicated that she had reviewed claimant’s CT scans, 
MRIs and other medical records regarding claimant’s treatment following her work 
accident.  She diagnosed claimant as having major depression, generalized anxiety 
disorder, agoraphobia, PTSD, and post-concussive syndrome.  Ms. Ohrt opined that 
claimant’s problems were a direct result of injuries sustained in her April of 2012 work 
accident.  (Ex. 7) 
Ms. Ohrt indicated she did not believe claimant exaggerated her symptoms.  She 
opined that claimant’s physical problems prevented her from returning to work.  She 
opined that claimant would need to take medications to combat physical and emotional 
problems.  Ms. Ohrt opined that claimant required ongoing physical therapy and would 
require ongoing medications to deal with claimant’s physical problems.  (Ex. 7) 
In a 50-page report dated January 2, 2024, Kunal Patra, M.D., gave his opinions 
of claimant’s condition following an independent psychiatric evaluation.  Claimant 
indicated she had headaches and pain in her neck, upper back and right shoulder.  
Claimant indicated she had migraine headaches approximately three times a month that 
lasted sometimes a few days.  (Ex. 4, p. 47) 
Claimant indicated confusion and anxiety when driving long distances.  (Ex. 4, p. 
48)  She said she was continually tired and often times very emotional.  (Ex. 4, p. 49)  
Claimant complained of having anxiety regarding day-to-day activities.  (Ex. 4, pp. 50-
51) 
Dr. Patra assessed claimant as having PTSD, a major depressive disorder, and a 
mild neurocognitive disorder.  Dr. Patra opined claimant’s April of 2012 work injury was 
a substantial causal or aggravating factor in claimant developing her mental health 
disorders.  (Ex. 4, pp. 74-75, 77) 
Dr. Patra opined that claimant could not return to work at North Central given her 
mental health conditions.  He also opined that claimant could not return to the 
workforce.  (Ex. 4, p. 75) 
Dr. Patra opined claimant had a 49 percent permanent impairment to the body as 
a whole based upon the AMA Guides.  (Ex. 4, pp. 75-76)  He opined that claimant 
would require ongoing treatment with a psychiatrist and a mental health counselor.  He 

GREEN V. NORTH CENTRAL IOWA REGIONAL SOLID WASTE AGENCY 
Page 8 
 
also opined that claimant would require, but would not be limited to, ongoing 
medications, ketamine therapy, and a repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation.  (Ex. 
4, pp. 76-77) 
In a January 13, 2024 supplemental report, Dr. Tranel indicated he reviewed Dr. 
Patra’s report.  Dr. Tranel disagreed with Dr. Patra’s diagnosis and most of his 
conclusions.  (Ex. D, p. 46)  Dr. Tranel reiterated that testing suggested symptom 
exaggeration.  He also opined that claimant’s cognitive function was within normal 
expectations given claimant’s baseline and educational background.  He opined that 
claimant did not have a mild neurocognitive disorder.  (Ex. D, p. 47) 
Dr. Tranel again opined that claimant’s April 30, 2012, work accident did not 
result in any permanent brain damage or permanent psychological or mental injury.  
(Ex. D, p. 47) 
In a February 7, 2024 supplemental report, Dr. Patra indicated he had reviewed 
Dr. Tranel’s supplemental report of January 13, 2024.  Dr. Patra opined that claimant 
developed PTSD from her traumatic brain injury of April 2012.  (Ex. 5, p. 83)  He also 
indicated that the over-reporting of symptoms, as may be the case with claimant, does 
not necessarily mean claimant does not have those symptoms.  (Ex. 5, p. 85)  Dr. Patra 
opined that the similarity in testing scores, between tests administered by Dr. Patra and 
Dr. Tranel, suggested that claimant was not feigning her symptoms and was honestly 
reporting them.  (Ex. 5, p. 85) 
Dr. Patra again opined that claimant’s April of 2012 traumatic brain injury was a 
substantial causative factor in claimant’s underlying major depressive disorder.  He also 
opined that it was a major factor in claimant developing a mild neurocognitive disorder.  
(Ex. 5, pp. 86-87) 
Claimant testified that she hurt her back, shoulder, neck and had headaches 
from the 2012 injury.  Claimant testified, that at the time of the review-reopening 
hearing, she was having “the same problems.”  (Tr., p. 22)  Claimant testified that since 
the 2014 arbitration hearing, her condition has not gotten any worse or any better.  (Tr., 
p. 61) 
Claimant says she has daily headaches.  (Tr., pp. 22, 46)  Claimant says she has 
anxiety while driving.  (Tr., p. 31)  Claimant says she has constant shoulder pain.  She 
said that if she has too much activity, the pain goes into her neck and worsens her 
headaches.  (Tr., p. 38)   
At the time of hearing claimant was taking two classes at a community college 
and got special tutoring for those classes.  (Tr., pp. 43-44) 
Claimant said she did not believe she could return to work given her condition.  
(Tr., p. 44)  She said that given her condition, she could not work at any of her previous 
jobs.  (Tr., p. 76)  Claimant testified that she would still be working if not for the 2012 
work injury.  (Tr., p. 49)  At the time of hearing claimant said she took prescription 

GREEN V. NORTH CENTRAL IOWA REGIONAL SOLID WASTE AGENCY 
Page 9 
 
medications for sleep, anxiety and depression, and that she took muscle relaxers.  (Tr., 
pp. 52-53) 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue to be determined is if claimant has had a change in condition since 
the 2014 arbitration hearing that would entitle her to permanent partial disability benefits 
under a review-reopening proceeding. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e). 
Upon review-reopening, claimant has the burden to show a change in condition 
related to the original injury since the original award or settlement was made.  The 
change may be either economic or physical.  Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 
N.W.2d 348, 350 (Iowa 1980); Henderson v. Iles, 250 Iowa 787, 793, 96 N.W.2d 321, 
324 (1959).  A mere difference of opinion of experts as to the percentage of disability 
arising from an original injury is not sufficient to justify a different determination on a 
petition for review-reopening.  Rather, claimant's condition must have worsened or 
deteriorated in a manner not contemplated at the time of the initial award or settlement 
before an award on review-reopening is appropriate.  Bousfield v. Sisters of Mercy, 249 
Iowa 64, 69-70, 86 N.W.2d 109, 113 (1957).   
In a review-reopening proceeding the claimant has the burden of proof to prove 
whether she has suffered an impairment of earning capacity proximately caused by the 
original injury.  E.N.T. Associates v. Collentine, 525 N.W.2d 827, 829 (Iowa 1994).     
As the Supreme Court noted in its remand decision in this case, claimant is 
entitled, in this review-reopening proceeding, to present evidence of a change in 
condition, from a temporary condition to a permanent condition, and that that change is 
causally related to the work injury.  Because our workers’ compensation statute 
expressly provides for review-reopening under specified conditions, such as a 
worsening of a worker’s disability, the rule of res judicata has no application when a 
change of condition is proven.  Green v. North Central Regional Solid Waste Authority, 
989 N.W.2d 144, 148-149 
At the time of her 2014 arbitration hearing, claimant was found to only have a 
temporary disability, and not a permanent disability.  As detailed above, claimant bears 
the burden of proof in proving that a change in condition occurred since the 2014 
arbitration hearing that now results in claimant having a permanent disability. 
At the time of her original arbitration hearing in 2014, claimant alleged injuries to 
her head, brain, neck, right shoulder, back and a mental injury causing anxiety and 
depression. (App. Dec., pp. 12-13, 19)  At the review-reopening hearing, claimant 
contends that she has the same conditions.  (Tr., pp. 22, 31, 38, 46; Ex. 2, pp. 21-22; 
Ex. 7; Ex. 4, pp. 74-77) 

GREEN V. NORTH CENTRAL IOWA REGIONAL SOLID WASTE AGENCY 
Page 10 
 
Claimant testified at the review-reopening hearing that she has the same 
problems that she had from her 2012 injury.  (Tr., p. 22)  She also testified that she has 
the same complaints now as she did at the 2014 hearing.  She said her condition has 
not gotten worse, but has also not gotten any better.  (Tr., p. 61) 
Three experts, on claimant’s behalf, offered opinions regarding claimant’s 
condition.  Counselor Ohrt has provided mental health counseling services for claimant 
beginning in 2015.  Counselor Ohrt opined, in part, that claimant has headaches, 
anxiety, depression and agoraphobia as a direct result of the injuries sustained from her 
April of 2012 work accident.  She also opined that claimant required ongoing treatment 
and medication for emotional and physical problems, and that claimant would require 
ongoing physical therapies.  (Ex. 7) 
There are a number of problems with Counselor Ohrt’s opinion.  Ms. Ohrt 
indicates her opinion is, in part, based on her review of claimant’s CT scans and MRIs.  
(Ex. 7, p. 90)  There is nothing in Ms. Ohrt’s CV indicating that she has any training or 
experience in review of CT scans or MRIs.  (Ex. 8)  Ms. Ohrt also assessed claimant as 
having a “brain bleed.”  (Ex. 7, p. 91)  There is nothing in Ms. Ohrt’s CV that suggests 
that she has any training or experience to make this assessment.  (Id.) 
Ms. Ohrt’s opinion indicates that claimant’s physical problems prevent her from 
returning to work.  (Ex. 7, p. 91)  There is nothing in Ms. Ohrt’s CV indicating she has 
training or experience to assess claimant’s physical problems regarding claimant’s 
ability to return to work.  Ms. Ohrt opined that claimant will have to take medication for 
her physical problems and have physical therapies.  (Ex. 7, p. 91)  There is nothing in 
Ms. Ohrt’s CV indicating she has training or experience to give an opinion regarding 
claimant’s physical problems or medications that claimant will need for treatment.  (Ex. 
8)   
In brief, much of Ms. Ohrt’s opinion regarding claimant appears to be beyond the 
scope of Ms. Ohrt’s education, training, experience or expertise. 
As noted in the Findings of Fact, claimant did not seek counseling from Ms. Ohrt 
from approximately September 2017 until July of 2021.  There is no explanation why 
claimant has a permanent mental health condition given this nearly four-year lapse of 
mental health counseling.   
Ms. Ohrt opines that claimant’s mental health problems are the result of her 
injuries from the April 2012 accident.  (Ex. 7, p. 90)  However, Ms. Ohrt offers no 
opinion that claimant has had a change in condition, since the 2014 arbitration hearing, 
indicating claimant’s adjudicated temporary disability is now a permanent disability.  For 
all the reasons detailed above, it is found that Ms. Ohrt’s opinions regarding claimant’s 
entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits under review-reopening proceeding 
are found to be not credible. 
Dr. Patra evaluated claimant once for an independent psychological exam.  Dr. 
Patra opined that claimant has PTSD, a major depressive disorder, and a mild 

GREEN V. NORTH CENTRAL IOWA REGIONAL SOLID WASTE AGENCY 
Page 11 
 
neurocognitive disorder.  (Ex. 4, p. 61)  Dr. Patra also opines that the conditions are 
permanent and were caused by claimant’s April of 2012 injury.  (Ex. 4, pp. 72, 74-75)  
Dr. Patra contends that claimant’s mental health conditions are a permanent disability 
caused by the April of 2012 injury.   
As noted above, the question in this proceeding is, has claimant had a change in 
condition since the 2014 arbitration hearing that changes her adjudicated temporary 
condition to a permanent disability.  Dr. Patra offers no opinion regarding a change in 
claimant’s condition since the 2014 arbitration decision.  Given this, it is found that Dr. 
Patra’s opinions regarding claimant’s mental health condition are not convincing, as 
they relate to a review-reopening proceeding.   
Dr. Kuhnlein evaluated claimant once for an IME.  Dr. Kuhnlein opined that 
because claimant has continued headaches, neck and shoulder pain since the 2014 
arbitration decision, her condition is now permanent in nature.  (Ex. 2, p. 20) 
Claimant told Dr. Kuhnlein she is more capable of coping with her situation as of 
recent.  (Ex. 2, p. 11)  She indicated to Dr. Kuhnlein that there has been no change in 
the pattern or intensity of her symptoms.  (Ex. 2, p. 16)  Claimant has had no change in 
her work restrictions since the 2014 hearing.  (Id.)  Dr. Kuhnlein found that claimant had 
a combined permanent impairment of 15 percent to the body as a whole.  As noted 
above, he limited claimant, in part, to lifting 30 pounds occasionally from floor to waist 
and from waist to shoulder.  (Ex. 2, p. 22) 
Dr. Kuhnlein appears to understand that what claimant needs to prove, in her 
review-reopening proceeding, is that she has had a change in condition since the 2014 
arbitration hearing.  However, Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinions regarding a worsening condition 
are not persuasive for one reason. 
Part of the record from claimant’s 2014 arbitration hearing is an IME from Dr. 
Sassman.  Dr. Sassman, like Dr. Kuhnlein, found that claimant had a permanent 
impairment for her headaches and for her neck and shoulder pain.  Dr. Sassman found 
that claimant had a combined permanent impairment for the neck and shoulder pain 
and headaches of 20 percent.  Dr. Sassman also limited claimant, in part, to 
occasionally lifting 20 pounds from floor to waist and from waist to shoulder.  (App. 
Dec., pp. 12-13; Ex. J, pp. 92-93) 
Assuming for argument’s sake that Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinion regarding permanent 
impairment and restrictions are found to be convincing of claimant’s permanent 
impairment, this still presents a problem.  Dr. Kuhnlein’s permanent impairment and 
permanent restrictions from 2024 are less than the permanent impairment and 
restrictions from Dr. Sassman in 2013.  If Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinions regarding permanent 
impairment and permanent restrictions are accepted, this would suggest claimant’s 
condition, since the 2014 hearing, has actually improved and not worsened.   
I have a great deal of respect for Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinions.  His reports are 
routinely used in determining permanent impairment and industrial disability before this 

GREEN V. NORTH CENTRAL IOWA REGIONAL SOLID WASTE AGENCY 
Page 12 
 
agency.  His reports are generally found to be persuasive.  However, in this case, Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s opinions regarding permanent impairment and permanent restrictions 
suggest that claimant’s condition has actually improved since the 2014 arbitration 
hearing.  For that reason, Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinions regarding claimant’s permanent 
impairment and permanent restrictions are found not convincing in proving that claimant 
has a worsening of her physical condition and abilities since the 2014 arbitration 
hearing. 
The question in this review-reopening proceeding is what change in condition 
has occurred since the 2014 arbitration hearing that results in claimant now having a 
permanent disability.  Claimant testified at hearing that her conditions have been 
unchanged since the 2014 arbitration hearing.  Counselor Ohrt and Dr. Patra both opine 
that claimant has sustained a permanent disability from the 2012 work injury.  Neither 
offers an opinion whether claimant has had a change in condition since the 2014 
hearing that results in claimant now having a permanent disability.  Dr. Kuhnlein’s 
opinion suggests that claimant’s permanent impairment and permanent restrictions 
have actually improved.  Given this record as detailed above, claimant has failed to 
carry her burden of proof she has had a change in condition, since the 2014 arbitration 
hearing, that results in claimant being entitled to permanent partial disability benefits 
under review-reopening proceeding. 
As claimant has failed to carry her burden of proof that she has sustained a 
change in condition since the 2014 arbitration hearing that results in claimant now being 
entitled to permanent partial disability benefits under a review-reopening proceeding, all 
other issues are moot. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED: 
That claimant shall take nothing in the way of benefits from this proceeding. 
That both parties shall pay their own costs. 
That defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
under rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
 
Signed and filed this __25th __ day of October, 2024.  
 
 
 
 
     JAMES F. CHRISTENSON 
          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

GREEN V. NORTH CENTRAL IOWA REGIONAL SOLID WASTE AGENCY 
Page 13 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Jerry Schnurr (via WCES) 
 
Ryan Clark (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
