Case Number: 5058838.01
Case Title:  UHLENHOPP, CHAD D V. STATE OF IOWA DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Uhlenhopp Chad-5058838.01R.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
CHAD UHLENHOPP, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
               File No. 5058838.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          
IOWA DEPT. OF TRANSPORTATION,   : 
    REVIEW-REOPENING DECISION 
 
 
  :                        
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
STATE OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
Head notes: 1302.1; 1402.40; 1802; 
 
Defendants. 
  :                   
2905 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Chad Uhlenhopp filed a petition for review-reopening seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against the Iowa Department of Transportation and State of 
Iowa, self-insured employer, for an accepted work injury date of February 29, 2016.  
The case came before the undersigned for hearing on August 4, 2022. The case 
proceeded to a live video hearing via Zoom, with all parties and the court reporter 
appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 6, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 5, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through I.  
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on August 4, 2022. The parties submitted post-
hearing briefs on September 2, 2022, and the case was considered fully submitted on 
that date. 
 
 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Jan-06  10:31:36     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

UHLENHOPP V. IOWA DEPT. OF TRANSPORTATION 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
Whether claimant has established a substantial change in condition sufficient 
to justify reopening of the October 15, 2018 agreement for settlement; 
 
2. 
Whether claimant is entitled to temporary disability and/or healing period 
benefits from November 16, 2018 to February 21, 2019; 
 
3. 
Whether claimant is entitled to additional permanent disability benefits; 
 
4. 
Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
examination (IME) under Iowa Code section 85.39; 
 
5. 
Whether a credit is due under Iowa Code section 85.38(2); 
 
6. 
Whether claimant is entitled to penalty benefits pursuant to Iowa Code section 
86.13; and 
 
7. 
Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
his demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 46-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
13) He lives in Hansell, Iowa, with his wife, two siblings, and an older child attending 
college. (Tr., pp. 12-13) He is a high school graduate, and attended some college but 
did not obtain a college degree. (Tr., pp. 13-14) In the past, claimant has worked at 
Fareway Grocery as a meat cutter; Woodharbor Cabinets on the assembly line; Curries, 
making frames for windows and doors; Northern Pipe, making sewer pipe and culverts; 
and the Iowa Department of Natural Resources as a general maintenance worker. (Tr., 
pp. 14-18) 
 
In 2008, claimant was hired by the Iowa Department of Transportation (DOT) as 
a Highway Technician Associate. (Tr., p. 66) His job duties include general road 
maintenance, including sign and shoulder maintenance, plowing snow, as well as 
general building maintenance. (Tr., pp. 18-19) According to the position description 
questionnaire (PDQ) for his job, he might also be involved with mowing roadside 
shoulders, cutting trees and brush, repairing guardrails and fences, and multiple 
additional duties. (Claimant’s Exhibit 2, p. 25) It also states he may occasionally lift, 
carry, push, and/or pull various amounts of force within the “heavy work” category, and 

UHLENHOPP V. IOWA DEPT. OF TRANSPORTATION 
Page 3 
 
“team lift or mechanical assist” is recommended for weights over 75-pounds. (Cl. Ex. 2, 
p. 27) 
 
Claimant sustained an injury while working on February 29, 2016. (Tr., p. 21) He 
was preparing to paint a floor, and while cleaning the floor he slipped and fell, driving his 
left shoulder into the concrete floor. He immediately felt pain across the back of his 
shoulder into his neck, as well as in the left side of his lower back into his left hip. (Tr., 
pp. 21-22) He reported the incident right away, and was sent for treatment the following 
day. (Tr., p. 22) 
 
Claimant initially saw Howard Kim, M.D., at Healthworks Occupational Health. 
(Joint Exhibit 2, p. 5) He was given medication and temporary restrictions. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 
5-6) Claimant testified that his initial treatment included medication and physical 
therapy, but nothing helped his symptoms. (Tr., p. 22) He also saw Christopher Morse, 
D.O. (Jt. Ex. 4, pp. 20-26) He was eventually referred for MRIs of his neck, low back, 
and left shoulder, after which he was referred to Eric Potthoff, D.O., for his shoulder. 
(Tr., pp. 22-23; Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 27-33) 
 
Claimant initially saw Dr. Potthoff on September 15, 2016. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 31) Dr. 
Potthoff noted claimant denied any previous pain or injury to his left shoulder. He also 
documented claimant’s neck and back pain, and that he was seeing Ronald Kloc, D.O., 
for his back. He reviewed claimant’s MRI and noted a labral tear. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 32) He 
discussed continuing with conservative treatment versus arthroscopic surgery, and 
advised him to call if he decided to have the surgery. 
 
Claimant ultimately had surgery with Dr. Potthoff on November 7, 2016. (Jt. Ex. 
5, p. 34) At his follow up appointment the surgery was described as left shoulder 
arthroscopy with repair of posterior, anterior, and superior labrum. Claimant participated 
in physical therapy, and was eventually released at maximum medical improvement 
(MMI) for his shoulder on August 15, 2017. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4) At that time, Dr. Potthoff 
recommended no permanent restrictions for the left shoulder. On August 28, 2017, 
using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, he 
issued an impairment rating of 7 percent of the left upper extremity, which converted to 
4 percent of the whole person. (Defendants’ Exhibit I, p. 50) The rating was based on 
deficits in range of motion. Dr. Potthoff did not anticipate the need for any further 
treatment of the left shoulder at that time.  
 
At the same time claimant was seeing Dr. Potthoff for his shoulder, he also saw 
Dr. Kloc for his low back. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 3) Dr. Kloc provided at least three epidural 
steroid injections over the course of several months. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 3-4) Claimant also 
noted pain in his neck, but Dr. Kloc could not determine whether the pain was related to 
the shoulder injury or to a separate neck problem. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 4; Jt. Ex. 3, p. 18) Dr. 
Kloc placed claimant at MMI for his back on February 14, 2017, and deferred to Dr. 
Potthoff with respect to restrictions. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 19)  
 

UHLENHOPP V. IOWA DEPT. OF TRANSPORTATION 
Page 4 
 
Claimant had an independent medical evaluation (IME) with Mark Taylor, M.D., 
which took place on January 24, 2018. (Cl. Ex. 1) Dr. Taylor’s report is dated February 
20, 2018. Dr. Taylor reviewed claimant’s medical records and performed a physical 
examination. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-7) He noted claimant’s symptoms at that time included 
shoulder pain when he extended his arm up or away from his body; neck stiffness and 
soreness on the left side and into the superior trapezius; and consistent low back pain, 
generally over the left low back, that occasionally radiates toward the left hip, buttock, 
and thigh. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 4-5) On physical examination, Dr. Taylor observed decreased 
range of motion in the left shoulder compared to the right. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 6) He recorded 
the following measurements: 
 
Shoulder 
Right/Left 
Flexion 
Extension Abduction Adduction Internal 
Rotation 
External 
Rotation 
Value 
175/140 
degrees 
60/40 
degrees 
170/110 
degrees 
40/35 
degrees 
70/40 
degrees 
95/70 
degrees 
 
He also recorded tenderness over various areas of the left shoulder, neck, and 
lower left lumbar spine. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 6-7)  
 
Dr. Taylor agreed with Dr. Potthoff regarding the date of MMI. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 8) 
Using the AMA Guides, he provided a 9 percent upper extremity impairment rating 
related to the left shoulder, which is equal to 5 percent of the whole person. He 
recommended a 6 percent whole person rating related to the lumbar spine. Finally, he 
recommended an additional 6 percent impairment related to the cervical spine. (Cl. Ex. 
1, pp. 8-9) Using the combined values chart, he assigned total permanent impairment of 
16 percent of the whole person. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 9)  
 
Dr. Taylor thought claimant might benefit from additional evaluation for his neck 
and back pain. He further recommended claimant continue with any home exercise he 
learned in physical therapy for his shoulder. Finally, with respect to restrictions, Dr. 
Taylor noted that claimant is “a strong individual” who had performed fairly physically 
demanding work for a number of years, but he had to alter how he performs his work 
activities. Therefore, he stated that as long as claimant was able to “continue in his 
current capacity and self-restrict when needed and/or obtain help if needed,” he would 
more than likely be able to continue in his current position. However, he added that if 
claimant were to seek alternate employment, he would recommend lifting predominately 
occur only between knee and chest level, and he recommended no more than 20 
pounds of force with the left arm above head level. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 9-10) He 
recommended most lifting activities occur with the left arm as close to his body as 
possible, and only rare to occasional overhead reaching with the left arm. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 
10) 
 
On February 6, 2018, shortly after his IME with Dr. Taylor, claimant returned to 
Dr. Potthoff complaining of a return of pain in his left trapezius. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 37) He said 
the pain started in his neck, and extended laterally toward the acromioclavicular (AC) 

UHLENHOPP V. IOWA DEPT. OF TRANSPORTATION 
Page 5 
 
joint. He also stated that the shoulder itself felt good. On physical examination, Dr. 
Potthoff noted active range of motion to “maybe 150 degrees in abduction” on the left, 
versus 170 degrees on the right. He noted good strength and internal and external 
rotation. Radiographs showed no evidence of complication of his previous labral repair.  
 
Dr. Potthoff opined that claimant’s trapezius pain could be coming from his neck. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 38) He stated claimant could have some degenerative disc disease of the 
cervical spine, or it could be postural from the way he was holding his shoulder. He 
recommended additional physical therapy. They also discussed which of claimant’s 
work duties bring on the pain, including wood chipping and lifting over shoulder level. 
Based on that discussion, Dr. Potthoff assigned restrictions of no wood chipping, and no 
lifting, pushing, or pulling greater than 25 pounds at or above shoulder level with the left 
upper extremity. He had nothing additional to offer, and recommended further workup of 
the cervical spine if his pain continued.  
 
The same day, claimant returned to Dr. Kloc for a follow up regarding his neck 
pain, but declined the trigger point injections that were offered as they had not been 
helpful previously. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 13) Claimant also resumed physical therapy and sought 
out chiropractic care. He also saw David Beck, M.D., at Mercy Neurosurgery on 
February 14, 2018. (Def. Ex. H, p. 48) Dr. Beck reviewed claimant’s previous MRI 
studies of his cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine, and noted minimal degeneration in 
the cervical and lumbar spine. He opined that “there is really nothing wrong.” He 
explained that while claimant may have some residual pain, it was not worth pursuing, 
and gave him a Medrol dose pack to see if it would help. He also recommended he add 
physical therapy to his low back. He did not believe claimant needed any restrictions for 
his back or neck. 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Potthoff on April 10, 2018. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 40) He reported 
that claimant had participated in therapy, which included dry needle modalities in the 
trapezius. Claimant felt that had helped with his shoulder range of motion. He had also 
been seeing a chiropractor, which also helped his shoulder range of motion. He 
reported that after three visits with the chiropractor he had no pain and excellent motion. 
Dr. Potthoff recorded active abduction of “maybe 130 degrees” in the left shoulder.  
 
Dr. Potthoff opined that because the chiropractic care was so helpful for range of 
motion and pain, claimant’s symptoms were coming from his neck. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 41) 
Claimant expressed pain in the neck going into the trapezius, and tightness in the 
shoulder as a result. As such, Dr. Potthoff did not have anything more to offer. He 
recommended claimant continue with the chiropractor. He recommended no lifting, 
pushing, or pulling more than 30 pounds at or below waist level, and no more than three 
pounds above shoulder level with the left upper extremity. He also restricted claimant 
from wood chipping. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 41-42) He advised claimant to follow up as needed, 
and again reiterated his opinion that “the issue is more cervical in etiology than left 
shoulder based.” (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 41) 
 

UHLENHOPP V. IOWA DEPT. OF TRANSPORTATION 
Page 6 
 
Dr. Potthoff’s findings regarding claimant’s range of motion are somewhat 
confusing, especially when compared to Dr. Taylor’s findings on January 24, 2018. On 
that date, Dr. Taylor found left shoulder abduction at 110 degrees, and significantly 
reduced internal and external rotation. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 6) However on February 6, 2018, 
about two weeks later, Dr. Potthoff documented “maybe 150 degrees” in abduction, and 
good internal and external rotation. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 37) Two months later, on April 10, 
2018, after claimant participated in physical therapy, Dr. Potthoff notes he had excellent 
motion in the shoulder, but then documents “maybe 130 degrees” of abduction. (Jt. Ex. 
5, p. 40) This calls the accuracy of Dr. Potthoff’s range of motion measurements into 
question.  
 
On May 4, 2018, Dr. Beck authored a letter to defendants’ claim representative 
and confirmed that claimant’s cervical spine diagnosis was cervical strain, presumably 
from the February 29, 2016 injury. (Def. Ex. H, p. 49) He did not believe claimant 
needed any additional treatment for his neck. He placed claimant at MMI, and did not 
recommend any permanent restrictions or assign any permanent impairment related to 
the cervical spine. 
 
On June 15, 2018, Dr. Potthoff wrote to defendants’ claim representative, and 
indicated he assigned claimant’s restrictions “secondary to his left shoulder pain.” (Def. 
Ex. G, p. 42) He stated that claimant should continue the restrictions “as long as he 
feels he needs them,” and he would be allowed to do more when he felt that he could. 
He reiterated that the restrictions were “just secondary to the pain that he feels,” and 
stated that he was not able to attribute the pain to claimant’s work injury on February 
29, 2016. He indicated claimant would be allowed to participate in activity as tolerated, 
and saw no reason to change his prior impairment rating.  
 
On July 9, 2018, defendants’ representative wrote to Dr. Potthoff seeking 
clarification regarding claimant’s restrictions. (Def. Ex. G, p. 43) Dr. Potthoff provided a 
Iowa DOT Patient Status Report (PSR) on July 25, 2018, and wrote claimant’s 
restrictions were 30 pounds lift, carry, push, and pull below shoulder level, and three 
pounds over shoulder level with the left upper extremity. (Def. Ex. G, p. 44) He stated 
that whether the restrictions were temporary or permanent was “up to patient.”  
 
The parties attended mediation and reached a settlement agreement in 
September of 2018. (Tr., p. 24) On October 16, 2018, the agreement for settlement was 
approved by the Workers’ Compensation Commissioner. (Def. Ex. C, p. 8) In addition to 
temporary benefits, the parties agreed that claimant was entitled to permanent partial 
disability (PPD) for 24 percent of the body as a whole, resulting in 120 weeks of 
compensation under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(u).1 (Def. Ex. C, p. 7) 
 
Claimant was back working at the DOT, and in November of 2018 he applied for 
a highway technician position. (Tr., pp. 28-29) During the interview, claimant testified 
                                                                 
1 As the injury occurred on February 29, 2016, the amendments to the workers’ compensation code 
passed in 2017 do not apply to this case. 

UHLENHOPP V. IOWA DEPT. OF TRANSPORTATION 
Page 7 
 
they were reviewing the lifting requirements, and he mentioned his restrictions from Dr. 
Potthoff. (Tr., p. 28) He testified that Ron Reichter, his supervisor, advised that he was 
not aware of any restrictions, and terminated the interview. (Tr., pp. 28-30) The 
following day, about halfway through his shift, he was sent home. (Tr., p. 29) He stated 
that Mr. Reichter advised he would have to use his sick leave, and go to his personal 
doctor to determine what weight restrictions were appropriate. (Tr., p. 31) Claimant 
testified that he tried to see his personal doctor, but when he said it involved a workers’ 
compensation claim, his doctor would not see him. (Tr., p. 33) He then tried to go back 
to physical therapy to see what his lifting limits were, but he was not able to get an 
appointment. 
 
Eventually, in February 2019, claimant sat down with Mr. Reichter and Randy 
Taylor, who he described as his “boss’s boss,” and completed a reasonable 
accommodation form. (Tr., p. 34) Claimant testified that Mr. Reichter and Mr. Taylor 
completed the form, and he was not aware of any medical professional being involved 
with completing the form. (Tr., pp. 34-35) The form states that the following 
accommodations were approved: 
 
1. Team lifting will be utilized in situations of both arms needed to lift above 
head. 
2. Lifting of 75lbs with one hand is not an essential function. Breaks will be 
granted as needed when operating a weed trimmer. 
3. Extra time or assistance will be available when servicing equipment. 
4. Team lifting is available and encouraged at all times. 
5. Team lifting is available and encouraged at all times.2 
 
The accommodations were signed by Randy Taylor on February 14, 2019. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 
30) 
 
 
Claimant testified that he has continued to work at the DOT since the 
accommodation form was completed. (Tr., p. 35) However, there are certain activities 
that give him difficulty. He testified that heavy lifting for long periods of time will cause 
problems. (Tr., p. 36) Also long periods of weed whacking and pulling or removing trees 
causes issues. He explained further that when windstorms come through and blow trees 
over, they will have to “yank and pull” tree limbs out from piles of trees to take them to 
the woodchipper, and at times they get too heavy for his shoulder. He testified that the 
woodchipper can fit a ten-inch log, up to 20 or 30 feet long. (Tr., p. 37) Some are 
smaller, and he can handle them, but the larger logs get heavy. He said there are times 
when he pulls or lifts too much and he feels his shoulder “pull,” like it is separating. 
When this happens, the next day it becomes swollen, stiff, and sore. (Tr., pp. 37-38) As 
a result, he has to go home and sit in a chair and take ibuprofen. (Tr., p. 38)  
 
 
Claimant testified that if he has the option, he will use a loader and dump truck to 
move trees and avoid the chipper, opting to burn the trees instead. (Tr., pp. 38-39) He 
                                                                 
2 It is unclear why the last two items on the list are identical. 

UHLENHOPP V. IOWA DEPT. OF TRANSPORTATION 
Page 8 
 
cannot drag the trees, so he has to lift them and carry them to the chipper, which can 
cause his back to become sore. (Tr., p. 39) His back also gets sore from sitting too long, 
using an older tractor without an Air Ride seat, and working in cold weather. (Tr., pp. 39-
40) Claimant testified that at times he has to see his chiropractor immediately due to the 
pain in his back. (Tr., pp. 41-42) He has continued to see a chiropractor on his own 
since the settlement, as no care has been authorized through workers’ compensation 
since that time. (Tr., p. 42) 
 
 
Outside of working for the DOT, claimant does some farming on his own land. 
(Tr., p. 42) He has a few cattle he tends, and has CRP that he has to mow and care for. 
(Tr., p. 43) He testified that this year he hired out all of his planting and fieldwork. He 
has also purchased a small utility tractor to use for dealing with logs on his property, 
rather than moving them by hand.  
 
On August 27, 2021, he filed the petition for review-reopening currently at issue. 
He returned to see Dr. Taylor on June 21, 2022, and Dr. Taylor’s report is dated June 
23, 2022. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 12) Dr. Taylor reviewed medical records from claimant’s 
treatment since the prior IME. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 13) He noted claimant had been back in 
physical therapy starting February 7, 2018, for his left neck, shoulder, and low back 
pain. He also reviewed the chiropractic records, and noted claimant continued with 
chiropractic care even after he finished the workers’ compensation approved visits. He 
also noted the updated letters from Dr. Potthoff regarding restrictions, as well as the 
accommodations form claimant was provided at work. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 14)  
 
At the time of his 2022 IME with Dr. Taylor, claimant expressed pain in the lateral 
and posterolateral aspect of his left shoulder. He stated he had minimal pain if his arm 
is at his side and if he is inactive, which was similar to the prior evaluation. However, he 
complained that cold weather was associated with increased pain regardless of his 
activities. He complained of increased pain when extending his arm away from his body, 
and a sharp pain with his shoulder “slipping” if he forcefully pulled anything. (Cl. Ex. 1, 
p. 15) Dr. Taylor noted that claimant’s range of motion had decreased, and he was 
unable to rotate. He demonstrated decreased internal rotation and especially decreased 
external rotation.  
 
Claimant also complained of pain over the left neck and upper trapezius that can 
extend up toward the skull. He explained that he “completely changed” how he performs 
his work activities in order to avoid aggravating his pain. With respect to his low back, 
he described persistent pain in the left low back and buttock, which can extend into the 
upper thigh as it intensifies. He stated that his pain levels were similar to his prior exam, 
but felt that the pain remained low due to the chiropractic care and remaining cautious. 
He felt that his pain increased with less activity than compared to his prior evaluation. 
 
Claimant advised Dr. Taylor that his work had not been pushing him as hard, as 
his new assistant supervisor had been helpful. With respect to the wood chipping, he 
explained that it was not the actual woodchipper that was the problem, but dragging the 
trees and branches to the chipper that bothered him. He also discussed driving the 

UHLENHOPP V. IOWA DEPT. OF TRANSPORTATION 
Page 9 
 
tractor through ruts and grooves when spraying, which aggravates his back pain. 
Overall, he told Dr. Taylor he generally self-restricts and works with his employer to try 
to avoid activities that are known to aggravate his symptoms. (Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 15-16) 
 
Dr. Taylor noted that claimant’s low back symptoms had gradually worsened with 
time, and his left shoulder had become “a bit more noticeable.” (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 16) He 
stated that on average, his neck had remained the same. 
 
On physical examination, Dr. Taylor documented the following range of motion 
values: 
 
Shoulder 
Right/Left 
Flexion 
Extension Abduction Adduction Internal 
Rotation 
External 
Rotation 
Value 
170/135 
degrees 
70/40 
degrees 
175/100 
degrees 
45/30 
degrees 
80/40 
degrees 
105/15 
degrees 
 
(Cl. Ex. 1, p. 17) Claimant’s cervical spine demonstrated 40 degrees of flexion and 50 
degrees of extension. Side-bending to the right aggravated his pain on the left side of 
the neck. He noted claimant had an element of scapular dyskinesia when elevating his 
arm. He had tenderness in several areas of his shoulder and upper trapezius, as well as 
the left mid to lower neck. 
 
 
Dr. Taylor’s diagnoses were chronic cervicalgia, left side; left shoulder labral tear 
status post surgery; persistent left shoulder arthralgia and decreased range of motion, 
as well as an element of scapular dyskinesia; and chronic low back pain status post 
prior injections and therapy.3  
 
 
Dr. Taylor opined that claimant’s continued need for chiropractic care was still 
related to the work injury. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 18) With respect to impairment, again using the 
AMA Guides, Dr. Taylor recommended a 12 percent upper extremity impairment for the 
left shoulder, which converts to a 7 percent whole person impairment. He indicated the 
increased impairment was mainly due to a decrease in abduction, a slight decrease in 
adduction, and a significant change regarding external rotation.  
 
 
With respect to the cervical spine, Dr. Taylor recommended the same value as 
previous; 6 percent of the whole person. Regarding the lumbar spine, however, he felt 
claimant had experienced a slow, but consistent, worsening of his left lower back and 
buttock pain, with less activity needed to aggravate his symptoms. As such, he 
recommended a rating of 7 percent of the whole person. When combined, Dr. Taylor 
recommended a total impairment of 19 percent of the whole person, as opposed to his 
prior combined rating of 16 percent.  
 
                                                                 
3 He also noted asymmetry of leg circumferences, but that does not appear to be a part of the workers’ 
compensation claim. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 18) 

UHLENHOPP V. IOWA DEPT. OF TRANSPORTATION 
Page 10 
 
 
As for restrictions, Dr. Taylor noted that claimant had learned to self-restrict his 
activities at work, and also obtains help as needed. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 19) He also tries to 
utilize equipment for heavy lifting, such as trees. Dr. Taylor recommended that claimant 
use heavy equipment whenever feasible for any heavier lifting or moving larger items 
such as trees. He stated that if claimant can continue to self-restrict, and if his employer 
continues to work with him in avoiding problematic tasks, he should be able to continue 
in his current position. He stated that specific lifting amounts were challenging to define, 
but if claimant was able to maintain his arms against his body, he can perform “quite a 
bit of lifting because he uses the right arm for the lifting and the left arm to stabilize the 
load.” However, if the lifting requires extending his arms away from the body, then his 
lifting limitations decrease, unless he is mainly using the right arm. 
 
 
Dr. Taylor ultimately agreed with Dr. Potthoff’s estimate that claimant can lift 30-
pounds on an occasional to frequent basis up to chest level, with the assumption that he 
can keep his left arm close to his body. He felt claimant could handle more than that on 
a rare or rare to occasional basis. As he extends his arm away from his body, especially 
when fully extended, he recommended ten pounds or less below shoulder level and five 
to ten pounds or less above shoulder level with the left arm. He recommended claimant 
avoid forceful pushing and pulling with the left arm extended outward away from his 
body, and no more than occasional overhead reaching with the left arm and only within 
his available range of motion. Finally, he noted that due to claimant’s significantly 
decreased external rotation, and moderately decreased internal rotation, claimant’s 
movements when performing certain activities would be limited, as he will have to 
reposition his entire body. As such, he will be slower performing certain tasks.  
 
 
Dr. Taylor did not recommend any additional restrictions related to the cervical 
spine, but reiterated that claimant should not perform more than occasional overhead 
tasks due to a combination of his neck and left shoulder. With respect to the low back, 
claimant should alternate sitting, standing, and walking as needed for comfort, and 
squat, bend, kneel, crawl, and climb ladders occasionally. He should also have the 
ability to stop and move around if sitting for a long period, such as when traveling. Dr. 
Taylor also noted that if he could use a tractor with an Air Ride seat, he could return to 
spraying on a limited basis. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 20) As for the woodchipper, he stated that the 
main issue is not running the machine, but lifting and maneuvering the large parts of 
trees. As such, he should utilize equipment and machinery to assist whenever possible. 
 
 
Dr. Taylor further opined that given the additional decrease in claimant’s range of 
motion, especially external rotation, as well as the possible component of scapular 
dyskinesia, he recommended consideration of a second opinion with a different 
orthopedic specialist. He further suggested if his back pain continued to worsen, he 
should be seen by a specialist. Otherwise, he should continue with chiropractic care. 
 
 
Claimant testified that Dr. Taylor’s examination lasted about two hours, and he 
used specific tools to measure range of motion. (Tr., p. 46) Given that Dr. Taylor’s 2022 
examination was the most recent, and apparently most thorough with respect to 
measurements and physical examination, I find it to be the most reliable when 

UHLENHOPP V. IOWA DEPT. OF TRANSPORTATION 
Page 11 
 
assessing claimant’s current condition and permanent impairment. Dr. Potthoff has not 
examined claimant since April 10, 2018, and his office note does not reflect that he used 
any tools to take precise measurements regarding strength or range of motion, and he 
was not as thorough in providing his estimates for the various planes of motion. (Jt. Ex. 
5, p. 40) 
 
 
Claimant testified that since the 2018 settlement, he has become more sensitive 
to cold weather. (Tr., p. 44) When he is in the cold, he becomes more stiff and sore, and 
it slows him down. He also notices more pain in his back, which affects his sleep. His 
shoulder range of motion has decreased, and he feels he is getting weaker. He believes 
this impacts him at work when he has to work outside in the cold. He agrees with the 
most recent restrictions recommended by Dr. Taylor, and testified that he presented 
them to Barry Thede at the DOT in July of 2022. (Tr., pp. 45-47) Mr. Thede is a 
supervisor who took over Randy Taylor’s position. (Tr., p. 47) Claimant testified that Mr. 
Thede told him he would discuss them with human resources and get back to him. At 
the time of hearing, claimant had not heard back from anyone at work regarding the 
restrictions. (Tr., pp. 47-48) 
 
 
That being said, claimant has not returned to any of the authorized treating 
providers since the settlement, and does not plan to do so. (Tr., p. 57) The only 
treatment he has had is chiropractic care, which is focused on his neck and low back. 
(Tr., pp. 57-58) The chiropractic care is not authorized, and claimant is not seeking 
alternate care for future treatment or reimbursement of expenses for the care he 
obtained on his own. (Tr., p. 58; Hearing Report) Claimant does not take any 
prescription medication for his work injury; only over-the-counter ibuprofen. (Tr., p. 60) 
At his deposition in May of 2022, he testified that his left shoulder symptoms were 
“about the same” as they were in 2018. (Def. Ex. E, p. 35; Deposition Transcript, p. 51) 
He said he still has pain in his shoulder, and it gets worse when it is cold outside. The 
same was true for his neck; he testified the pain remained about the same as at the 
time of settlement. With respect to his low back, he said the pain is “maybe a little 
worse,” and again indicated it seemed to be related to cold weather. (Def. Ex. E, p. 35; 
Depo. Tr., p. 52) 
 
 
In reviewing and comparing claimant’s first deposition, taken on July 20, 2018, 
prior to the agreement for settlement, it does not appear that claimant’s condition has 
significantly changed since that time. (See Def. Ex. D) He testified at that deposition that 
he did not believe he would be able to return to his prior work at Fareway, Curries, or 
Northern Pipe due to the heavy lifting involved. (Def. Ex. D, pp. 11-12; Depo. Tr., pp. 
12-16) He acknowledged that testimony at hearing. (Tr., pp. 71-72) At his 2018 
deposition, he also testified that he had limited range of motion in his left shoulder, and 
could not raise it over shoulder height. (Def. Ex. D, p. 20; Depo. Tr., p. 46) He also 
testified at the 2018 deposition regarding the difficulties he had at work, including 
dragging trees from the ditch for wood chipping, and lifting anything too heavy. (Def. Ex. 
D, p. 21; Depo. Tr., p. 52) Again, he confirmed that testimony at hearing. (Tr., p. 72) 
 

UHLENHOPP V. IOWA DEPT. OF TRANSPORTATION 
Page 12 
 
Claimant also testified, however, that his shoulder is stiffer and sorer, and his 
range of motion is not as good as it was in 2018. (Tr., p. 78) However, he continues to 
work in the same job he had at the time of settlement, and makes more money having 
received raises. (Tr., pp. 66-67) He continues to work overtime hours, and there have 
been no changes to his schedule or benefits. (Tr., pp. 67-68) He has not had any 
disciplinary issues or complaints about his job performance, and he plans to stay in his 
job for the foreseeable future. (Tr., pp. 68-69)  
 
Claimant’s supervisor, Ron Reichter, provided a sworn affidavit for hearing. (Def. 
Ex. A, pp. 1-2) The affidavit states that Mr. Reichter did not believe claimant was 
working under any work restrictions at the time of his November 2018 interview for the 
highway technician position. (Def. Ex. A, p. 1) He further stated that all highway 
technician associates, including claimant, are required to lift more than 30-pounds, and 
accurate lifting requirements for claimant’s position are set forth in the PDQ. (Def. Ex. A, 
p. 2) The affidavit is dated July 6, 2022. 
 
Amy Sturm, an affirmative action and equal employment opportunity officer for 
the DOT, also provided an affidavit. (Def. Ex. B) The affidavit states that if a DOT 
employee wishes to work under any restrictions or accommodations, whether 
recommended by a doctor or based on the employee’s perception of his or her physical 
capabilities, the employee is required to go through the Request for Reasonable 
Accommodation interactive process. (Def. Ex. B, p. 3) She indicated that claimant’s 
request for reasonable accommodation was received on November 15, 2018, seeking 
to follow the restrictions set forth in Dr. Potthoff’s July 25, 2018 patient status report. At 
that time, claimant’s supervisor, Mr. Reichter, responded to the request by seeking 
additional medical information. (Def. Ex. B, p. 4) Claimant was taken off work effective 
November 16, 2018, while his request was processed. According to Ms. Sturm, on 
December 21, 2018, claimant advised that he had arranged to undergo “capacity and 
range of motion testing” with his personal doctor. However, on February 5, 2019, 
claimant consented to using the patient status report from Dr. Potthoff rather than 
seeking additional information from his doctor. As such, on February 14, 2019, 
claimant’s request for reasonable accommodation was completed, as outlined above. 
(See also Cl. Ex. 2, p. 30) Ms. Sturm’s affidavit states that claimant continues to work 
under the approved accommodations. The affidavit is dated July 12, 2022. 
 
 
The affidavit is somewhat confusing, as it states the accommodations are based 
on Dr. Potthoff’s patient status report, which restricts claimant from lifting, carrying, 
pushing, or pulling more than 30 pounds below shoulder level, and 3 pounds above 
shoulder level with the left upper extremity. (Def. Ex. B, p. 5) However the approved 
accommodations, as noted above, state that team lifting will be utilized for overhead 
lifting, and lifting 75 pounds with one hand is not an essential function. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 30) 
There is nothing about lifting over 30 pounds below shoulder level, but it does state that 
team lifting is available and encouraged at all times. It also contradicts Mr. Reichter’s 
affidavit, where he states that he was not aware of any restrictions at the time of the 
2018 interview. Regardless, claimant testified both at his 2022 deposition, and at 
hearing, that he does not believe he has worked outside of Dr. Potthoff’s recommended 

UHLENHOPP V. IOWA DEPT. OF TRANSPORTATION 
Page 13 
 
restrictions from 2018 to the present time. (Tr., pp. 60-61; Def. Ex. E, p. 26; Depo. Tr., 
pp. 15-16) He testified that he is always careful about what he does. (Tr., p. 61)  
 
 
It is unclear from the evidence why claimant was taken off work from November 
16, 2018 through February 21, 2019. Claimant repeatedly testified that he was unclear 
as to why he was sent home and kept off work. (See Def. Ex. E, pp. 32-35; Depo. Tr., 
pp. 38-50; Tr., p. 76) While it seems there may have been some type of 
misunderstanding on the part of Mr. Reichter with respect to claimant’s restrictions, the 
evidence is not clear enough to determine whether claimant is entitled to healing period 
benefits for those dates.  
 
 
Dr. Taylor’s updated restrictions are essentially the same as the restrictions 
provided by Dr. Potthoff in 2018. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 19; Def. Ex. B, p. 5) They both 
recommend claimant avoid lifting more than 30 pounds below shoulder level, and Dr. 
Potthoff recommended lifting no more than three pounds over shoulder level with the 
left arm, while Dr. Taylor said no more than five to ten pounds. While it does appear 
from Dr. Taylor’s 2022 IME that claimant’s range of motion has gotten worse since the 
settlement, he has continued to do his job with no discipline or complaints regarding his 
performance. He also testified that it takes less activity to increase his symptoms, and 
he is more sensitive to cold weather, but again, these issues do not prevent him from 
continuing to do his job in the same manner as he was doing at the time of the 
settlement. In fact, he testified that had he been offered the highway technician job he 
applied for, he believed he could physically perform that job. (Tr., p. 62) He said the job 
was similar to his current position, but involves more work with asphalt and construction 
materials. Finally, claimant testified in his deposition and at hearing that he has been 
careful to work within Dr. Potthoff’s restrictions since before the 2018 settlement, up 
through the present time. (Tr., pp. 60-61; Def. Ex. E, p. 26; Depo. Tr., pp. 15-16) As 
such, he has not met his burden to prove that he sustained a change in condition such 
that he is entitled to increased compensation.  
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
Claimant brings this review-reopening proceeding. A review-reopening 
proceeding is appropriate whenever there has been a substantial change in condition 
since a prior arbitration award or settlement. Kohlhaas v. Hog Slat, Inc., 777 N.W.2d 
387 (Iowa 2009). Under Iowa Code section 86.14(2), this agency is authorized to 
reopen a prior award or settlement to inquire about whether the condition of the 
employee warrants an end to, diminishment of, or increase of compensation. Id. 
 
Upon review-reopening, claimant has the burden to show a change in condition 
related to the original injury since the original award or settlement was made. The 
change may be either economic or physical. Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 
N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Henderson v. Iles, 250 Iowa 787, 96 N.W.2d 321 (1959). A 
mere difference of opinion of experts as to the percentage of disability arising from an 
original injury is not sufficient to justify a different determination on a petition for review-
reopening. Bousfield v. Sisters of Mercy, 249 Iowa 64, 86 N.W.2d 109 (1957). Rather, 

UHLENHOPP V. IOWA DEPT. OF TRANSPORTATION 
Page 14 
 
claimant's condition must have worsened or deteriorated since the time of the initial 
award or settlement. Id. A failure of a condition to improve to the extent anticipated 
originally may also constitute a change of condition. Meyers v. Holiday Inn of Cedar 
Falls, Iowa, 272 N.W.2d 24 (Iowa App. 1978).   
 
The Iowa Supreme Court has addressed situations where a claimant returns to 
work with an accommodation. The Court stated: 
We note that when a settlement is reached in a worker’s compensation 
case, the injured’s loss of earning capacity is properly viewed “in terms of 
the injured worker’s present ability to earn in the competitive job market 
without regard to the accommodation furnished by one’s present 
employer.” 
See US West Communications, Inc. v. Overholser, 566 N.W.2d 876 (1997)(citing 
Thilges v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 528 N.W.2d 614, 617 (Iowa 1995)). 
 
A review-reopening proceeding is not a reevaluation of the facts and 
circumstances that were known at the time of the original settlement. See Kohlhaas, 
777 N.W.2d at 392. The claimant need not prove that the current extent of his disability 
was not contemplated by the prior arbitration or appeal decision. Id. The industrial 
disability award or agreement necessarily contemplated claimant’s earning capacity in 
the general labor market at the time the agreement for settlement was entered and 
approved.  Id.   
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995); Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 

UHLENHOPP V. IOWA DEPT. OF TRANSPORTATION 
Page 15 
 
 
In this case, I found that claimant did not meet his burden to prove that he 
sustained a substantial change in his physical condition such that an increased award is 
warranted. The physical activities that aggravated his symptoms prior to the 2018 
settlement have remained the same. Prior to settlement, claimant did not believe he 
would be capable of returning to his prior jobs at Fareway, Curries, or Northern Pipe. At 
the time of settlement, claimant believed he was working under Dr. Potthoff’s 
restrictions, and testified that he was careful not to work outside of those restrictions. 
Whether his supervisor understood that to be true is not relevant. Claimant was self-
restricting, and has continued to do so with no disciplinary actions or complaints about 
his job performance. He works the same job, at higher pay, with the same schedule, 
overtime opportunities, and benefits as he did at the time of settlement.  
 
Additionally, claimant has not sought any additional medical treatment for his 
shoulder since the time of settlement. The only medical care he has received is 
chiropractic care for his neck and low back, which was not authorized, and for which he 
has not sought reimbursement. He is not seeking alternate medical care. At his May 23, 
2022 deposition, he testified that his shoulder and neck symptoms were “pretty much” 
the same as they were at the time of settlement, other than when it is cold. He further 
testified his low back is “maybe a little worse,” but this has not stopped him from 
continuing to work. While Dr. Taylor documented some decreased range of motion in 
claimant’s shoulder, and provided a slightly higher impairment rating, that does not rise 
to the level of increased industrial loss under Iowa law. 
 
I conclude that claimant did not meet his burden to prove that he sustained a 
substantial change in his physical condition such that an increased award is warranted. 
Therefore, I conclude that claimant has not established entitlement to reopening or 
increase of his prior industrial disability award due to a physical change of condition. 
Iowa Code section 86.14(2). 
 
The next issue to determine is whether claimant is entitled to additional healing 
period benefits for the time he was taken off work from November 16, 2018 through 
February 21, 2019. Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable 
to an injured worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker 
has returned to work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially 
similar employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery. The 
healing period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable 
expectation of improvement of the disabling condition. See Armstrong Tire & Rubber 
Co. v. Kubli, 312 N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981). Healing period benefits can be 
interrupted or intermittent. Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
 
In this case, I found that the evidence was not clear as to the reason claimant 
was taken off work from November 16, 2018 through February 21, 2019. Claimant 
repeatedly testified that he was unclear as to why he was sent home and kept off work. 
It is possible there was a misunderstanding on the part of Mr. Reichter with respect to 
claimant’s restrictions, but the evidence is not clear enough to determine whether 
claimant is entitled to healing period benefits for those dates. As claimant did not meet 

UHLENHOPP V. IOWA DEPT. OF TRANSPORTATION 
Page 16 
 
his burden to prove entitlement to healing period benefits during this period, his claim 
for penalty benefits based on non-payment of those benefits is moot. 
 
The final issues to determine are whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement 
of his 2022 IME with Dr. Taylor, and taxation of costs. Section 85.39 permits an 
employee to be reimbursed for subsequent examination by a physician of the 
employee’s choice where an employer-retained physician has previously evaluated 
permanent disability and the employee believes that the initial evaluation is too low. In 
the review-reopening setting, defendants do not owe an independent medical evaluation 
unless they have obtained another permanent impairment rating from a physician of 
their own choosing since the prior award or settlement. Kohlhaas, 777 N.W.2d 387 at 
394-395.  
In this case, defendants did not obtain a medical report from any physician 
regarding permanent impairment after the agreement for settlement and before Dr. 
Taylor’s 2022 IME. I conclude that claimant failed to establish entitlement to 
reimbursement of Dr. Taylor’s IME pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
 
Finally, claimant seeks reimbursement of costs. (Cl. Ex. 5) Assessment of costs is 
a discretionary function of the agency. Iowa Code section 86.40.   
 
Based on the above findings of fact, I exercise the agency’s discretion and I 
conclude that each party should bear its own costs. 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
 
Claimant shall take nothing further from these proceedings. 
 
The parties shall bear their own costs. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this ___6th __ day of January, 2023. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 

UHLENHOPP V. IOWA DEPT. OF TRANSPORTATION 
Page 17 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Casey Steadman (via WCES) 
Nate Willems (via WCES) 
Sarah Timko (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
