Case Number: 20010303.01
Case Title:  SCHACHTERLE, VICKI V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Schachterle Vicki - 20010303.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
VICKI SCHACHTERLE 
  : 
         FILE NO.:  20010303.01 
 
 
  : 
Claimant, 
  : 
            A R B I T R A T I O N 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
      D E C I S I O N 
 
 
  : 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
 
 
  : 
Defendant. 
  :      Head Note Nos: 1400, 1800, 1803, 3200           
_________________________________ ____________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
The claimant, Vicki Schachterle, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa (“Fund”).  Benjamin Roth 
appeared on behalf of the claimant.  Andrew Duffelmeyer appeared on behalf of the 
defendant.   
 
The matter came on for hearing on April 16, 2024, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips.  Pursuant to an order of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, the hearing occurred electronically via Zoom.  
The hearing proceeded without significant difficulty.  
 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-8, and 
Defendant’s Exhibits AA-DD.  All the exhibits were received into evidence without 
objection.   
The claimant testified on her own behalf.  Jeanne Strand was appointed the 
official reporter and custodian of the notes of the proceeding.  The evidentiary record 
closed at the conclusion of the hearing, and the matter was considered fully submitted 
following briefing by the parties on May 13, 2024.     
STIPULATIONS 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged 
injury.   
  
2. That the claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of and in the course of 
his employment on August 13, 2020.   
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Jun-17  10:55:57     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SCHACHTERLE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
3. That, at the time of the work injury, the claimant’s gross earnings were three 
hundred seventy-three and 47/100 dollars ($373.47) per week, that the 
claimant was married, and entitled to two exemptions.  The resulting 
stipulated weekly compensation rate was two hundred seventy and 21/100 
dollars ($270.21).     
The defendants waived their affirmative defenses.  Entitlement to temporary disability 
and/or healing period benefits, and medical benefits were no longer in dispute. 
 
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
 
2. With regard to Fund benefits: 
 
a. Whether the claimant sustained a prior qualifying loss to her right arm 
in 2010.   
b. The extent of the functional loss from the prior qualifying loss. 
c. Whether the claimant sustained a compensable loss to the left leg on 
August 13, 2020.   
d. The extent of the functional loss from the second qualifying loss. 
e. The commencement date for Fund benefits, should any be awarded. 
f. Whether the Fund is entitled to a credit of 44.8 weeks pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.64.   
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Vicki Schachterle, the claimant, was 67 years old at the time of the hearing.  
(Testimony).  She is right-handed.  (Testimony).  She did not graduate from high school, 
but instead earned a GED from Ellsworth Community College in Iowa Falls, Iowa, in 
approximately 1976.  (Testimony).   
From 1976 to 1986, Ms. Schachterle worked as a bus driver for the Ackley-
Geneva Community School District.  (Claimant’s Exhibit 7:34).  She left that position 
because the school district closed.  (CE 7:34).  She then worked at an Ace Hardware 
known as Hampton Distributing in Hampton, Iowa, from 1986 to 2000.  (CE 7:34).  She 
was in charge of the greenhouse, designed Christmas trees, and mixed paint.  
(Testimony).  She left that position following a change in ownership.  (CE 7:34).  She 
then began working at Krieger’s Flower & Greenhouse in Iowa Falls, Iowa.  (CE 7:34).  
While working there she attended a floral design course for a very brief time.  

SCHACHTERLE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
(Testimony).  She tended a greenhouse and arranged flowers there from 2000 until the 
owner’s retirement in 2007.  (CE 7:34).   
In May of 2007, Ms. Schachterle began working in a part time position for Long 
Term Medical Supply (“Long Term”), in Hampton, Iowa.  (CE 7:34; Testimony).  This job 
required her to be in a retail store setting for about two-thirds of the time, and on the 
road servicing various nursing homes and customers one-third of the time.  (DE CC:2).  
She generally worked eight-hour days, but there would be times where she was in a 
retail store setting or on the road a little longer than eight hours.  (Testimony).  As part 
of her duties with Long Term, Ms. Schachterle took medical supplies such as 
wheelchairs, hospital beds, lift chairs, oxygen machines, and oxygen tanks to nursing 
homes and individuals’ homes.  (DE CC:2; Testimony).  This required lifting heavy tanks 
and machines, as well as pushing a cart.  (DE CC:3).  She also tested the machines at 
nursing homes and replaced parts as needed.  (DE CC:2).  Part of her job also required 
her to be in the office working on paperwork concerning the products which she 
maintained or delivered.  (DE CC:2).  When she was not on the road or working on 
paperwork, she worked in a retail store selling parts for CPAP machines along with 
wheelchairs and walkers.  (DE CC:2).   
Ms. Schachterle testified that oxygen machines and tanks could be heavy.  
(Testimony).  She needed to periodically lift these devices during installation, and while 
she cleaned them.  (Testimony).  Installing hospital beds and lift chairs required her to 
perform heavy lifting and carrying, as well.  (Testimony).   
Ms. Schachterle worked at Long Term until September 22, 2022.  (CE 7:34).  On 
that date, she received a negative write-up for performing certain tasks which her 
employer requested she not perform.  (Defendant’s Exhibit CC:1-2).  This angered her, 
so she resigned or retired.  (DE BB:2; CC:2).  She admitted that she chose to retire due 
to dissatisfaction with her boss and could have continued working but for that issue.  
(DE BB:2).   
Ms. Schachterle claims a first injury to her right hand and fingers.  (DE AA:3).  
She claimed in her answers to discovery that she experiences reduced strength and 
sensation in her right hand and fingers.  (DE AA:3).  She further claimed that this 
developed over time, “likely due to repetitive activities” that she performed at work and 
home.  (DE AA:3).   
The claimant visited Franklin General Hospital on July 3, 2009, with complaints of 
bilateral hand and foot pain dating back several weeks.  (Joint Exhibit 1:1).  Ms. 
Schachterle indicated that her feet felt “tingly and numb.”  (JE 1:1).  Her hands hurt in 
the morning, and she experienced issues with grip strength.  (JE 1:1).  The examining 
physician opined that the claimant’s pain may be due to carpal tunnel syndrome, and 
that they could not tell what was wrong with her feet.  (JE 1:1).  The doctor prescribed 
Medrol and recommended she wear cockup wrist splints, especially in the evening.  (JE 
1:1).   

SCHACHTERLE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
In May of 2011, Ms. Schachterle completed a screening indicating she had no 
issues or restrictions performing her job as a “CSR.”  (JE 2:26-27).   
Ms. Schachterle returned to Franklin General Hospital on August 15, 2014, 
where Toni Lauffer, D.O., examined her for complaints of arthritis in her right hand.  (JE 
1:2-3).  Ms. Schachterle told Dr. Lauffer that her right index finger began to turn on the 
end secondary to her arthritis.  (JE 1:2).  This also resulted in considerable pain in her 
right hand.  (JE 1:2).  Dr. Lauffer discussed certain medications and recommended that 
Ms. Schachterle get x-rays to confirm the arthritic developments in her hands.  (JE 1:2).  
X-rays showed moderate to advanced osteoarthritis, which was worse on the right than 
the left.  (JE 1:4).   
On April 3, 2015, Dr. Lauffer examined Ms. Schachterle again for a recheck 
regarding hypertension, heart failure, bilateral hand arthritis, depression, and allergic 
rhinitis.  (JE 1:6-7).  Ms. Schachterle complained of weight gain since her last visit.  (JE 
1:6).   
Ms. Schachterle participated in an occupational health assessment on May 14, 
2015.  (JE 2:21-25).  She checked boxes indicating she previously treated for hand, 
wrist and elbow issues including numbness, tingling, and arthritis.  (JE 2:22).   
On November 15, 2019, Dr. Lauffer again saw Ms. Schachterle for continued 
complaints of bilateral hand pain.  (JE 1:8-9).  Specifically, she experienced pain in the 
“DIP joint of [the] [second] finger of the left hand and [the] [second] and [fourth] finger of 
[the] right hand.”  (JE 1:9).  Her ongoing hand pain affected her work, specifically, any 
typing she performed.  (JE 1:9).  Dr. Lauffer reviewed the 2014 x-rays and again 
documented severe arthritis in the right hand.  (JE 1:9).  Dr. Lauffer made a referral to a 
hand specialist regarding potential joint replacement.  (JE 1:9).  Ms. Schachterle was to 
inform Dr. Lauffer when she desired to see the hand specialist.  (JE 1:9).   
Ms. Schachterle was descending steps into a basement on August 13, 2020, 
when she slipped on a pool of water on a step.  (CE 2:13).  She fell.  (CE 2:13).  She 
experienced immediate pain and noticed a deformity in her left lower extremity.  
(Testimony).   
On August 13, 2020, Ms. Schachterle reported to the emergency room with a left 
ankle injury.  (JE 3:30-35).  She noted that she slipped while descending steps at work 
resulting in a fall and injury to her left ankle.  (JE 3:30).  Ms. Schachterle could not walk 
or put any weight on her left ankle.  (JE 3:30).  She was provided with prescription 
medications while in the emergency room.  (JE 3:30-31).  The emergency room provider 
noted swelling and a gross deformity to the left ankle.  (JE 3:32).  X-rays showed a 
dislocated fracture of the left ankle.  (JE 3:32).  Specifically, the radiologist noted, 
“[a]cute, oblique fracture of the distal tibia with overriding of the fracture fragments by 
2.7 cm,” and “[a]cute fracture through the lateral malleolus with dislocation of the tibia 
with respect to the talus.”  (JE 3:32).  The provider recommended a CT scan for further 
evaluation of the fractures.  (JE 3:32).  The claimant’s fracture was reduced in the 
emergency room.  (JE 3:34).   

SCHACHTERLE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
Ms. Schachterle was then transferred to the emergency room at Mercy North 
Iowa.  (JE 4:36-43).  She recounted the incident to the provider, who found her to 
continue to have tenderness to palpation around the left ankle.  (JE 4:36).  X-rays 
continued to show the previously noted dislocated fractures.  (JE 4:38-39).  While in the 
emergency room, providers attempted to reduce her fracture on several more 
occasions.  (JE 4:37).  Since these were not successful, it was decided that she 
required open reduction and internal fixation of the fractures.  (JE 4:37).   
On August 14, 2020, Darron Jones, M.D., performed an open reduction internal 
fixation of the claimant’s left ankle fracture dislocation.  (JE 4:40-42).  Dr. Jones fixed a 
“very comminuted fibula” with a bridge plate.  (JE 4:41).  X-rays following the surgery 
showed no evidence of hardware complication or misalignment in the left distal tibia and 
fibula.  (JE 4:43).   
Ms. Schachterle followed up at the Mason City Clinic with Jared Knowles, PA-C, 
on August 28, 2020.  (JE 5:46-48).  She was doing well following the surgery and was 
no longer taking pain medications.  (JE 5:46).  She noted some paresthesia surrounding 
her incision but had no numbness or tingling into her foot.  (JE 5:46).  X-rays showed 
her fractures to be stable with no evidence of hardware issues.  (JE 5:47).  She was told 
to remain non-weightbearing for four weeks.  (JE 5:47).  The provider issued a note 
allowing her to return to light duty work on September 7, 2020, with restrictions of no 
lifting, pushing, or pulling, no use of stairs, no climbing ladders, and no weightbearing 
with her left leg.  (JE 5:48).   
On September 1, 2020, Ms. Schachterle called Dr. Jones and expressed that she 
could not return to work on September 7, 2020, unless she could perform 
weightbearing.  (JE 5:49).  Dr. Jones changed his restrictions and then kept Ms. 
Schachterle off of work through September 25, 2020.  (JE 5:49-50). 
Ms. Schachterle had another postsurgical follow-up visit with Dr. Jones on 
September 25, 2020.  (JE 5:51-54).  She reported “doing fine” during this visit with no 
problems.  (JE 5:51).  She performed some gentle range of motion exercises and told 
Dr. Jones that she felt as though she had a tight band around her foot.  (JE 5:51).  Dr. 
Jones allowed her to begin weightbearing and wearing her boot less often.  (JE 5:52).  
In one month, she was allowed to start taking her boot off and walking around her 
house.  (JE 5:52).  He allowed her to return to light duty work effective October 5, 2020, 
with a restriction of carrying less than 10 pounds.  (JE 5:54).   
Dr. Jones saw Ms. Schachterle again on November 9, 2020.  (JE 5:56-57).  Ms. 
Schachterle was doing well without wearing the boot for two weeks.  (JE 5:56).  She 
noted some swelling and difficulty wearing a shoe to Dr. Jones.  (JE 5:56).  Dr. Jones 
recommended she work on range of motion and strengthening of her left ankle.  (JE 
5:57).  He provided her with an ankle stabilizing orthosis to wear over a compression 
sock, and requested she return in three months.  (JE 5:57).   
On November 10, 2020, Ms. Schachterle called the doctor’s office and requested 
a note allowing her to return to work.  (JE 5:55).     

SCHACHTERLE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
The claimant returned to her surgeon’s office on February 8, 2021, for continued 
follow-up care.  (JE 5:58-61).  She complained of mild lateral swelling with some medial 
pain and discomfort over her medial malleolus.  (JE 5:58).  This was located in the area 
of the screws in her ankle and occurred on a daily basis.  (JE 5:58).  However, Ms. 
Schachterle told the doctor that she could work full duty and was “…able to do all the 
things she wants to do.”  (JE 5:58).  X-rays showed a “nicely healed” fracture.  (JE 
5:59).  Dr. Jones found Ms. Schachterle to have some tenderness over her foot.  (JE 
5:59).  He recommended that she stop wearing her ankle brace and continue her 
normal activities in an effort to alleviate her discomfort.  (JE 5:59).  The doctor 
requested she return in six months, at which time some of the screws may be removed.  
(JE 5:59).   
On August 18, 2021, Ms. Schachterle returned to see Dr. Jones.  (JE 5:63-65).  
She reported consistent pain around her ankle, especially in the area surrounding her 
hardware.  (JE 5:63).  Her left ankle also ached more when she stood on it.  (JE 5:63).  
X-rays showed no complications and only mild degenerative changes.  (JE 5:64).  Dr. 
Jones recommended removing the hardware from the claimant’s left leg.  (JE 5:64).   
Dr. Jones performed another surgery to the claimant on September 30, 2021, 
due to ongoing painful hardware in the left ankle.  (JE 4:44-45).  Plates and screws 
were removed from the claimant’s left ankle.  (JE 4:45).  Dr. Jones could easily lift the 
plate from the bone following removal of the screws.  (JE 4:45).   
An x-ray performed on October 8, 2021, showed a healed left bimalleolar ankle 
fracture, and removal of medial and lateral hardware.  (JE 5:62).  She told Dr. Jones 
during a visit on the same day that her ankle felt “much better…” and that she no longer 
experienced the pain which was present prior to the surgery.  (JE 5:66).  Dr. Jones kept 
her off work for two more weeks in order to allow the swelling to go down, and 
requested she return in one month.  (JE 5:67).  He allowed her to return to work on 
October 25, 2021.  (JE 5:67).   
On November 15, 2021, Dr. Jones saw Ms. Schachterle again.  (JE 5:68-70).  
She was doing well but complained of pain in the distal one third of the anterior medial 
tibia, which according to Dr. Jones was “…away from where we have done her surgery.”  
(JE 5:68).  He observed her walking without any significant issues.  (JE 5:68).  Dr. 
Jones also observed that Ms. Schachterle had good range of motion in her ankle.  (JE 
5:69).  She had plantar flexion to 40 degrees, neutral dorsiflexion, inversion of 30 
degrees, and eversion of 20 degrees.  (JE 5:69).  He found her to have significant 
tenderness along the medial border of her tibia from her mid tibia to the distal third of 
her tibia.  (JE 5:69).  Dr. Jones expressed confusion as to why Ms. Schachterle 
experienced pain in her tibia, but recommended soft tissue massage and 
desensitization.  (JE 5:70).  He allowed her to resume full activities and opined that she 
would achieve maximum medical improvement (“MMI”) after January 1, 2022.  (JE 
5:70).   
Dr. Jones issued a letter on January 11, 2022.  (JE 5:71).  He placed the 
claimant at MMI effective January 1, 2022.  (JE 5:71).  He recounted his prior range of 

SCHACHTERLE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
motion studies from November 15, 2021, when he referenced table 17-11 and 17-12 of 
the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, to provide an 
impairment rating of 3 percent due to loss of range of motion in Ms. Schachterle’s left 
ankle.  (JE 5:71).  He made no mention in his letter of any permanent restrictions.  (JE 
5:71).   
On February 7, 2022, Dr. Jones issued a subsequent missive, addressed to 
Robin Hamrick, R.N., of Complex Care solutions.  (JE 5:72).  He opined in this letter 
that the claimant had no permanent impairment since her hardware was removed and 
her range of motion was normal.  (JE 5:72).   
Dr. Jones examined Ms. Schachterle again on March 30, 2022.  (JE 5:73-75).  
Ms. Schachterle complained of pain along the distal third of the medial aspect of the 
tibia.  (JE 5:73).  This pain worsened if she walked a lot or carried anything.  (JE 5:73).  
She described the pain as feeling as though her ankle “wants to break.”  (JE 5:73).  She 
requested Dr. Jones make sure there was not “anything else going on where she had 
the hardware removal…”  (JE 5:73).  Dr. Jones ordered x-rays which showed some 
degenerative changes.  (JE 5:75).  He told Ms. Schachterle that these appeared to be 
the impetus for her issues, as “…where she wants to internally rotate her foot when she 
is walking…” created “increased stress on the medial tibia.”  (JE 5:74).  Dr. Jones 
recommended that the claimant use an ankle lacer to stabilize her ankle when she 
walked.  (JE 5:74).  He reiterated to her that she need not fear breaking anything in her 
bone.  (JE 5:74).   
Farid Manshadi, M.D., F.A.A.P.M.&R., conducted an IME on the claimant on 
August 13, 2022, and issued a report outlining his findings on August 29, 2022.  
(Claimant’s Exhibit 1:5-8).  Dr. Manshadi performed the examination and wrote the 
report at the request of claimant’s counsel.  (CE 1:1-8).  Dr. Manshadi is a fellow in the 
American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation.  (CE 1:10).  In preparing 
his report, Dr. Manshadi reviewed a number of medical records.  (CE 1:5).  He outlined 
those records in his report.  (CE 1:5-6).   
Dr. Manshadi also interviewed Ms. Schachterle.  (CE 1:6).  She complained of 
constant swelling around her left ankle, along with limited range of motion.  (CE 1:6).  
She also told the doctor that she experienced difficulty balancing on her left leg, using 
stairs, and ambulating on uneven surfaces.  (CE 1:6).  She could only stand or walk for 
15 minutes due to pain in her left ankle.  (CE 1:6).  She noted that she had difficulty 
gardening and could no longer clean her floors on her hands and knees.  (CE 1:6).  
Finally, Dr. Manshadi inserted one sentence indicating that Ms. Schachterle 
experienced right hand numbness and tingling for the last 20 years, for which she wore 
a nocturnal brace.  (CE 1:6).   
The report continued by outlining the findings of Dr. Manshadi’s physical 
examination of Ms. Schachterle.  (CE 1:6-7).  Ms. Schachterle had up to 5 mm of two 
point discrimination in her right hand.  (CE 1:6).  She had reduced light touch and 
pinprick sensation in her right hand.  (CE 1:6).  Dr. Manshadi observed swelling in the 
claimant’s left ankle along her medial and lateral malleoli.  (CE 1:6).  The doctor then 

SCHACHTERLE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
used a goniometer and documented the claimant’s range of motion in her left ankle.  
(CE 1:7).  Dr. Manshadi found Ms. Schachterle to have dorsiflexion “at -20 degrees to 
neutral,” 30 degrees of plantar flexion, 23 degrees of ankle inversion, and 9 degrees of 
left ankle eversion.  (CE 1:7).   
Dr. Manshadi opined that Ms. Schachterle showed clinical evidence of carpal 
tunnel syndrome on her right side due to “reduce strength involving the right APB as 
well as reduced sensation along the right median digits.”  (CE 1:7).  This diagnosis 
predated her left ankle injury, according to Dr. Manshadi.  (CE 1:7).  Dr. Manshadi then 
provided a diagnosis that he related to the August 13, 2020, work injury, and opined that 
Ms. Schachterle experienced reduced range of motion in her left ankle, along with pain.  
(CE 1:7).  He placed Ms. Schachterle at MMI as of August 12, 2022, for her left ankle 
issues.  (CE 1:7).   
Dr. Manshadi then provided impairment ratings for Ms. Schachterle’s right hand 
carpal tunnel syndrome using “Chapter 16, Tables 16-10, Table 16-11, and finally Table 
16-15.”  (CE 1:7).  There is no indication or reference to the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, in Dr. Manshadi’s report.  (CE 1:7).  Using the 
aforementioned tables, Dr. Manshadi assigned an 8 percent impairment to the right 
upper extremity for sensory deficits, and a 2 percent impairment to the right upper 
extremity for motor deficits.   (CE 1:7).  The result was a 10 percent permanent 
impairment to the claimant’s right upper extremity.  (CE 1:7).  Dr. Manshadi then used 
“Chapter 17, specifically Table 17-11 and Table 17-12” to assign a 9 percent impairment 
to the claimant’s left lower extremity.  (CE 1:7).  Again, there was no reference to the 
version of the Guides or book used by Dr. Manshadi.  (CE 1:7).   
The doctor recommended permanent restrictions of no repetitious gripping or 
sustained gripping with Ms. Schachterle’s right hand.  (CE 1:7-8).  With regard to the left 
ankle, Dr. Manshadi opined that Ms. Schachterle should be allowed to sit, stand, and 
walk on an as needed basis.  (CE 1:8).  He allowed her to ascend and descend stairs 
on occasion, while avoiding ladders entirely.  (CE 1:8).  She also was to avoid uneven 
surfaces and avoid squatting with her left leg.  (CE 1:8).  Finally, Dr. Manshadi opined 
that Ms. Schachterle may benefit from shoe inserts or orthotics, while also not ruling out 
the possibility of a future unspecified left ankle surgery.  (CE 1:8).   
Dr. Lauffer examined Ms. Schachterle again on September 26, 2022.  (JE 1:10-
11).  Ms. Schachterle complained of hot flashes, sweating, fatigue, and 
lightheadedness.  (JE 1:10).  She requested a thyroid panel due to a family history of 
thyroid issues.  (JE 1:10).  There is a note of chronic edema in her left lower leg and 
ankle in the area where she previously had surgery.  (JE 1:11).   
On August 29, 2023, Ms. Schachterle saw Dr. Lauffer again requesting a 
handicapped parking placard for her vehicle due to her left ankle and leg issues.  (JE 
1:12-15).  She noted intermittent swelling in the left ankle along with problems walking 
on hard surfaces.  (JE 1:12).   

SCHACHTERLE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
Dr. Lauffer visited with Ms. Schachterle again on September 12, 2023.  (JE 1:17-
20).  Ms. Schachterle complained of lightheadedness and a feeling as though she were 
in a “fog” and with her equilibrium being “off.”  (JE 1:17).  She described it as though her 
head was heavy and difficult to hold up.  (JE 1:17).  Dr. Lauffer expressed concern that 
the claimant suffered a stroke and referred her to have an MRI of her brain.  (JE 1:18).  
The MRI was eventually performed, and the record updated on September 18, 2023, 
noting that the claimant’s brain looked good despite mild decreased brain volume on the 
right.  (JE 1:16).  Despite continued issues, Ms. Schachterle refused a referral to 
neurology.  (JE 1:16).   
At the time of the hearing, and her deposition, Ms. Schachterle experienced 
difficulties with running, climbing ladders, walking on hard surfaces, and walking on 
sand.  (DE CC:7).  She testified that she has to ascend and descend stairs sideways.  
(DE CC:8).  She also described an electrical shock-type feeling if any pressure is placed 
on her left ankle.  (DE CC:7).  She overwinters in Florida and had significant difficulties 
walking on beaches.  (DE CC:7; Testimony).  Ms. Schachterle maintains a large garden.  
(DE CC:9; Testimony).  She claimed that her injury to her left lower extremity 
significantly hampers her ability to tend to her gardens.  (DE CC:9; Testimony).   
Finally, Ms. Schachterle testified that she was not very familiar with computers.  
(Testimony).  While she learned to run a cash register, she could not type very well.  
(Testimony).  She felt she could no longer perform a position such as the one she 
performed at Ace Hardware or the floral position due to her ongoing issues with her leg.  
(Testimony).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.904(3).   
The claimant alleges entitlement to Fund benefits based upon carpal tunnel 
syndrome in her right arm dating back to 2010, and due to a compensable loss to her 
left leg on August 13, 2020.  The Fund alleges that the claimant did not sustain a first 
injury or a second injury for Fund purposes, and thus is not entitled to Fund benefits. 
Iowa Code 85.64 governs Second Injury Fund liability.  Before any liability of the 
Fund is triggered, three requirements must be met.  These requirements are: 1. The 
employee must have lost or lost the use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye; 2. The 
employee must sustain a loss or loss of use of another specified member or organ 
through a compensable injury; and, 3. Permanent disability must exist as to both the 
initial injury and the second injury.   
The Second Injury Fund Act exists to encourage the hiring of handicapped 
persons by making a current employer responsible only for the amount of disability 
related to an injury occurring while that employer employed the handicapped individual, 
as if the individual had no preexisting disability.  See Anderson v. Second Injury Fund, 

SCHACHTERLE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 10 
262 N.W.2d 789 (Iowa 1978); 15 Iowa Practice, Workers’ Compensation, Lawyer, 
Section 17:1, p. 211 (2014-2015).  While the Second Injury Fund may be entitled to a 
credit for the compensable value of the previously disabled scheduled member, the 
Second Injury Fund is not entitled to credit for any prior unscheduled injuries.  See 
e.g.  Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Kratzer, 778 N.W.2d 42 (Iowa 2010).   
The Fund is responsible for the industrial disability present after the second injury 
that exceeds the disability attributable to the first and second injuries.  Iowa Code 
85.64.  Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467 (Iowa 1990); Second 
Injury Fund v. Neelans, 436 N.W.2d 355 (Iowa 1989); Second Injury Fund v. Mich. Coal 
Co., 274 N.W.2d 300 (Iowa 1970).  The second injury may be a bilateral injury.  Second 
Injury Fund of Iowa v. George, 737 N.W.2d 141 (Iowa 2007). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is 
probable, rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 
148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); 
Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996).   
 
The question of medical causation is “essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.”  Cedar Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844-45 (Iowa 
2011).  The commissioner, as the trier of fact, must “weigh the evidence and measure 
the credibility of witnesses.”  Id.  The trier of fact may accept or reject expert testimony, 
even if uncontroverted, in whole or in part.  Frye, 569 N.W.2d at 156.  When considering 
the weight of an expert opinion, the fact-finder may consider whether the examination 
occurred shortly after the claimant was injured, the compensation arrangement, the 
nature and extent of the examination, the expert’s education, experience, training, and 
practice, and “all other factors which bear upon the weight and value” of the opinion.  
Rockwell Graphic Sys., Inc. v. Prince, 366 N.W.2d 187, 192 (Iowa 1985).  Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994).  Supportive lay testimony may be used 
to buttress expert testimony, and therefore is also relevant and material to the causation 
question.   
Iowa employers take an employee subject to any active or dormant health 
problems and must exercise care to avoid injury to both the weak and infirm and the 
strong and healthy.  Hanson v. Dickinson, 188 Iowa 728, 176 N.W. 823 (1920).  While a 
claimant must show that the injury proximately caused the medical condition sought to 
be compensable, it is well established that a cause is “proximate” when it is a 
substantial factor, or even the primary or most substantial cause to be compensable 
under the Iowa workers’ compensation system.  Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 
N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994); Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 
1980).   

SCHACHTERLE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 11 
The first question is whether the claimant lost the use of one of the enumerated 
members, specifically, in this case, her right arm.  The claimant alleges that she has 
carpal tunnel syndrome in her right upper extremity.  She bases this claim on two 
mentions throughout her medical records.  The first, is from a 2009 visit with a provider 
at Franklin General Hospital, where she complained of bilateral hand and foot pain 
dating back several weeks.  Ms. Schachterle explained that she experienced pain in her 
hands, along with grip strength issues.  The examining provider documented that Ms. 
Schachterle’s pain could be due to carpal tunnel syndrome.  Ms. Schachterle testified 
that she was told that she could either have surgery or wear cockup wrist splints.  Ms. 
Schachterle recounted anecdotal evidence of several friends or acquaintances who did 
not experience positive results following surgical procedures to correct carpal tunnel 
syndrome.  Based upon this, she chose not to proceed with surgery.  Instead, she 
chose to wear the cockup wrist splints.  As of the time of the hearing, Ms. Schachterle 
continued to wear these splints when she experienced wrist pain.   
Ms. Schachterle followed up for complaints of right-hand pain in 2014, which was 
diagnosed as arthritis.  She followed up on this pain in 2019 when she had joint pain in 
the second and fourth fingers of her right hand.  She was referred to a hand specialist, 
but it does not appear she ever sought the recommended follow-up care.   
The next doctor to document right upper extremity issues was Dr. Manshadi, the 
claimant’s chosen IME physician.  Dr. Manshadi interviewed the claimant and reviewed 
a number of medical records.  Notably, he did not review the 2009 record in which a 
preliminary diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome was mentioned.  Based upon his 
examination of Ms. Schachterle, his review of medical records, and his experience, Dr. 
Manshadi opined that Ms. Schachterle demonstrated clinical evidence of carpal tunnel 
syndrome on her right side.  Evidence of this was reduced strength in the “right APB” as 
well as reduced sensation along the right median digits.  Dr. Manshadi also documented 
a positive Phalen’s sign in the right hand.  Based upon his expertise, Dr. Manshadi 
opined that this predated the August 13, 2020, work injury.   
Dr. Manshadi opined further that the claimant’s right carpal tunnel syndrome was 
a cause of permanent disability, and provided an impairment rating pursuant to Chapter 
16, Table 16-10, Table 16-11, and Table 16-15 of the Guides.  Chapter 16 of the Guides 
pertains to impairments to the upper extremities.  On page 495 of the Guides, the 
authors discuss carpal tunnel syndrome as “the most common of nerve compression 
lesions” which “involves the median nerve at the volar aspect of the wrist.”  Guides, 
page 495.  The Guides continues by identifying a number of signs or symptoms 
indicative to a provider of the presence of carpal tunnel syndrome.  Id.  These include 
weakness or atrophy of the wrist, the presence of Phalen’s sign, and motor and sensory 
electroneuromyographic abnormalities.  Id.  This is illustrative insofar as it confirms the 
claimant’s contention that carpal tunnel syndrome involves a disability to the median 
nerve of the volar wrist and that this represents entrapment or compression neuropathy.  
Id.  The Guides continues by providing an impairment rating in situations where optimal 
recovery time has elapsed following a surgical decompression of the carpal tunnel.  Id.  
The Fund argues that this language discredits the opinions of Dr. Manshadi, insofar as 
his use of Tables 16-10, 16-11, and 16-15 in providing his permanent impairment rating.  

SCHACHTERLE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 12 
I disagree.  In fact, Table 16-15 provides for various permanent impairment ratings in 
the event of deficits to major peripheral nerves, which includes reference to the median 
peripheral nerve.  Id. at 492.  While Dr. Manshadi did not refer to the 2009 medical 
record, he performed an examination and recorded several signs and symptoms of 
carpal tunnel syndrome, as defined by the Guides.   
The opinions in the 2009 record, and in Dr. Manshadi’s report are unrebutted.  
They also appear to be the most credible as noted in my foregoing analysis.  Based 
upon the foregoing, the claimant has proven, by a preponderance of the evidence that 
she lost the use of her right upper extremity due to her carpal tunnel syndrome, and that 
this loss of use predated her August 13, 2020, work injury.   
The next aspect to examine is whether the claimant sustained a compensable 
injury to another scheduled member.  Ms. Schachterle slipped and fell while walking 
downstairs at work.  She felt immediate pain in her left lower extremity, near her ankle.  
She also had a significant deformity in her left ankle.  She was transported to the 
emergency room.  Ms. Schachterle fractured her left distal tibia and fibula.  After a 
number of attempts to set the fractures in the emergency room, a surgery was 
performed on Ms. Schachterle’s left lower extremity.  The surgeon placed screws and 
plates in order to set the fractures.   
Following the surgery, Ms. Schachterle continued to complain of aches and 
tenderness over her left ankle around the hardware.  By August of 2021, Dr. Jones, who 
performed the original surgery, recommended removing hardware from the claimant’s 
left lower extremity.  This was done on September 30, 2021.   
Since the removal of the hardware, Ms. Schachterle indicated that she continued 
to have pain in her tibia, though Dr. Jones indicated that this was away from where her 
surgery occurred.  Dr. Jones recommended that she perform soft tissue massage and 
desensitization activities in order to relieve her pain.  He also took range of motion 
measurements in November of 2021.  In January of 2022, Dr. Jones issued a letter 
placing the claimant at MMI as of January 1, 2022, and opining that the claimant had a 
3 percent permanent impairment to her left lower extremity due to a loss of range of 
motion.  Dr. Jones later amended this opinion in February of 2022, in response to a 
request from a nurse case manager.  The nurse’s letter is not included in the record.  In 
February of 2022, Dr. Jones changed his opinion to indicate that Ms. Schachterle had 
minor changes in range of motion that resulted in no permanent impairment.   
Dr. Jones examined the claimant again in March of 2022 due to her feeling as 
though her ankle would snap.  He opined that her fractures healed well and 
recommended that she wear an ankle lacer to stabilize her ankle and prevent her from 
internally rotating her foot while walking.  He made no changes to his prior opinions.   
Dr. Manshadi, at the request of the claimant, completed an IME.  He documented 
that the claimant had difficulty balancing on her left leg, with using stairs, and 
ambulating on uneven surfaces.  He also documented various changes to the claimant’s 
range of motion.  He placed her at MMI as of August 12, 2022, for her left lower 

SCHACHTERLE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 13 
extremity issues.  He then assigned a 9 percent permanent impairment to the claimant’s 
left lower extremity based upon Table 17-11 and 17-12 of Chapter 17.  These match up 
to the applicable section of the Guides.   
There are no other opinions as to the alleged permanency stemming from the 
claimant’s left lower extremity injury.   
Dr. Jones’ credibility is greatly hurt by his second opinion letter.  There is no 
indication as to what about Ms. Schachterle’s range of motion changed that caused him 
to change his opinions on permanent impairment.  Dr. Manshadi’s opinions are most 
credible on these issues.  He performed the most recent examination of the claimant.  
He provided a clear opinion when compared to other medical opinions.  Therefore, I 
accept Dr. Manshadi’s opinions as to the claimant’s permanent impairment regarding 
her left lower extremity.   
Considering the foregoing, the claimant has established entitlement to Fund 
benefits.  Under the Fund statute, the Fund compensates the injured worker for the 
industrial disability incurred following the second injury.  Industrial disability was defined 
as follows: “[i]t is therefore plain that the Legislature intended the term ‘disability’ to 
mean ‘industrial disability’ or loss of earning capacity and not a mere ‘functional 
disability’ to be computed in terms of percentages of the total physical and mental ability 
of a normal man.”  Diederich v. Tri-City R. Co., 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 899 (1935) 
 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee’s age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted, and the employer’s offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.S.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961).   
A loss of earning capacity due to voluntary choice or lack of motivation to return 
to work is not compensable.  Malget v. John Deere Waterloo Works, File No. 5048441 
(Remand Dec. May 23, 2018); Rus v. Bradley Puhrmann, File No. 5037928 (App. 
December 16, 2014); Gaffney v. Nordstrom, File No. 5026533 (App. September 7, 
2011); Snow v. Chevron Phillips Chemical Co., File No. 5016619 (App. October 25, 
2007); Copeland v. Boone’s Book and Bible Store, File No. 1059319 (App. October 14, 
1997); See also Brown v. Nissen Corp., 89-90 IAWC 56, 62 (App. 1989)(no prima facie 
showing that claimant is unemployable when claimant did not make an attempt for 
vocational rehabilitation).   
 
Ms. Schachterle was 67 years old at the time of the hearing.  She obtained a 
GED in approximately 1976.  Since then she took one short course in floral design, but 
has no other formal education.   

SCHACHTERLE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 14 
 
She worked as a school bus driver, a florist, as a clerk at a hardware store, and 
for Long Term.  Generally, her positions were customer facing and required her to 
perform some modicum of physical labor, or to be on her feet for some part of the day.   
 
Ms. Schachterle has carpal tunnel syndrome.  This causes her periodic 
symptoms, for which she wears wrist braces.  They generally would not impede her 
employment, based upon my review of the record.  She also experienced severe 
fractures to her left lower extremity on August 13, 2020, following a fall.  These fractures 
necessitated the placement of hardware to fix.  After the fractures were healed, Ms. 
Schachterle continued to experience pain in her left lower extremity.  Thus, Dr. Jones 
removed the hardware.  Despite the removal of the hardware, Ms. Schachterle 
continues to complain of pain and instability in her left lower extremity.  She can no 
longer participate in certain hobbies such as gardening, rock hunting, and shell hunting.  
She has altered the way that she ascends and descends stairs.  She experiences 
difficulties with walking on uneven terrain.  Walking on hard flooring increases her pain.  
As a result of her difficulty with walking, she obtained a handicapped parking pass.  She 
also has some, albeit minor, reductions in range of motion in her left ankle.   
 
Dr. Jones initially offered an impairment rating of 3 percent to Ms. Schachterle’s 
left lower extremity.  He later amended this to opine that Ms. Schachterle had no 
permanent impairment.  Dr. Manshadi provided the claimant with a 10 percent 
permanent impairment to the right upper extremity due to her ongoing carpal tunnel 
syndrome.  He also provided her with a 9 percent impairment to the claimant’s left lower 
extremity for deficits in her range of motion.   
 
Dr. Jones offered no restrictions for the claimant.  Dr. Manshadi provided the 
claimant with restrictions of being allowed to sit, stand, and walk, on an as needed 
basis, only using stairs occasionally, and avoiding ladders entirely.  She also was to 
avoid uneven surfaces and squatting on her left leg.  Dr. Manshadi also recommended 
shoe inserts or orthotics.  These restrictions would certainly affect the categories of jobs 
which may be available to Ms. Schachterle.  Unfortunately, there is no objective 
evidence, such as a vocational assessment, that illustrate to what extent Ms. 
Schachterle’s employment opportunities or earning capacity is reduced.   
 
It is important to note that Ms. Schachterle was released to work full duty by Dr. 
Jones.  She returned to her part time employment with her employer following her 
recovery from her first and second surgeries.  While she had some assistance 
performing her work, she was told by her employer that she could work full time if she 
were able.  She also reported no adverse employment actions following her return.   
 
The biggest issue in evidence as it comes to the extent of Ms. Schachterle’s 
industrial disability is her motivation to return to work and the offer of work provided by 
her prior employer.  Ms. Schachterle tried to testify at the hearing that the after-effects 
of her work injury contributed in large part to her retiring from her job with the employer 
in this case.  The overwhelming evidence indicates that she attempted to alter her 
testimony to her own benefit at the hearing.  Both her deposition testimony, some of her 
hearing testimony, and her discovery responses, indicate that Ms. Schachterle 

SCHACHTERLE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 15 
successfully completed her return to employment and worked there until she 
experienced a conflict with her supervisor.  She became angry with her supervisor due 
to a dispute.  As a result of this, she resigned her employment and retired.  She collects 
retirement benefits from Social Security.  She spends her winters in Florida.   
 
Since her retirement, Ms. Schachterle developed a need for costly dental work.  
This requires her to obtain more money in order to complete.  As a result, she decided 
that she needed to return to work.  While she indicated a passing interest in several 
positions in Iowa, she never applied for these positions.  In fact, she has not applied for 
any employment since her retirement from her final employer.  Therefore, it is difficult to 
determine her exact loss of earning capacity.   
 
Ms. Schachterle has restrictions placed upon her, and has some permanent 
impairment based upon Dr. Manshadi’s opinions.  She also testified to limitations in her 
ability to walk for long distances and to complete some of her hobbies.  However, I am 
concerned by Ms. Schachterle’s motivation to return to the workforce following her 
retirement.  This greatly impacts her loss of earning capacity and/or industrial disability 
claim.  As noted, she voluntarily retired, and has not sought to return to the workforce, 
but for her need to finance some potential dental work.  She mentioned some potential 
options for future employment; however, she has made no application for work since 
her retirement.   
 
Based upon the foregoing, I find that the claimant sustained a 15 percent 
industrial disability.  Compensation shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the 
disability bears to the body as a whole.  Iowa Code section 85.34.  Thus, the claimant is 
awarded 75 weeks of benefits at the stipulated rate of compensation.   
Subsequent to conclusion of the arbitration hearing, the parties reached out to 
the undersigned and indicated that they reached an agreement that, if any Fund 
benefits were awarded, the commencement date would be May 30, 2022.  Therefore, 
benefits shall commence on that date.  The parties further agreed that the Fund is 
entitled to a credit of 44.8 weeks of benefits at the stipulated rate.   
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
That the Fund shall pay the claimant 75 weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits at the stipulated rate.   
That the commencement date for Fund benefits is May 30, 2022.   
That the Fund is entitled to a credit of 44.8 weeks of benefits.   
That the Fund shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest.  All interest on past due weekly compensation benefits shall be payable at an 
annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal 

SCHACHTERLE V. SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 16 
reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  
See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018).   
That the defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by 
this agency pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 3.1(2) and 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 11.7.  
Signed and filed this __17th ___ day of June, 2024. 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Benjamin Roth 
 
(via WCES) 
Andrew Duffelmeyer 
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Com pensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
  
   ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
