Case Number: 22008961.04
Case Title:  FISHER, ANDRE V. KINSETH HOTEL CORPORATION
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Fisher Andre- 22008961.04M.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
ANDRE FISHER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
     File No. 22008961.04 
 
 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
KINSETH HOTEL CORPORATION, 
  : 
 
 
  :              ALTERNATE MEDICAL CARE           
 
Employer, 
  :                               
 
 
  :                            DECISION  
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
GENERAL CASUALTY COMPANY OF 
  : 
WISCONSIN,  
  :  
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :                         Headnote: 2701  
 
Defendants. 
  : 
 
 
  : 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
This is a contested case proceeding under Iowa Code chapters 85 and 17A. The 
expedited procedure of rule 876 IAC 4.48 is invoked by claimant, Andre Fisher.  
Claimant appeared through his attorney, Nick Cooling. Defendants appeared through 
their attorney, Kathryn Johnson. Claimant’s petition was filed on September 22, 2023. 
Defendants filed an answer on October 4, 2023. Defendants do not dispute liability for 
the condition on which the claim for alternate care is based. 
The alternate medical care claim came on for hearing on October 4, 2023. The 
proceedings were digitally recorded. That recording constitutes the official record of this 
proceeding. Pursuant to the Commissioner’s July 21, 2023 Order, the undersigned has 
been delegated authority to issue a final agency decision in this alternate medical care 
proceeding. Therefore, this ruling is designated final agency action and any appeal of 
the decision would be to the Iowa District Court pursuant to Iowa Code section 17A. 
The record consists of Claimant’s Exhibits 1-3, and Defendants’ Exhibit A. Both 
attorneys provided oral arguments to support their positions.  
ISSUE 
The issue presented for resolution is whether the claimant is entitled to alternate 
medical care consisting of an order that defendants provide claimant with a smoking 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Oct-05  11:14:33     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

FISHER V. KINSETH HOTEL CORPORATION  
Page 2 
 
 
cessation program, and authorized treatment with a spine specialist or neurosurgeon 
other than Brett Rosenthal, M.D., or Trevor Schmitz, M.D. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
This case was the subject of a prior alternate care hearing, which took place on 
May 19, 2023 before the undersigned. The decision was filed the same day, and denied 
claimant’s request for alternate medical care. By way of background, claimant sustained 
an injury to his lower back on July 14, 2022. Defendants provided authorized care with 
Dr. Rosenthal, who recommended a facetectomy and interbody fusion surgery. The 
recommendation for surgery was made in October of 2022. Dr. Rosenthal advised 
claimant he would not perform the surgery until claimant was nicotine-free. 
On April 27, 2023, claimant reported to Dr. Rosenthal that he was 26-days free of 
nicotine. However, Dr. Rosenthal ran a nicotine test, which indicated otherwise. Dr. 
Rosenthal stated that since it was the second time claimant had been dishonest about 
his smoking cessation progress, the doctor-patient relationship had been compromised. 
Dr. Rosenthal stated that he did not have any reliable surgical interventions other than 
the fusion surgery, so he discharged claimant from his care as he did not have anything 
else to offer safely. He also placed claimant at maximum medical improvement (MMI) 
since he had nothing more to offer. 
At the time of the prior alternate care hearing, defendants had contacted Trevor 
Schmitz, M.D., at Iowa Ortho, who was in the process of reviewing claimant’s medical 
records to determine whether he would see claimant. As such, claimant’s petition for 
alternate medical care was denied because defendants continued to provide reasonable 
care. Since that time, claimant has seen Dr. Schmitz. On June 23, 2023, Dr. Schmitz 
noted that Dr. Rosenthal had previously recommended surgery, but claimant had 
trouble with stopping nicotine use. (Claimant’s Exhibit 3, page 1) His note indicates that 
claimant had stopped nicotine use on that date. Claimant reported pain at a level 8 out 
of 10.  
Dr. Schmitz reviewed claimant’s prior MRI, and noted a large disc bulge with 
bilateral foraminal stenosis causing questionable L5 neural impingement. (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 
3-4) He noted that claimant had subjective reports of radiculopathy, but had not had an 
EMG. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 4) He ordered an EMG to confirm lumbar radiculopathy prior to 
surgery, as well as a urine nicotine test to be performed the same day. He noted that if 
the EMG came back negative or the nicotine test came back positive, claimant would be 
at MMI. If not, he would discuss a stand-alone L5-S1 anterior lumbar interbody fusion 
(ALIF). He placed claimant on a 15-pound lifting restriction, as well as restrictions 
against repetitive lifting, bending, and twisting. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 5)  
On August 4, 2023, claimant’s attorney emailed defense counsel after he 
received a copy of Dr. Schmitz’s note. (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1) He expressed his client’s 
dissatisfaction with care, and his own confusion and disappointment at the fact that Dr. 
Schmitz said he would place claimant at MMI if there was a negative EMG test or a 
positive nicotine test. He noted that he had requested defendants authorize a nicotine 

FISHER V. KINSETH HOTEL CORPORATION  
Page 3 
 
 
cessation program on several occasions in the past, as it is clear claimant will not get 
the surgery he needs through the authorized treating physicians at Iowa Ortho if he 
continues to smoke, and he had not been able to “kick the habit on his own.” 
Claimant returned to Dr. Schmitz on September 20, 2023. (Defendants’ Exhibit A, 
page 1) He reported worsening pain at a level 9 of 10. The record notes that claimant 
had an EMG on September 8, 2023, which demonstrated bilateral S1 radiculopathy. 
(Def. Ex. A, p. 3) Dr. Schmitz noted that claimant had another positive urine nicotine test 
that day, but that claimant stated he had not smoked or used nicotine for 26 days. Dr. 
Schmitz stated it was claimant’s second or third failed test, and he thought it was likely 
claimant continued to use nicotine products. He stated that claimant was at MMI, and 
from a structural standpoint, does not require restrictions. The patient status report 
indicates claimant can return to work with no restrictions, and Dr. Schmitz provided a 
handwritten note next to that status that states “[because] of smoking.” (Def. Ex. A, p. 4)  
The nurse case manager assigned to the case, Gene Coon, RN, emailed 
claimant’s attorney on September 20, 2023, with a brief update regarding claimant’s 
visit that day. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 1) He noted that Dr. Schmitz advised claimant that he could 
contact his office if he gets to a point where he can test nicotine-free for six weeks. 
Otherwise, no further surgical intervention can be evaluated.  
Claimant’s attorney represented at hearing that claimant has discussed utilizing a 
formal smoking cessation program with the doctors at Iowa Ortho, but those 
conversations have not made it into the medical records. Claimant argues that he is not 
at MMI, as two authorized treating physicians have recommended spinal fusion surgery 
that has not been performed, and Dr. Schmitz has indicated he is still willing to do the 
surgery if claimant can stay nicotine free for 6 weeks. Claimant argues that defendants 
should be required to treat the condition that is preventing him from receiving the 
surgery he needs, which is his nicotine dependence. 
Defendants argue that they have met their duty to provide reasonable care under 
Iowa Code section 85.27. No doctor has ordered a formal nicotine cessation program 
for claimant. As such, defendants argue they are not obligated to provide claimant with 
that treatment. Defense counsel represented that defendants do not have any additional 
care scheduled for claimant at this time, as he has been placed at MMI and released 
with no restrictions by both Dr. Rosenthal and Dr. Schmitz. 
REASONING AND CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers’ compensation law. The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services. The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury. Section 85.27. Holbert v. 
Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 16, 1975).  

FISHER V. KINSETH HOTEL CORPORATION  
Page 4 
 
 
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish reasonable 
services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the right to 
choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
An application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because 
claimant is dissatisfied with the care he or she has been receiving. Mere dissatisfaction 
with the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate 
medical care. Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, 
was not reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient 
for the claimant. See Iowa Code § 85.27(4). Thus, by challenging the employer’s choice 
of treatment and seeking alternate care, claimant assumes the burden of proving the 
authorized care is unreasonable. See Iowa R. App. P 14(f)(5); Long, 528 N.W.2d at 
124. 
In Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 437 (Iowa 1997), the 
supreme court held that “when evidence is presented to the commissioner that the 
employer-authorized medical care has not been effective and that such care is ‘inferior 
or less extensive’ than other available care requested by the employee, . . . the 
commissioner is justified by section 85.27 to order the alternate care.” Ultimately, 
determining whether care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.  Long, 
528 N.W.2d at 123. 
At the time of the prior alternate care hearing, defendants were actively working 
to schedule claimant with another doctor, as Dr. Rosenthal had dismissed him from care 
due to a breakdown of the doctor-patient relationship. As such, I found that claimant had 
not met his burden to prove the authorized care was unreasonable at that time. 
Currently, however, defendants are not authorizing any additional treatment, as 
claimant has been placed at MMI and released to return to work with no restrictions. 
The problem with defendants’ position is that claimant’s MMI status and full duty release 
are based solely on his inability to proceed with the recommended surgery due to 
positive nicotine tests. Yet, the physicians at Iowa Ortho have done nothing to help 
claimant achieve nicotine-free status. Despite discussions with claimant regarding 
smoking cessation and multiple requests from claimant’s attorney, no authorized 
treating physician has formally ordered a nicotine cessation program. This is not 
reasonable medical care given the situation. 
 

FISHER V. KINSETH HOTEL CORPORATION  
Page 5 
 
 
This is an accepted injury claim, for which two authorized treating providers have 
recommended spinal fusion surgery. Claimant recently reported a pain level of 9 out of 
10, with worsening symptoms. Nothing about his physical condition has changed that 
would suggest the prior 15-pound lifting restriction is no longer necessary. Despite all 
this, Dr. Schmitz declared him at MMI and released him to return to work full duty, 
“because of smoking.” Defendants have not provided claimant with meaningful or 
effective treatment, as his condition has remained essentially untreated since the 
original recommendation for surgery in October 2022. He is no longer being offered 
care, despite his ongoing symptoms, and is not being offered help to overcome his 
nicotine dependence, which is preventing him from receiving the recommended surgery. 
Defendants’ failure to offer additional medical care in this case is unreasonable, and 
constitutes an abandonment of defendants’ obligation to provide claimant with 
reasonable medical care under Iowa Code section 85.27. 
I find defendants are not offering medical care reasonably suited to treat the 
claimant’s work injury. Therefore, claimant has established he is entitled to alternate 
medical care. Once an abandonment of care has occurred, the claimant is free to seek 
care on his own at defendant's cost. See West Side Transport v. Cordell, 601 N.W.2d 
691 (Iowa 1999) (the court upheld the holding that the defendant employer had “lost the 
right to choose the care” and that “allow and order other care” language is broad 
enough to include treatment by a doctor of the employee's choosing). As such, claimant 
is entitled to seek treatment for his spine condition with a physician of his choosing. 
Should the selected physician recommend a smoking cessation program after 
evaluation, defendants shall provide the recommended smoking cessation treatment. 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant’s petition for alternate medical care is granted. 
Claimant may seek out his own medical providers for the accepted work injury. 
Defendants are ordered to promptly pay for all reasonable and causally related charges, 
including smoking cessation treatment, should the selected physician recommend it. 
Signed and filed this ____5th ___ day of October, 2023. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Nick Cooling (via WCES) 
 
Kathryn Johnson (via WCES) 
