Case Number: 22004975.01
Case Title:  LANDEROS MORALES, CARLOS V. DEAN SNYDER CONSTRUCTION CO
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Landeros-Morales Carlos - 22004975.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
CARLOS LANDEROS-MORALES, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 File No. 22004975.01 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
 
 
 
  :  
 
 
vs. 
 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
DEAN SNYDER CONSTRUCTION CO.,   : 
 
  
  : 
 
 
  : 
          ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
Employer, 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  :                           
 
 
  : 
WEST BEND MUTUAL INSURANCE, 
  :  
 
 
  :       
 
Insurance Carrier,  
  :      Headnotes:   1402.20, 1402.30,1601 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Carlos Landeros-Morales, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Dean Snyder Construction Co., employer, and West Bend 
Mutual Insurance, insurance carrier, as defendants.  The hearing was held on June 25, 
2025.  Pursuant to an order from the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this 
case was heard via videoconference using Zoom with all parties and the court reporter 
appearing remotely.  
  
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing. On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations. Those 
stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision and 
no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed 
in this decision. The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
 
Carlos Landeros-Morales was the only witness to testify live at the trial. The 
evidentiary record also contains Joint Exhibits 1-3, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-7; and 
Defendants’ Amended Exhibits A- H.  The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on 
August 1, 2025, at which time the case was fully submitted to the undersigned.   
 
 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Dec-09  07:22:35     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

LANDEROS-MORALES V. DEAN SNYDER CONSTRUCTION 
Page 2 
 
 
ISSUES 
 
 
The parties identified the following disputed issues on the hearing report: 
 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of 
his employment with Dean Snyder Construction on April 27, 2022.  
2. Whether claimant is precluded from receiving benefits by Iowa Code section 
85.16(2).   
3. Whether the claimant is entitled to temporary disability or healing period 
benefits because of the alleged injury. 
4. Whether the alleged injury resulted in any permanent disability; and if so, 
5. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits. 
6. Whether claimant is entitled to payment of the medical expenses in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 1. 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to recover the cost of an independent medical 
examination pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
8. Assessment of costs.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds as follows: 
At the time of the hearing the claimant, Carlos Landeros-Morales (hereinafter 
“Landeros”) was 28 years old. (Hearing Transcript, p. 13).  He lives with his mother and 
his finance in Charles City, Iowa. (Id.).  Landeros graduated from CAL Community High 
School in 2016. (Id. at 14).  Following high school, he attended Ellsworth Community 
College for one semester before dropping out for financial reasons. (Id.).   Landeros 
also has certifications in industrial welding, forklift driving and OSHA 12 safety, all of 
which he obtained through the defendant employer. (Ex. G, depo pp. 2-12).    
During high school, Landeros worked part-time washing soybean crates. (Exhibit 
D, p. 14).  After high school, he worked full time as a farmhand at Rolling Valley Farms. 
(Id.).  In 2017, he was hired by Iowa Select Farms, to unload hogs. (Id.).  Landeros 
worked full time for Iowa Select for two years, making $12 an hour. (Id.).  
In April 2019, Dean Snyder Construction Co. (hereinafter “Dean Snyder”) hired 
Landeros as a laborer/welder. (Ex. D, p. 13).  Dean Snyder is a construction company 
headquartered in Clear Lake, Iowa, that specializes in building footings and 
infrastructure. (Tr., p. 16).   Landeros testified that Dean Snyder moves its welders 
around often so they can cover more jobs.  (Ex. G, depo p. 33).  This means they work 
shorter amounts of time with different crews. (Id.).  Landeros testified that many of these 
jobs involved working in different states and at high altitudes. (Id. at 17, 33-34).  

LANDEROS-MORALES V. DEAN SNYDER CONSTRUCTION 
Page 3 
 
 
Landeros alleges he suffered compensable whole-body injuries while working for 
Dean Snyder on April 27, 2022.  (See Petition.)  On that date, Landeros was assigned 
to work at a construction site in Shell Rock, Iowa. (Tr., p. 19).  It was his first day at this 
job site. (Id.).  At that time, Landeros was living in Clear Lake, Iowa, and commuting to 
work with J.P., a co-worker.1 (Id. at 19, 23).  It was a 45-minute drive from Clear Lake to 
the job site. (Id. at 23-24).  Landeros testified he was tired, so he took a nap in the car.  
(Id.).   
Upon arriving at the job site around 6:45 a.m., the men attended a safety meeting 
lead by Mike Dorenkamp, the onsite supervisor. (Tr., p. 25).  There were six employees, 
and a safety instructor present at the meeting. (Ex. F, depo p. 7).  That day, the crew 
was putting a steel roof on a commercial building for Zinpro. (Tr., pp. 29-31).  The height 
of the Zinpro building is not known.  At the hearing, Landeros testified it was 60-70 feet 
tall. (Id. at 29).  His co-worker thought the building was around 100 feet tall. (See Ex. E, 
depo p. 6).  Following the meeting, three of the men, including Landeros, got into a 
bucket truck and were raised onto the roof of the building with their tools. (Tr., pp. 35-
36).  A fourth man met them on the roof. (Cl Ex. 7 at 1:47:43).  He got onto the roof from 
an inside staircase. (Id.).  At this stage of the construction, the roof was not yet 
complete. (Tr., p.  37).  It was mostly just a grid of 6-inch steel beams, with two small 
walkways that appear to be made of metal sheets. (Id.; Cl Ex. 7).  The men were 
wearing safety harnesses. (Tr., p. 37).  According to Landeros, once the men reached 
the roof, they were supposed to  tie-off onto the Gradall and then find a spot to attach 
retractable ropes to their safety harnesses. (Id. at 37).  Landeros testified he was also 
wearing something called a beam slider so he could move around the grid freely. (Id. at 
37-42).  According to Landeros, he remembers walking to the corner of the roof to take 
a measurement and then nothing until he woke up in the hospital on May 22, 2022. (Id.).  
Defendants submitted the deposition testimony of Zachary Starkey into the 
hearing record. (Ex. E, p. 17).  Starkey was one of the men on the roof with Landeros 
that morning. (Id. at depo p. 7).  Starkey testified that Landeros crouched down to get a 
measurement, stood up quickly, started walking, and his retractable harness caught, 
causing him to fall off the beam/roof. (Id. at 14-15). Landeros also submitted a video of 
the incident into the hearing record. (Cl Ex. 7).  It shows Landeros repeatedly kneeling 
down on a slim sheet of the roof metal. (Id.).  He kneels, crouches, and moves up and 
down a beam and on a slim sheet of metal while talking to his co-workers. (Id.).  At 
various times throughout the video, Landeros does appear to be moving at a quicker 
pace than the other three men. (Id.).  He also appears to do so several times without 
being tied off. (Id.).  Approximately two hours and eighteen minutes into the video, 
Landeros strides across the portion of the roof already covered by metal and then walks 
out onto a new beam.  (Id. at 2:18:04).  As he is about to clear the first metal grid, 
Landeros steps across onto a perpendicular beam. (Id.).  As he takes that step, his 
retractable harness catches, pulling him backward and off the beam. (Id. at 2:18:05).  
His retractable then snaps, allowing him to fall. (Id. at 2:18:07).  Landeros fell onto a 
tank on the mezzanine level, a fall of approximately 32 feet. (See Ex. F, depo p. 11; Ex. 
 
1 At the time of the accident, Landeros did not have a valid driver’s license because of OWI and 
driving without a license charges and fines. (Ex. G, depo p. 43).   

LANDEROS-MORALES V. DEAN SNYDER CONSTRUCTION 
Page 4 
 
 
E, depo. p. 9; Ex. C, p. 11a).  His co-worker immediately called 911. (Ex. E, p. depo. p. 
6).   
Landeros was transported to the emergency room (ER) at the University of Iowa 
Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC) via helicopter.  (JE 1, pp. 1-7).   According to the medical 
records, he was snoring, agitated and combative when EMS arrived. (Id. at 1).  He 
arrived at the ER sedated and intubated. (Id. at 1).  Landeros was diagnosed with 
bilateral mandibular, orbital, and skull base fractures, a subarachnoid hemorrhage, pupil 
asymmetry with a tear of his right iris, open fractures of his left tibia and fibula, right 
internal carotid artery dissection, a small right pneumothorax (a partially collapsed lung), 
and a possible lumbar hernia. (Id.  at 6-8).  On April 28, 2022, he underwent surgery to 
fix his left ankle. (See id. at 72, 77).  He also underwent surgery to fix his mandible 
fractures on May 6, 2022. (Id. at 104, 106).  Landeros was discharged from UIHC on 
June 3, 2022. (See id. at 115).  The records from UIHC note that Landeros fell because 
his harness broke. (Id. at 60).  
There are two incident reports in the hearing record. (Cl Ex. 5, pp. 89-90; Ex. C, 
pp. 11-11a).  The first report is from Brian Carrott, one of Landeros’ supervisors. (Cl Ex. 
5, p. 89).  His description of the accident is as follows, 
While walking on the I-beam, the retractable locked up causing [Landeros] 
to lose his balance and fall off the beam.  He fell and landed on a tank 
approx. 30 feet below.  He ended up on the grating around the tank which 
is about 2 ft. below the top of the tank.  
(Id.).  The second incident report was authored by Russ DeFord, Dean Snyder’s Field 
Safety Coordinator. (Id. at 90).  It states that Landeros was using two retractables 
hooked together as one unit. (Id.).  DeFord explained that Landeros was wearing a 
beam slider which was connected to a steel roof beam with one retractable rope hooked 
to the beam slider, and the other retractable rope hooked to Landeros’ back and the first 
retractable rope. (Id.).  DeFord concluded that Landeros fell because one of the 
retractable ropes locked up, pulling Landeros off the beam, and then the force of the fall 
in combination with the use of two retractable ropes caused the second retractable to 
snap and break in half. (Id.).   
 
It is not exactly clear who connected the two retractable ropes together.  
Defendants submitted Michael Dorenkamp’s deposition into the hearing record. (Ex. F).  
Dorenkamp was Landeros’ onsite supervisor on the date of the accident. (Id. at depo. 
pp. 5-6). During his testimony, Dorenkamp indicated Landeros attached the retractable 
ropes together.  His testimony reads as follows: 
Q. Okay.  You were not working up on the roof with Mr. Adores Morales, 
Zack Starkey and the two other gentleman? 
A. No.  

LANDEROS-MORALES V. DEAN SNYDER CONSTRUCTION 
Page 5 
 
 
Q. Okay. There has been discussion in the records about Mr. Adores 
using two retractables or chaining the retractables together.  Are you 
familiar with that?  
A. Yes.  
Q. Well, let me ask so we understand what chain or using double 
retractables, what that means so we understand? 
A. He had a retractable hooked on the back of his harness, and he hooked 
that retractable to another retractable to get out further.  
Q. Is that common practice? 
A. No.  
Q. Is that a safe practice?  
A. No.  
(Id. at depo p. 19).  
  
On November 8, 2024, defendants’ counsel took Landeros’ deposition. (Ex. G, p. 
19).  At that deposition, Landeros testified that he did not recall using two retractables 
on the date of the injury. (Id. at depo. p. 61).  He stated,  
A. I don’t recall doing it.  I thought I had my beam slider attached to my 
retractable. I had my beam slider, and then I didn’t even think I had a 
retractable on.  
Q. So are you telling me today it’s your recollection you were not using 
two retractables? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Okay you heard Mr. Dorenkamp testify earlier that they found that you 
were, in fact, wearing two retractables that day.   
A. Well, what broke?  You said that something broke.  Was it the 
retractable, or was it my harness in general? 
Q. Let’s go back to my question. You heard Mr. Dorenkamp testify— 
A. Yeah, I heard him.  
Q. Did you hear him say that you were wearing two retractables? 
A. Yes.  
Q. Okay.  But your recollection today is that you weren’t, in fact, wearing 
two retractables?  

LANDEROS-MORALES V. DEAN SNYDER CONSTRUCTION 
Page 6 
 
 
A. Yes, sir.  
. . .  
Q. So based on your experience, Mr. Landeros Morales, wearing two 
retractables, would that be poor judgement if somebody did wear two 
retractables, based on your experience. 
A. Sure.  
Q. I’m sorry? 
A. Yes, sir.  
Q. Maybe somebody wasn’t thinking clearly at the time they did that? 
A. Well, if someone were to do that and either hadn’t been properly trained 
or - - year, they didn’t know what  -- they were having – how did you 
say it?  
Q. Wasn’t thinking clearly. 
A. Yes, yes.  
Q. But you were properly trained; right? 
A. I mean, yeah, I had a class.  
(Id. at depo. pp. 62-63).   
 
Surveillance video of the incident does not necessarily reconcile these disparate 
testimonies.  When the workers are raised up in the bucket truck they are already 
wearing their harnesses and retractables. (Cl Ex. 7 at 1:46:11).  As the men exit the 
bucket truck, the video shows carabiners from the end of their retractables dangling 
behind their harnesses.  (See id. at 1:47:54).  Approximately one hour and forty-nine 
minutes into the video, Landeros walks out onto a beam, sits down straddling the beam, 
and then reaches back and grabs the retractable attached to the back of his harness. 
(Id. at 1:49:34).  He then attaches the retractable to a beam slider. (Id. at 1.49: 44).  
Several minutes later, Landeros reaches around behind his back and tugs slightly on 
the retractable. (Id. at 1:51:20).  One hour and fifty-six minutes into the video, Landeros 
unhooks his beam slider and reattaches it on the other side of a flat metal walkway. (Id. 
at 1:56:11- 1:57:57).  While he is doing this, his hard hat falls off. (Id. at 1:56:29).  Two 
hours and fifteen minutes into the video, Landeros walks out onto a beam; as he does 
this his retractable appears to detach from the beam slider. (Id. at 2:15:34).  Landeros 
walks back, bends down, and re-attaches the retractable to the beam slider. (Id. at 
2:15:45). The video does not clearly show Landeros attaching a second retractable to 
his harness rigging, but he is turned away from the camera at this juncture.  It does, 
however, clearly show him having problems with his equipment.  Whether these were 
caused by the state of the equipment or user error/judgement is unclear. 
Landeros received post-operative care at UIHC. (JE 1, p. 115).  He attended a 
six-week follow-up appointment on June 17, 2022, with Hiroto Kawaskai, M.D. (Id.).  He 

LANDEROS-MORALES V. DEAN SNYDER CONSTRUCTION 
Page 7 
 
 
noted his neck pain and range of motion had improved. (Id.).  He, however, was still 
wearing a Miami cervical collar at all times except when showering and eating. (Id.).  His 
next follow-up appointment took place on July 1, 2022, with Matthew Hogue, M.D.  (Id. 
at 122).  He reported continued leg pain, but was weightbearing without the use of a 
walker. (Id.).  Dr. Hogue prescribed activity as tolerated and physical therapy. (Id. at 
124).   
On August 5, 2022, Landeros had another appointment with Dr. Kawaskai. (JE 1, 
p. 128).  Landeros reported that his neck pain had resolved and he was no longer 
wearing the Miami cervical collar. (Id. at 129).  Dr. Kawaskai noted he was recovering 
very well and his cervical spine was stable. (Id. at 133).  He indicated Landeros should 
return back to UIHC as needed. (Id.).  Dr. Kawaskai authored a letter indicating 
Landeros could return to work without specific restrictions from a neurosurgical 
perspective. (Id. at 134-136).  On August 10, 2022, however, Dr. Kawaskai authored a 
revised letter indicating Landeros should not over exert himself and should take breaks 
if he feels off. (Id. at 136-137).  This is the last treatment note in the hearing record from 
Dr. Kawaskai.2 (Id.).   
Landeros was given a post-accident urine drug screen while in the ER on April 
27, 2022. (JE 1, pp. 51-54).  The test results indicate he had THC in his system at the 
time of the accident.3 (Id. at 54).  The test states the cutoff level for a positive 
cannabinoids result was 50 ng/mL, but it does not provide the specific amount found in 
Landeros’ urine. (Id.).   
On January 31, 2023, defendants obtained a report from Raymond Harbison, Ph. 
D.  (Ex. A).  Dr. Harbison is a professor at the University of South Florida, as well as a 
Toxicologist and the Director of the Center for Environmental and Occupational Risk 
Analysis and Management. (Id. at 1).  Prior to issuing his report Dr. Harbison reviewed 
Landeros’ treatment records and urine drug test results. (Id.).  Dr. Harbison noted the 
test results identified Carboxy-THC in Landeros’ urine. (Id. at 2).  He indicated that 
Carboxy-THC is a metabolite of the pharmacologically active constituent of marijuana 
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC).  (Id.).  According to Dr. Harbison, the presence of 
Carboxy-THC indicates Landeros had used marijuana prior to the accident. (Id.).  The 
exact timing of Landeros’ use, however, cannot be determined from his Carboxy-THC 
level alone. (Id.).  Nor, did the test results definitively prove his impairment at the time of 
the accident. (Id.).  Dr. Harbison, however, indicated impairment could not be ruled out. 
(Id.).  His report cites to a published study by the National Institute on Drug Abuse 
(NIDA) that indicated chronic marijuana users experience prolonged impairment and 
prolonged use is associated with lower performance, increased risk-taking behaviors 
and a higher number of work accidents. (Id.).  Dr. Harbison indicated that heavy 
marijuana usage can cause deficits in memory and attention that can last for several 
 
2 There is a note from Lora Manley, DMD, dated August 29, 2022. (JE 1, pp. 137-138).  It 
indicates Landeros needs to have his mandible arch bars removed and wanted to have it done closer to 
his home. (Id.).  It is not clear whether or not these were ever removed.  
3 The screen was also positive for Benzodiazepines. (JE 1, p. 51).  This was from EMT sedation 
in the helicopter. (See Ex. B, p. 9 (indicating they administered midazolam)).    

LANDEROS-MORALES V. DEAN SNYDER CONSTRUCTION 
Page 8 
 
 
days. (Id. at 3).  Dr. Harbison concluded that Landeros used marijuana prior to his 
accident and that use could have contributed to the accident. (Id. at 4). 
On November 8, 2024, defendants’ counsel took Landeros’ deposition. (Ex. G, p. 
19).  During that deposition, Landeros testified that he used marijuana on Saturday, 
April 23, 2022. (Ex. G, p. 19, depo. p. 76).  He stated he smoked a small amount with 
his cousin after going out for dinner. (Id. at 77-79).  He also testified that he smoked 
marijuana with his cousin the Sunday before that. (Id.). So, Landeros admitted he 
smoked on April 17, 2022, and April 23, 2022. (Id.).  At the hearing, Landeros clarified 
that the marijuana he smoked was a vape cartridge. (Tr., pp. 20-21).  He said it helped 
relieve body pain. (Id. at 22).  There is no evidence that Landeros had a medical 
marijuana prescription in the hearing record.   
On December 11, 2024, defendants procured a report from Daniel McCabe, M.D. 
(Ex. B, pp. 8-10).  Dr. McCabe is a physician that specializes in medical toxicology and 
emergency medicine. (Id. at 8).  He is also a certified medical review officer. (Id.).  Prior 
to issuing his report, Dr. McCabe reviewed Landeros’ medical records including his 
urine test, his deposition transcript, photos of the safety harness he was wearing, 
surveillance video of the accident, and a copy of the language of Iowa Code section 
85.16.  (Id.).  Dr. McCabe stated that it is UIHC’s standard practice to perform a urine 
drug screen on all trauma patients, even if intoxication is not suspected. (Id. at 9).  He 
stated the test administered to Landeros was qualitative, indicating the presence of a 
minimum concentration of 50 ng/ml for 9-carboxy-THC. (Id.).  The test, however, does 
not provide an actual quantitative concentration. (Id.).  Thus, it is not possible to 
determine the actual level of 9-carboxy-THC present in Landeros’ urine at the time of 
the accident. (Id.).  Landeros, however, admitted to using marijuana four days before 
the accident and THC can remain detectable in urine for several days following acute 
use.  Given these facts, Dr. McCabe concluded that Landeros’ urine screen is a true 
positive THC sample, and under Iowa law Landeros has the burden of overcoming a 
presumption of intoxication despite the uncertainty associated with equating a positive 
THC screen to clinical intoxication. (Id. at 9-10).   
On January 29, 2025, Landeros’ counsel obtained a report from Ronald E. 
Henson, Ph.D.  (Cl Ex. 4).  Dr. Henson specializes in drug and alcohol testing for 
criminal proceedings. (Id. at 57).  He is a former supervisor of the Drug/Narcotics and 
Alcohol Testing Program at the Police Training Institute at the University of Illinois, and 
has taught courses at several colleges and universities. (Id.).  Before issuing his report, 
Dr. Henson reviewed Landeros’ medical records, urine test results, the reports from Dr. 
Harbison and Dr. McCabe, the deposition transcripts of Zachary Starkey, Michael 
Dorenkamp and Landeros, as well as surveillance footage of the accident. (Id. at 58).  
Dr. Henson read Landeros’ urine screen as a “Presumptive Positive” result for THC, 
which is also known as delta-9-carboxy. (Id.).  He explained that delta-9-carboxy is a 
non-impairing metabolite of marijuana. (Id.).  Dr. Henson indicated the test was not 
confirmed or quantified and therefore it could be a false positive test. (Id.).  He stated 
this type of “testing is not forensically reliable” because it does not actually measure the 
subject’s level of impairment. (Id. at 59).  According to Dr. Henson, the scientific 
community does not believe an unconfirmed urine screen proves impairment. (Id.).  

LANDEROS-MORALES V. DEAN SNYDER CONSTRUCTION 
Page 9 
 
 
Especially in claims like Landeros’, where there is no observed cognitive or physical 
impairment on the date of the accident. (Id.).  Put another way, “the mere presence of a 
drug and/or its metabolites in a person’s urine is insufficient to prove impairment.” (Id. at 
60).  In conclusion, Dr. Henson opined that,  
The unconfirmed THC inactive metabolite from the reported urine 
screen in this case cannot conclude to a reasonable degree of scientific 
certainty the result is in anyway reliable nor associated with the work-related 
injury accident in this case . . . 
(Id.).  
 
On January 20, 2025, Landeros’ counsel deposed Dr. Harbison. (Ex. H, p. 20).  
Dr. Harbison testified that he could not rule out Landeros’ marijuana or THC use as a 
cause or a contributor to his work accident on April 27, 2022. (Id. at depo. p. 5).  
However, Dr. Harbison also agreed that a presumptive positive urine screen means that 
the test has not been confirmed. (Id. at depo. pp. 6-7).  He stated that urine tests are not 
useful for determining an individual’s actual level of impairment. (Id. at depo. p. 8).  Dr. 
Harbison testified that marijuana does not have to produce stumbling or motor 
impairment to alter an individual’s response time, judgment, vision or risk-taking 
behaviors. (Id. at depo. 15).  He reiterated that studies have shown an increased risk of 
accidents with marijuana use without observable impairments. (Id.).  Dr. Harbison 
agreed that a knowing and intentional failure to follow safety protocol on a construction 
site could be an example of risk-taking behavior related to marijuana use. (Id. at depo. 
p. 20).   
Landeros attended an independent medical examination (IME) with Sunil Bansal, 
M.D., at his attorney’s request on December 31, 2024. (Cl Ex. 3, p. 34).  Dr. Bansal, 
however, did not issue his IME report until May 19, 2025. (Id. at 56). Prior to writing his 
report, Dr. Bansal reviewed Landeros’ medical records, as well as the expert reports 
from Dr. Harbison, Dr. McCabe and Dr. Henson. (Id. at 35-46).  Dr. Bansal diagnosed 
Landeros with bilateral mandible fractures status post open reduction and internal 
fixation, a right zygomaticomaxillary complex fracture, central skull base fracture, a 
longitudinal fracture of the left temporal bone, traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage, 
diffuse axonal injury, post-concussion syndrome, cognitive impairment, ligamentous 
injury/craniocervical dissociation with disruption of the anterior longitudinal ligament at 
C1, widening of the left occipital condyle and C1 lateral mass with atlantoaxial capsule 
disruption, pulmonary contusions, right pneumothorax with associated right lobe 
atelectasis, an umbilical hernia, and an open comminuted fracture of the left fibular 
diaphysis status post open reduction and internal fixation, and an oblique fracture of the 
left distal fibular diaphysis.  (Id. at 50-51).  He causally related all of these diagnoses to 
the work accident on April 27, 2022. (Id. at 51-53). Dr. Bansal assigned Landeros the 
following permanent impairment ratings: 
* 6 percent BAW impairment for the bilateral mandible fractures, left 
temporal 
bone 
fracture, 
skull 
base 
fracture, 
and 
the 
right 

LANDEROS-MORALES V. DEAN SNYDER CONSTRUCTION 
Page 10 
 
 
zygomaticomaxillary fracture, citing to Table 11-5 of the AMA  Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition  
* 5 percent BAW impairment for cognitive defects from the accident, citing 
to Tables 13-5 and 13-6 in the AMA Guides  
* 25 percent BAW impairment for injuries to Landeros’ neck, including 
multiple ligamentous disruptions at the craniocervical junction, including the 
right alar ligament, left transverse ligament, anterior atlanto-occipital 
membrane, and the anterior longitudinal ligament at C1, citing to Table 15-
5 in the AMA Guides 
* 5 percent BAW impairment for the abdominal hernia, citing to Table 6-9 of 
the AMA Guides 
* 9 percent of the left lower extremity or 4 percent BAW impairment for 
fractures of the tibia and fibula, citing to Tables 17-11 and 17-12.  
(Cl Ex. 3, pp. 53-55).    Dr. Bansal’s report does not attempt to combine his proposed 
impairment ratings. (See id. at 55).  Dr. Bansal also suggested permanent work 
restrictions of no work that requires sustained attention, complex-decision making or 
critical safety operations due to ongoing memory deficits.  (Id.).  He also recommended 
no repetitive neck movements or awkward postures, no overhead work requiring 
extension of the cervical spine, no lifting or carrying more than 15 pounds above 
shoulder level, no exposure to significant vibration, no climbing ladders, scaffolding or 
work at unprotected heights, no repetitive stair climbing, no continuous walking or 
standing for more than 15 minutes, no working on uneven surfaces, no more than 
occasional squatting, kneeling, or crouching, no repetitive bending or twisting at the 
waist and no forceful contraction of his abdominal muscles. (Id. at 55-56).  Dr. Bansal 
recommended future treatment of hardware removal, injections, and laparoscopic 
hernia repair. (Id.).   
 
Landeros testified that he recuperated at home for approximately a month after 
his discharge from UIHC. (Tr., p. 45).  Then he tried returning to work for Dean Snyder. 
(Id.).  Upon his return, he was assigned to weld steps in the shop. (Id. at 46-47).  
Landeros testified he was unable to physically perform the assigned work because he 
couldn’t stand to be in the same gear he was wearing on the date of his accident. (Id. at 
47).  He also had trouble keeping his neck in a stationary position and walking on his 
left leg. (Id. at 47-48).  After a week and a half in the shop, Landeros told the HR 
Manager he could not physically perform the job and asked if the company had any 
seated office work available. Brian, the HR Manager, indicated there was nothing 
available. (Id. at 50).  Landeros resigned. (Id.).   
 
After his resignation, Landeros obtained a job at Wood Harbor through a 
temporary agency. (Ex. G, depo. p. 30).  Wood Harbor makes custom cabinets. (Id. at 
31).  Landeros was hired to glue and sand cabinet doors. (Id.).  Landeros worked there 
for less than a month. (Id.).  He was terminated for absenteeism. (Id. at 31-32; see also 
Tr., p. 51). Following that, Landeros took a job with Kraft-Heinz in Mason City, Iowa. 

LANDEROS-MORALES V. DEAN SNYDER CONSTRUCTION 
Page 11 
 
 
(Tr., p. 52). He ran a Bosch machine that makes pudding. (Id.).  He worked full time and 
made $21 an hour. (Ex. G, depo. pp. 27-28).  Landeros worked there for seven or eight 
months. (Tr., p. 52).  He was terminated for attendance issues. (Ex. G, depo. p. 29).  In 
August and September 2023, Landeros worked at Trelleborg, feeding rubber into a 
Three Roll Machine. (Id. at 24-25).  In September 2023, Landeros was let go in a plant-
wide layoff. (Id. at 25).  After the layoff, Landeros took a position at Pure Prairie Poultry. 
(Id. at 12-15).  He started out as a laborer, but was later promoted to crew leader. (Id. at 
17).  Landeros operated a machine that deboned chicken breasts. (Id. at 12-13).  He 
worked around 40 hours per week as a laborer, less than that as a crew leader, and 
made $24 to $25 an hour. (Id. at 20).  His employment with Pure Prairie Poultry ended 
in October 2024 when the company declared bankruptcy. (Id. at 17).   
 
During his deposition, Landeros testified that he applied for several non-
strenuous factory jobs after Pure Prairie Poultry closed, but was not offered any 
positions. (Ex. G, depo. pp. 18-20).   In February 2025, Landeros started his own 
construction company called Los Meros, LLC. (Tr., p. 56).  It appears to be a sole 
proprietorship. (Id.).  Since starting the company, Landeros has painted several houses 
and worked on a bathroom remodel. (Id.).  Landeros thought he made around $4,000 
from those construction jobs. (Id. at 57).  He indicated the company owns a vehicle, but 
he does not have a driver’s license due to charges of DUI and driving without a license.4 
(Id. at 56-59). Landeros’ company does not have any other employees. (Id. at 56).  
Outside of this occasional construction work, Landeros was not working at the 
time of the hearing. (See Tr, p. 55).  Landeros testified he continues to experience 
symptoms from the work accident, including memory issues/forgetfulness, headaches, 
right-sided face and eye pain, mouth numbness, drooling, neck pain and loss of range 
of motion, and cramping and pain around his hernia that affects his ability to bend, and 
pain and loss of motion and sensation in his left leg which affects his ability to walk. (Id. 
at 62-70).  
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the 
cause or source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311.  The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
 
4 It appears that one of the DUIs took place after the 2022 work accident in this case. (See Tr., p. 
103).  Landeros has undergone substance abuse treatment in connection with that charge. (Id.).   

LANDEROS-MORALES V. DEAN SNYDER CONSTRUCTION 
Page 12 
 
 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
The evidence shows Landeros fell off a roof while working for Dean Snyder on 
April 27, 2022.  As a result of that fall, he sustained injuries to his face, skull, neck, 
spine, chest, lung and left leg.  Defendants, however, argue he is not entitled to any 
workers’ compensation benefits because he had THC metabolites in his system at the 
time of the injury.  Defendants are asserting the affirmative defense of intoxication as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.16.  During the 2017 legislative session, the Iowa 
legislature made a significant change to Iowa Code section 85.16(2).  The legislature 
amended it to create a presumption of intoxication upon a positive test result reflecting 
“the presence of [a] . . . hallucinogenic . . . drug.” More specifically, the section provides 
as follows:    
No compensation under this chapter shall be allowed for an injury caused:   
. . .  
(2)      (a)  By the employee’s intoxication, which did not arise out of and in 
the course of employment but which was due to the effects of alcohol 
or another narcotic, depressant, stimulant, hallucinogenic, or 
hypnotic drug not prescribed by an authorized medical practitioner, 
if the intoxication was a substantial factor in causing the injury.   
(b)  For the purpose of disallowing compensation under this 
subsection, both of the following apply:   
(1)  If the employer shows that, at the time of the injury, or 
immediately following the injury, the employee had positive 
test results reflecting the presence of alcohol, or another 
narcotic, depressant, stimulant, hallucinogenic, or hypnotic 
drug which drug either was not prescribed by an authorized 
medical practitioner or was not used in accordance with the 
prescribed use of the drug, it shall be presumed that the 
employee was intoxicated at the time of the injury and that 
intoxication was a substantial factor in causing the injury.   
(2)  Once the employer has made a showing as provided in 
subparagraph (1), the burden of proof shall be on the 
employee to overcome the presumption by establishing that 
the employee was not intoxicated at the time of the injury, or 
that intoxication was not a substantial factor in causing the 
injury.   
 

LANDEROS-MORALES V. DEAN SNYDER CONSTRUCTION 
Page 13 
 
 
Iowa Code § 85.16.  According to the hearing evidence, Landeros had a positive drug 
test immediately after the injury, which demonstrated the presence of delta-9-carboxy-
THC, a metabolite of marijuana.  Iowa Code section 124.204(4)(m) lists marijuana as a 
scheduled I hallucinogenic substance.  Landeros conceded that he had used marijuana 
prior to the date of injury; he smoked it on April 17, 2022, and April 23, 2022.  At the 
time of the work accident, Landeros did not have a medical marijuana card or a doctor’s 
prescription for medical marijuana.  Given these findings, it appears that Landeros has 
triggered the rebuttable intoxication presumption in Iowa Code section 85.16(2)(b)(2).  
Landeros, however, argues otherwise.  
 
In his brief, Landeros argues that the rebuttable presumption has not been 
triggered in this case because his “drug test did not reveal the presence of any 
psychoactive chemicals, only Delta-9-Carboxy, which is a ‘non-impairing metabolite.’” 
(Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, p. 2).  According to claimant’s expert report, THC is fat 
soluble and, therefore, it can remain in the body for many days and/or weeks after use.5 
(Cl Ex. 4, p. 60).   Landeros testified that he did not use marijuana in the four days 
leading up to his accident; therefore, he claims the THC detected in his urine was just 
in-active metabolites, not active THC with hallucinogenic properties.  (Claimant’s Post-
Hearing Brief, pp. 2-3). Landeros argues a test result revealing the presence of delta-9-
carboxy alone does not trigger the statutory presumption in 85.16 because it is not a 
“positive test result . . . reflecting the presence [of a] hallucinogenic . . . drug.” Iowa 
Code § 85.16(1).  The undersigned is not persuaded by this argument.   
 
In this case, the ER tested Landeros’ urine for the presence of THC metabolites. 
(JE 1, p. 54).  In criminal cases involving marijuana use, Iowa courts rely upon 
toxicology reports, showing the presence of marijuana metabolites in the person’s blood 
or urine. See e.g., State v. Meyers, 924 N.W.2d 823, 828-831 (Iowa 2019).  In these 
cases, the state must show the presence of a controlled substance or metabolites in the 
accused’s urine in an amount that exceeds the standards for initial laboratory testing for 
controlled substances. See Iowa Code § 321J.2(8)(c) (requiring the state to adopt 
“nationally accepted standards for determining detectable levels of controlled 
substances in the division of the criminal investigation’s initial laboratory screening test 
for drugs”); see also Iowa Admin. Code r. 661-157.7 (adopting the federal guidelines for 
workplace testing in initial screenings).  These standards established detectable levels 
for initial laboratory testing at 50 ng/ml for marijuana metabolites.  In this case, 
Landeros’ urine screen showed at least 50 ng/ml of cannabinoid metabolites.  
Additionally, all three of the expert reports in the hearing record agree that Landeros’ 
urine screen showed at least a “presumptive positive” result for THC under the Iowa 
standards.  (See Cl Ex. 4, p. 58; Ex. A, p. 2; Ex. B, p. 9).   
Finally, the Commissioner and the Iowa Court of Appeals recently addressed a 
similar argument and found confirmatory testing is not required under Iowa Code 
section 85.16.  See Davis v. Gordon Food Service, Inc., File No. 1652763.01 (App., 
April 13, 2022); see also Davis v. Gordon Food Service, Inc., 5 N.W.3d 4 (Table) (Iowa 
Ct. App. 2024).   In Davis, the claimant argued that his positive drug test result was 
 
5 Claimant’s expert report indicates THC is generally cleared from the body 10 to 28 days after 
marijuana use. (Cl Ex. 4, p. 60).   

LANDEROS-MORALES V. DEAN SNYDER CONSTRUCTION 
Page 14 
 
 
inadmissible in his workers’ compensation case because he had not been offered a 
confirmatory test as required by Iowa Code section 730.5(7), which regulates drug-
testing in private workplaces.  Id. at 3. Both the agency and the Court of Appeals 
determined that the drug testing restrictions in Iowa Code section 730.5 do not apply to 
workers’ compensation cases. Id. at 4.  They reasoned that the legislature was fully 
aware of the confirmatory testing requirements in Iowa Code section 730.5 when they 
re-wrote the workers’ compensation statute in 2017, and they chose not to include those 
requirements in Iowa Code section 85.16. Id. at 3 (stating “They did not include any 
reference to regulations for drug-testing, whether by cross-reference to section 730.5 or 
otherwise. We presume this omission deliberate.”).  The Commissioner and the Court of 
Appeals have already determined that confirmatory testing is not required to trigger the 
presumption in Iowa Code section 85.16.6  I am bound by that finding.  Given the 
Commissioner’s past interpretation of this statute and the facts presented in this case, I 
find Landeros’ urine screen showing the presence of at least 50 mg/nl of delta-9-
carboxy was a positive test result under the language of Iowa Code section 
85.16(2)(b)(2); the presumption that Landeros was intoxicated at the time of his 
accident and that his intoxication was a substantial factor in causing his injuries has 
been triggered.  
 
“Intoxication” is not defined in chapter 85; however, the Iowa Supreme Court 
adopted the following definition for alcohol use:   
A person is “under the influence of alcohol” and therefore intoxicated 
when one or more of the following are true:  
(1) the person's reason or mental ability has been affected; (2) the 
person's judgment is impaired; (3) the person's emotions are visibly excited; 
and (4) the person has, to any extent, lost control of bodily actions or 
motions.  
Garcia v. Naylor Concrete Co., 650 N.W.2d 87, 90 (Iowa 2002) (citing Benavides v. J.C. 
Penney Life Insurance Co., 539 N.W.2d 352, 355 (Iowa 1995)).   The Court also noted 
“blood-alcohol level revealed by chemical testing is important evidence on the question 
of intoxication.” Id.  In cases involving marijuana use, the Court relies upon toxicology 
reports, showing the presence of marijuana metabolites in the person’s blood or urine, 
as well as evidence of the person’s conduct and demeanor, and circumstantial evidence 
of impairment such as having blood shot eyes, poor performance on field sobriety tests, 
and drowsiness. See Meyers, 924 N.W.2d at 828-831.   
 
6 Confirmatory testing, which identifies the amount and type of a controlled substance in a 
person’s blood or urine sample, is required to prove the charge of operating while intoxicated (OWI) for 
marijuana, under Iowa Code section 321J.2(1)(c).  See State v. Meyer, 924 N.W.2d 823, 830 (Iowa 
2019).  However, that standard is being applied in a criminal proceeding, in which the state bears the 
burden of proof and must establish guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.  The drafters of Iowa Code section 
85.16 placed the burden of proof on the claimant after a positive drug test and the language of the statute 
gives no indication that it requires more than an initial test showing the presence of metabolites for a 
controlled substance to trigger that statutory burden.   
 
 

LANDEROS-MORALES V. DEAN SNYDER CONSTRUCTION 
Page 15 
 
 
 
Landeros has the burden of overcoming the presumption by offering proof that he 
was not intoxicated at the time of the injury, or that his intoxication was not a substantial 
factor in causing his injuries.  To meet his burden, Landeros has offered the report of 
Dr. Henson.  (Cl Ex. 4, pp. 57-61).  In this report, Dr. Henson concludes that without a 
second, quantifying test, there is a possibility Landeros’ urine screen was a false 
positive. (Id. at 58).  He also opines that the test is not forensically reliable because it 
does not actually prove Landeros was high on marijuana at the time of the accident, nor 
is it evidence of an association between Landeros’ marijuana use and the cause of the 
accident. (Id. at 59). Dr. Henson states that cannabis metabolites can remain 
identifiable in an individual’s urine for up to 77 days after use, and “There is no urine 
test result for cannabis that can determine impairment or a time when cannabis was 
used.” (Id. at 60).  Given this, the American Academy of Forensic Sciences (AAFS), has 
declared that toxicologists should not opine on an individual’s degree of impairment 
based solely on a quantitative test. (Id.).  In short, Dr. Henson’s report concludes 
Landeros may not have been intoxicated at the time of his injury. Taken by itself, 
however, it is not affirmative proof that he was not intoxicated at the time of the injury, 
as Code section 85.16(2)(b)(2) requires.  
 
In addition to Dr. Henson’s report, claimant submitted copies of incident reports 
created by Brian Carrot, Landeros’ supervisor, and Russ DeFord, the Safety 
Coordinator at Dean Snyder. (Cl Ex. 5, pp. 89-90).  Both reports concluded that 
Landeros fell because a retractable rope attached to his harness locked up. (Id.).  
Carrot’s report is less detailed, but states, “While walking on the I-beam, the retractable 
locked up causing [Landeros] to lose his balance and fall off the beam.” (Id. at 89).  De 
Ford’s report is more detailed.  It states,  
Problems: 
Carlos was using two retractables together as one unit.  He had a beam 
slider on the beam with one retractable hook hooked to the beam slider, the 
other retractable was on the back, hooked to the body of the first retractable.  
 
. . .  
 
Investigation: 
Russ, DeFord, Field Safety Coordinator spoke with the three witnesses of 
the accident.  Received statements from them stating that the retractable 
locked, pulling Carlos off the beam.  The combination of two retractables 
and the force of the fall making the second retractable strap break in half.  
 
(Cl Ex. 5, p. 90).   
 
 
To support his case, Landeros also submitted a video of the incident into the 
hearing record.  (Cl Ex. 7).  The video backs the factual findings in Carrot’s and 
DeFord’s incident reports.  It shows Landeros’ retractable harness catching and pulling 
him backwards off a beam. (Id. at 2:18:05).  The retractable then snaps, allowing him to 
fall. (Id. at 2:18:07).  Defendants submitted the deposition transcripts of Zachary Starkey 
and Michael Dorenkamp into the hearing record. (Ex. E and Ex. F).  Starkey was 

LANDEROS-MORALES V. DEAN SNYDER CONSTRUCTION 
Page 16 
 
 
Landeros’ co-worker. (Ex. E, depo. p. 7).  He was one of the men on the roof with 
Landeros the morning of the accident.  (Id.).  Starkey testified that Landeros crouched 
down to get a measurement, stood up quickly, started walking, and his retractable 
harness caught, causing him to fall off the beam/roof. (Id. at 14-15). Dorenkamp was 
Landeros’ onsite supervisor on the date of the accident. (Ex. F, depo pp. 5-6).  
Dorenkamp was not on the roof when Landeros fell; he did not see Landeros fall. (Id. at 
10).  His first-hand knowledge is limited to post-accident observations.  (Id.).  In his 
deposition, he states “I ran up the stairs, and then I seen him laying there.  And I looked 
up and his retractable -  there’s two retractables hooked together and one had broken.” 
(Id. at 10-11).   
 
Both Starkey and Dorenkamp testified that Landeros did not appear intoxicated 
on the morning of the accident. (Ex. F, depo p. 12; Ex. E, depo. pp. 7-8).  They stated 
he did not have blood shot eyes or slurred speech, nor did he show signs of poor 
coordination or unsteadiness in his movements. (Ex. F, depo. p. 13; Ex. E, depo. 7-8).  
They also did not smell marijuana on him. (Ex. F, depo. p. 13; Ex. E, depo. p. 8).  
Starkey testified Landeros did not appear inattentive that day. (Ex. E, depo. p. 8).  
Additionally, Dorenkamp testified that he would not have allowed Landeros to get up on 
the roof if he had appeared intoxicated. (Ex. F, depo. p. 13).  Both Starkey and 
Dorenkamp testified that Landeros appeared to know what he was doing that day; 
Starkey testified “I could tell that he was competent in what he was doing –". (Ex. F, 
depo. pp. 13-14; Ex. E, depo. p. 13).  However, according to Dr. Harbison, defendants’ 
expert, marijuana does not have to produce stumbling or motor impairment to alter an 
individual’s response time, judgment, vision or risk-taking behaviors. (Ex. H, depo. 
p.15).  Dr. Harbison testified that medical studies have shown an increased risk of 
accidents with marijuana use without observable impairments. (Id.).   
 
In their post-hearing brief, defendants make a nuanced argument; they argue 
that Landeros’ marijuana use triggered the accident by causing him to behave in a high-
risk manner and make bad decisions.  (Defendants’ Post-Hearing Brief, pp. 3-4).   They 
state that using two retractables together is not common or safe.  (Id. at 3).  They assert 
that the two retractables coupled with Landeros’ abnormally quick pace caused the 
accident.  (Id.).  At first glance, this argument appears tenuous because the video is 
ambiguous, and the testimony contradictory, on who attached the coupled retractables 
to Landeros’ harness. However, because the statute places the burden of proof on 
Landeros in this instance, ambiguity should be resolved in favor of the employer.  The 
incident reports clearly find that Landeros fell because his retractable locked up causing 
him to lose his balance and fall off the beam, and the force of his fall in combination with 
the use of two retractables caused one of the ropes to snap.  The question is whether 
this catastrophic equipment failure was caused by the user, Landeros, or by the 
condition of the equipment itself. Put another way, the question is whether Landeros’ 
marijuana use was a substantial factor in causing Landeros’ equipment failure that 
caused/allowed him to fall.  
DeFord concluded that Landeros fell because one of the retractable ropes locked 
up, pulling Landeros off the beam, and then the force of the fall in combination with the 
use of two retractable ropes caused the second retractable to snap and break in half. 

LANDEROS-MORALES V. DEAN SNYDER CONSTRUCTION 
Page 17 
 
 
(Id.).  Dorenkamp testified that Landeros himself was the individual that attached the 
two retractable ropes together. (Ex. F, depo. p. 19).  Landeros testified he did not recall 
attaching the two ropes together, but he did not submit any evidence into the hearing 
record either (1) showing the equipment failure was unrelated to user error, or (2) 
proving someone else ordered the two retractable ropes be connected or physically 
connected the two retractable ropes together, rather than himself.  Prior decisions have 
found falls to be the type of accident in which intoxication can play a meaningful role. 
See, e.g., Garcia v. Naylor Concrete Co., 650 N.W.2d 87, 91 (Iowa 2002) (upholding 
Commissioner’s determination that claimant’s intoxication impaired his ability to function 
and was a substantial factor in causing his fall off a roof). Defendants have produced 
testimony indicating Landeros made the questionable decision to attach two retractable 
ropes together in order to reach further out onto the roof.  Landeros questions this, but 
did not produce any concrete evidence to counter the assertion.  However, under the 
statute, this is the type of evidence required to prove his presumed 
intoxication/substance use was not a substantial factor in his fall.   
In his post-hearing brief, Landeros argues the evidentiary ambiguity must be 
resolved in his favor. (See Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, p. 4-6 (arguing Landeros’ 
incorrect use of his harness was not caused by his intoxication/could have been caused 
by other reasons such as age and personality)). However, the statutory language of 
Iowa Code section 85.16 dictates otherwise.  It specifically places the burden of proof 
on the employee to prove intoxication was not a substantial factor in causing the injury.  
Iowa Code § 85.16. While this appears to be a departure from Iowa’s no-fault workers’ 
compensation system, it is a divergence specifically authorized by the legislature.   See 
Tripp v. Scott Emergency Communication Center, 977 N.W.2d 459, 470 (Iowa 2022) 
(stating, “our workers’ compensation statute embodies a ‘no fault’ system: employers 
are not liable for their negligence in causing a workplace injury and workers are not 
subject to a setoff in benefits for their own conduct that might have contributed to their 
injury.”).  Generally, workers cannot be denied benefits based upon their own 
negligence. Id; see also Ganske v. Spahn and Rose Lumber Co., 580 N.W.2d 812, 815-
816 (Iowa 1998) (stating “The Pennsylvania statute, like Iowa's, provides a no-
fault system of guaranteed payment to employees in exchange for the employer's 
immunity from common-law suit.” (emphasis added)). In this instance, the plain 
language of the statute mandates that Landeros produce additional evidence to meet 
these additional causation hurdles.  See Bridgestone Americas, Inc v. Anderson, 4 
N.W.3d 676, 683 (holding the Court is “‘required to use the plain language of the statute 
when construing’ the workers’ compensation statute.” (quoting Warren Props. V. 
Stewart, 864 N.W.2d 307, 315 (Iowa 2015))).  Landeros did not produce persuasive 
evidence showing his intoxication was not a substantial factor in his equipment failure 
and subsequent fall. 
Landeros failed to overcome the presumption and carry his burden of proof to 
establish that he was not intoxicated and/or that the intoxication was not a substantial 
factor causing his injury.  Any recovery of weekly or medical benefits is barred by Iowa 
Code section 85.16(2).  Landeros’ petition should be dismissed without an award of 
benefits.   Given this finding, the remaining issues in the case are moot. 

LANDEROS-MORALES V. DEAN SNYDER CONSTRUCTION 
Page 18 
 
 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, it is ordered:  
Claimant shall take nothing.  
The parties shall be responsible for their own costs. 
Signed and filed this __9th ___ day of December, 2025. 
 
   
__________________________ 
         AMANDA R. RUTHERFORD 
              DEPUTY WORKERS’  
    COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
Brian Keit 
 
 
(via WCES) 
James Ballard 
 
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
 
