Case Number: 1642927.02
Case Title:  SCHOENBERGER, SHANE V. ZEPHYR ALUMINUM PRODUCTS
Doc Type:    Decision - Court of Appeals
Source:      Schoenberger - COA Decision.PDF
========================================================================

IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF IOWA 
 
No. 22-1613 
Filed April 12, 2023 
 
 
SHANE A. SCHOENBERGER, 
 
Petitioner-Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
ACUITY, A MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY, and ZEPHYR ALUMINUM 
PRODUCTS, 
 
Respondents-Appellees. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Polk County, David Nelmark, Judge. 
 
 
A claimant appeals the district court’s error-preservation finding on judicial 
review of workers’ compensation proceedings.  REVERSED AND REMANDED. 
 
 
Thomas M. Wertz and Mindi M. Vervaecke of Wertz Law Firm, Cedar 
Rapids, for appellant. 
 
Stephanie L. Marett of Nyemaster Goode, P.C., Des Moines, for appellee. 
 
 
Considered by Vaitheswaran, P.J., and Greer and Chicchelly, JJ.
1 of 11
ELECTRONICALLY FILED            APR 12, 2023            CLERK OF SUPREME COURT
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Apr-12  09:31:42     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

 
2
CHICCHELLY, Judge. 
 
This appeal concerns the narrow question of error preservation in the 
administrative law context.  Shane Schoenberger contends the district court erred 
in finding he did not preserve error on the issue of whether he was entitled to 
industrial disability benefits for a combined shoulder and arm injury.  Upon our 
review of the proceedings before the Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, we 
find the issue was preserved.  Accordingly, we reverse and remand to the agency 
for adjudication on the merits of this issue. 
I. Background Facts and Proceedings. 
 
Since 2001, Schoenberger has worked through a union as a journeyman 
carpenter for various employers.  Except for intermittent layoffs, he has worked for 
Zephyr Aluminum Products since 2007.  Zephyr is insured by its co-defendant 
Acuity.  On September 18, 2017, Schoenberger sustained an injury while working 
for Zephyr.  After physical therapy and a subacromial injection failed to resolve his 
shoulder pain, Schoenberger underwent arthroscopic surgery on his left shoulder, 
which consisted of labral debridement with biceps tenotomy, arthroscopic 
acromioplasty with conversion of type I acromion, and a mini-open rotator cuff 
repair.  He spent some time off work altogether, returned part-time on light duty, 
and eventually resumed working full-time for Zephyr with some permanent 
restrictions.   
 
Schoenberger applied for permanent partial disability benefits as a result of 
the injury.  The parties obtained a total of three independent medical evaluations 
between November 2018 and August 2020, which each opined as to the 
percentages of impairment to Schoenberger’s left upper extremity and body as a 
2 of 11

 
3
whole.  Notably, one of the examining physicians explained that Schoenberger’s 
arm would not be as functional but did not distinguish the impairment rating beyond 
the upper-left-extremity or body-as-a-whole categories.  Schoenberger’s reported 
symptoms ranged from left shoulder and biceps pain to numbness in the triceps 
area, tingling from the elbow through the left hand, and problems working at or 
above chest level, gripping and grasping, and using power tools.  Testing in 
October 2019 showed ulnar neuropathy at the left elbow, which the subsequent 
medical evaluation opined was a sequela to the work injury and related surgery.  
 
On June 21, 2021, the deputy workers’ compensation commissioner filed 
an arbitration decision, which found that Schoenberger failed to prove the 
stipulated work injury extended beyond his left shoulder into the body as a whole, 
and therefore he was not entitled to receive industrial disability benefits.  Pursuant 
to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) (2017), the deputy commissioner found 
Schoenberger sustained permanent scheduled member disability to nineteen 
percent of the left shoulder, and this disability entitled Schoenberger to receive 
seventy-six weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.   
 
Schoenberger appealed to the workers’ compensation commissioner, 
arguing the deputy commissioner erred in finding his injury did not extend beyond 
the 
left 
shoulder and 
qualify 
for 
industrial 
disability 
benefits 
under 
section 85.34(2)(v).  The commissioner filed an appeal decision on March 7, 2022.  
Although the commissioner’s decision affirmed the finding that Schoenberger 
failed to prove the injury extends beyond his left shoulder into the body as a whole 
and therefore does not qualify for industrial disability benefits, the decision failed 
to specifically address Schoenberger’s assertion that his injury qualifies for 
3 of 11

 
4
industrial disability benefits because it constitutes a combined shoulder and arm 
injury.  Because Schoenberger had not previously and explicitly raised the 
question of a combined shoulder and arm injury or secured a ruling thereon, the 
district court found that error on this issue was not preserved and affirmed the 
commissioner’s decision on judicial review.  Schoenberger filed a timely appeal. 
II. Review.  
 
“We review a district court decision reviewing agency action to determine if 
we would reach the same result as the district court in our application of the Iowa 
Administrative Procedure Act.”  Staff Mgmt. v. Jimenez, 839 N.W.2d 640, 653 
(Iowa 2013).  “Further, ‘we review the commissioner’s interpretation of Iowa Code 
chapter 85 for correction of errors at law instead of deferring to the agency’s 
interpretation’ because the legislature has not clearly vested the commissioner 
with authority to interpret that chapter.”  Chavez v. MS Tech. LLC, 972 N.W.2d 
662, 666 (Iowa 2022) (citation omitted).  “Nevertheless, we accept the 
commissioner’s factual findings when supported by substantial evidence.”  Id.  
(citation omitted) (cleaned up). 
III. Discussion. 
 
Schoenberger argues that he properly preserved error because different 
error preservation rules apply in the administrative law context.  We agree with this 
premise but disagree that it leads directly to Schoenberger’s requested result. 
Normally, for an issue to be preserved, a party must present it and 
have it ruled upon before a court will review the issue on appeal.  See 
Meier v. Senecaut, 641 N.W.2d 532, 537 (Iowa 2002) (“It is a 
fundamental doctrine of appellate review that issues must ordinarily 
be both raised and decided by the district court before we will decide 
them on appeal.”). 
4 of 11

 
5
 
The rule is different for administrative law cases.  The final 
agency action in a workers’ compensation case is not the deputy’s 
decision, but the decision of the workers’ compensation 
commissioner.  See Iowa Code § 86.24(5) (2013).  We have held a 
party preserves error on an issue before an agency if a party raises 
the issue in the agency proceeding before the agency issues a final 
decision and both sides have had an opportunity to address the 
issue.  See Office of Consumer Advocate v. Iowa State Commerce 
Comm’n, 465 N.W.2d 280, 283 (Iowa 1991) (finding a party 
preserved error by raising an issue in a petition for rehearing). 
Jimenez, 839 N.W.2d at 647.  Based on this principle, Schoenberger contends that 
raising his industrial disability argument based on the combination of shoulder and 
arm injuries on appeal to the commissioner, and thereby giving the defendants an 
opportunity to respond, was sufficient.  We acknowledge that this scenario could 
be true in some instances.  However, another key element is necessary: having 
raised the issue at the earliest possible opportunity.  See Off. of Consumer Advoc., 
465 N.W.2d at 283 (finding issue preserved despite not being initially plead before 
the agency because it was raised to the agency “at the earliest possible 
opportunity”). 
 
Consistent therewith, rule 876–4.28(7) of the Iowa Administrative Code 
describes the scope of issues on appeal before the workers’ compensation 
commissioner: 
The appeal will consider the issues presented for review by the 
appellant and cross-appellant in their briefs and any issues 
necessarily incident to or dependent upon the issues that are 
expressly raised, except as provided in rule 876—4.29(86,17A).  An 
issue will not be considered on appeal if the issue could have been, 
but was not, presented to the deputy workers’ compensation 
commissioner.  An issue raised on appeal is decided de novo and 
the scope of the issue is viewed broadly.  If the ruling from which the 
appeal was taken made a choice between alternative findings of fact, 
conclusions of law, theories of recovery or defenses and the 
alternative selected in the ruling is challenged as an issue on appeal, 
5 of 11

 
6
de novo review includes reconsideration of all alternatives that were 
available to the deputy. 
(emphasis added).  This rule highlights that failing to obtain a ruling from the deputy 
commissioner is not fatal so long as the matter was raised.  See Boehme v. 
Fareway Stores, Inc., 762 N.W.2d 142, 146 (Iowa 2009) (clarifying that 
presentation to the deputy commissioner does not require obtaining a ruling from 
the deputy in order to preserve the issue for further review). 
 
Here, Schoenberger’s claim to the deputy commissioner centered on 
whether his injury was to the scheduled member shoulder or extended beyond it.  
The deputy commissioner summarized the issue as follows: 
One of the main issues in this case is if claimant’s injury extends to 
the body as a whole, and is compensated as an industrial disability 
under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v), or if the injury is limited to the 
shoulder and is compensated as a functional loss under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(n). 
In this way, the question of industrial disability under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) 
was indeed presented at the earliest opportunity, which in this case, was to the 
deputy commissioner.  Zephyr contends that  
adding a whole new body part for consideration with respect to the 
nature and extent of injury is not an “alternative theory” that is 
incident to, dependent upon, or already encompassed within the 
issues expressly raised to the deputy commissioner on whether a 
shoulder injury only is a scheduled member or body as a whole 
injury. 
(citing Iowa Admin. Code r. 876–4.28(7)).  However, we find that the broad scope 
to be embraced on appeal pursuant to rule 876–4.28(7) supports otherwise.  
 
Essentially, Schoenberger went from arguing that his injury extended 
beyond the shoulder to the body as a whole to arguing the injury extended beyond 
the shoulder by way of the arm injury specifically.  He was not permitted to add a 
6 of 11

 
7
whole new body part, introduce additional evidence, or claim a new injury.  The 
record already contained evidence pertaining to symptoms below the shoulder 
area, such as the sequela injury involving ulnar neuropathy at the elbow.  
Therefore, we agree with Schoenberger’s characterization of his appellate 
argument to the commissioner as “additional ammunition for the same 
argument . . . made below—not a new argument advanced on appeal.”  See JBS 
Swift & Co. v. Ochoa, 888 N.W.2d 887, 893 (Iowa 2016).   
 
Because Schoenberger presented the broad issue to the deputy 
commissioner, it was preserved for the commissioner’s review on direct appeal.  
The commissioner did not explicitly find the issue waived but failed to address the 
argument altogether.  In such circumstances, we encourage claimants to file an 
application for rehearing pursuant to rule 876–4.24 of the Iowa Administrative 
Code.  Nonetheless, in light of our special preservation rules for administrative 
proceedings, we find the issue was preserved for the district court.  See Jimenez, 
839 N.W.2d at 647.  Accordingly, we reverse the ruling on judicial review and 
remand to the agency for a determination on the merits of this issue. 
 
REVERSED AND REMANDED. 
Vaitheswaran, P.J., concurs; Greer, J., dissents. 
 
 
7 of 11

 
8
GREER, Judge (dissenting). 
Shane Schoenberger contests the district court ruling that his claim for 
benefits under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) (2021) was not preserved.1  In his 
requested relief in the appellate brief here, Schoenberger commented that the 
“[c]ommissioner did a de novo review and still only awarded the functional 
impairment rating to the shoulder,” yet requested that we “remand[] back to the 
[a]gency for a determination of whether Schoenberger’s injury falls within the 
industrial disability analysis with two schedule [sic] injuries to his shoulder and arm 
combined.”  Schoenberger concedes he first raised the legal theory that the 
combined injuries to the shoulder and arm were separate scheduled injuries in his 
appellate brief to the commissioner, but we note he initially addressed the arm and 
shoulder complaints2 with the deputy commissioner under the theory that the arm 
dysfunction, along with the shoulder injury, would require a finding of injury to the 
person as a whole.  The deputy commissioner noted: 
One of the main issues in this case is if claimant’s injury 
extends to the body as a whole, and is compensated as an industrial 
disability under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v), or if the injury is 
limited to the shoulder and is compensated as a functional loss under 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n). 
 
So, I part ways with the majority on the approach we should take given the 
record and the legal issues before us.  The commissioner affirmed the deputy 
 
1 Both parties point to cases that, in their analysis, answer the error-preservation 
question.  Given that those cases, which were considered by the district court, 
could take us on different paths, clarity might be helpful here if resolution depended 
on error preservation. 
2 At all stages of the case, Schoenberger describes his work injuries as including: 
“his rotator cuff, left superior labrum, supraspinatus tendon, left biceps long head 
tendon, and sequela to the left elbow, and left ulnar nerve causing symptomatology 
from elbow to fingertips.” 
8 of 11

 
9
commissioner’s ruling that considered whether the work injury was solely to the 
shoulder, such that Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) (2021) applies, or was a 
constellation of injuries under section 85.34(2)(v).  See Chavez v. MS Tech. LLC, 
972 N.W.2d 662, 668 (Iowa 2022) (“These rules of statutory construction guide our 
conclusion that ‘shoulder’ under section 85.34(2)(n) must be defined in the 
functional sense to include the glenohumeral joint as well as all of the muscles, 
tendons, and ligaments that are essential for the shoulder to function.”).  Both 
theories required a finding that the arm and hand complaints were work-related 
injuries, along with the shoulder injury.   
 
As for the record made below, Schoenberger offered medical evidence over 
the arm and hand symptoms to show those injuries should be considered along 
with the shoulder injury to allow compensation under 85.34(2)(v).  In an 
independent medical examination by his expert, Dr. John Kuhnlein, the doctor 
opined less definitively, that: 
The ulnar forearm, hand, and finger symptoms developed 
after the surgery with no other known cause for these symptoms, and 
so while the cause for the symptoms has not been formally defined 
at this time, it is more likely that they are related to the surgery that 
was performed for this work injury, and so therefore would be related 
to the original September 18. 2017, injury as a sequela to that injury. 
 
Still, two medical evaluators providing medical reviews for the employer, Dr. David 
Field and Dr. James Nepola, evaluated the left arm and hand complaints as not 
related to the work injury and shoulder issues.  So, although the legal theory was 
presented differently before the deputy commissioner than it was before the 
commissioner on appeal, the underlying proof required for either theory was 
developed and considered by the deputy commissioner.  Yet, the deputy 
9 of 11

 
10 
commissioner found (and the commissioner affirmed and adopted) that only the 
shoulder issues were work-related injuries requiring compensation under the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation statute.  We give great deference to the commissioner’s 
determination that Schoenberger suffered only one work-related injury.  See Cedar 
Rapids Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Pease, 807 N.W.2d 839, 844 (Iowa 2011) (“Our decision 
is controlled in large part by the deference we afford decisions of administrative 
agencies.  Medical causation presents a question of fact that is vested in the 
discretion of the workers’ compensation commissioner.”).  And without a second 
injury, Schoenberger cannot be entitled to industrial disability benefits.  See Iowa 
Code § 85.34(2)(n) (including “shoulder” in the statutory list of scheduled member 
injuries); Chavez, 972 N.W.2d at 666–67 (“Disabilities resulting from injuries other 
than those listed in paragraphs (a) through (u) of section 85.34 are considered 
unscheduled injuries that allow for benefits based on the injury to the body as a 
whole and are evaluated according to the industrial method.”); accord Chavez, 972 
N.W.2d at  670–71 (refusing to consider claimant’s argument that she was entitled 
to industrial disability benefits because she injured two scheduled members, her 
shoulder and arm, because substantial evidence supported the commissioner’s 
finding that the claimant failed to prove a second injury).    
Given our deference to the agency, I would affirm the commissioner’s ruling 
over the compensation for the work-related shoulder injury.  
   
 
10 of 11

State of Iowa Courts
Case Number
Case Title
22-1613
Schoenberger v. Zephyr Aluminum Products
Electronically signed on 2023-04-12 08:28:37
11 of 11
