Case Number: 22005624.02
Case Title:  NIELSEN, JEENLEE V. MIDWEST MEDICAL TRANSPORT COMPANY
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Nielsen Jeenlee-22005624.02M.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
JEENLEE NIELSEN, 
File No. 22005624.02 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
MIDWEST MEDICAL TRANSPORT 
COMPANY, 
ALTERNATE CARE 
DECISION 
 
Employer, 
OLD REPUBLIC INSURANCE, 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
I.  
STATEMEN T OF TH E C AS E. 
This case stems from the second application for alternate care JeenLee Nielsen 
has filed with the agency under Iowa Code section 85.27 and rule 876 IAC 4.48 seeking 
care for alleged injuries relating to an April 28, 2022 vehicle crash. On December 19, 
2022, Nielsen first applied for alternate care. The agency assigned the case File No. 
22005624.01 and scheduled a telephone hearing. However, after the defendants, 
employer Midwest Medical Transport Company (Midwest) and insurance carrier Old 
Republic Insurance (Old Republic), filed an answer disputing liability, the undersigned 
issued an order dismissing the case without prejudice under rule 876 IAC 4.48(7). 
Nielsen has requested the agency take administrative notice of the filings in that 
proceeding and the undersigned hereby does so. 
After the defendants changed their position and again accepted liability for 
Nielsen’s injuries stemming from the crash, Nielsen applied to the agency for alternate 
care a second time, on January 23, 2023.  The defendants did not file an answer, which 
is their prerogative in an alternate care proceeding, and responded to Nielsen’s 
allegations on the record during the hearing under rule 876 IAC 4.48(12).  
The undersigned presided over a hearing held by telephone and recorded on 
February 2, 2022. That recording constitutes the official record of the proceeding under 
agency rule 876 IAC 4.48(12). Nielsen participated personally and through attorney 
Jennifer M. Zupp. The defendants participated through attorney Madaline McGill. The 
record consists of: 
 Claimant’s Exhibit 1;  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Feb-03  12:26:52     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

NIELSEN V. MIDWEST MEDICAL TRANSPORT COMPANY 
Page 2 
 
 Defendants’ Exhibit A; and 
 Hearing testimony by Nielsen. 
II.  
ISSU E . 
During the hearing, the parties refined their dispute. They do not dispute the 
defendants’ choice of doctor for Nielsen’s leg or back. Nor do they dispute the choice of 
Robert Arias, PhD, for a neuropsychological evaluation. The parties dispute the 
following: 
1) Should Dr. Arias’s examination, which is estimated to take about six hours, 
take place in Lincoln, Nebraska, on February 7, 2023, given the fact that 
Nielsen has a previously scheduled appointment for that afternoon in Omaha, 
Nebraska? 
2) Should Michael Chen, D.O., continue as the authorized treating neurologist? 
3) Should Kirsten Jorgensen, M.S., continue as the authorized treating speech 
therapist? 
4) Should the defendants provide care in the form of a neuro-optometry 
examination, as recommended by Morgan LaHolt, M.D.? 
5) Should Nielsen undergo magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her left knee, 
as recommended by Dr. LaHolt, before or after her first appointment with 
Ryan Arnold, M.D., the defendants’ chosen treating physician for the alleged 
injury? 
III .  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T . 
On April 28, 2022, Nielsen was working for Midwest, riding in a vehicle that was 
traveling down Highway 59. A large black truck struck the vehicle Nielsen was in. Her 
first memory after the collision is being upside down, held in her seat by her seatbelt. 
Nielsen unbuckled her seatbelt, fell to the roof of the vehicle, and exited. Her memory of 
the aftermath of the crash is spotty. (Testimony)  
A helicopter transported her to the emergency room (ER) at the University of 
Nebraska Medical Center (UNMC) in Omaha. Nielsen received care at the ER 
overnight. UNMC discharged Nielsen and referred her to Takashi Kawamitsu, M.D., her 
personal care physician, and Brandon Reicks, PA-C, at UNMC Neurosurgery. There is 
no indication in the record that the defendants communicated to the providers or 
Nielsen that this care was unauthorized. (Testimony) 
Nielsen provided an executed authorization to release medical information to 
Brooke Johnson, from Gallagher Bassett shortly after the crash. Later, Nielsen executed 
a second authorization for defense counsel’s law firm that had the sections regarding 
substance abuse, mental health, and AIDS information crossed out. Nielsen has 

NIELSEN V. MIDWEST MEDICAL TRANSPORT COMPANY 
Page 3 
 
subsequently given a full release. It is unclear based on the record what issues the 
defendants have had obtaining medical records relating to the care Nielsen has 
received for the alleged conditions she contends relate to the crash other than an 
apparent lag time with respect to the fulfillment of requests relating to records from 
speech therapy. (Testimony) 
Nielsen saw Reicks. He prescribed medication and physical therapy (PT). 
Nielsen participated in PT after the Reicks referral. He also referred Nielsen to her 
personal care physician for prescription medication and PT follow-up. There is no 
indication the defendants took issue with this course of care. (Testimony) 
Nielsen received care with Dr. Kawamitsu. A nurse case manager (NCM) 
attended at least some of her early appointments as an agent of the defendants. Dr. 
Kawamitsu continued PT, managed prescriptions, and ultimately referred her to see Dr. 
Chen, a neurologist, and a neurosurgeon. Dr. Kawamitsu’s office scheduled an 
appointment with Dr. Chen for her. There is no indication the defendants took issue with 
this care. (Testimony) 
The NCM was at the appointment during which Dr. Kawamitsu referred Nielsen 
to Dr. Chen. The NCM attended Nielsen’s first appointment with Dr. Chen. Dr. Chen 
continued to treat Nielsen, managing her medication and referring her for PT and 
speech therapy. Dr. Chen referred Nielsen to Jorgensen for speech therapy, which she 
has participated in about once per week. There is no indication the defendants took 
issue with this treatment. (Testimony) 
The defendants arranged for Nielsen to undergo an independent medical 
examination (IME) with Morgan LaHolt, MD, on December 5, 2022. (Ex. 1) After the 
IME, Nielsen applied to the agency for alternate care under File No. 2205624.01. The 
defendants answered, denying liability, and the agency dismissed the case without 
prejudice. This all happened before Dr. LaHolt issued an IME report. 
Dr. LaHolt issued his IME report to defense counsel on or about January 13, 
2023, and defense counsel provided a copy of it to claimant’s counsel. (Ex. 1) Dr. 
LaHolt opined that Nielsen’s alleged traumatic brain injury (TBI), headaches, neck, 
back, and leg injuries were caused by the April 28, 2022 crash and recommended care 
for them. (Ex. 1) Dr. LaHolt recommended neuropsychological testing, seeing her 
speech therapy through to completion, an MRI of her injured knee, physical therapy for 
the cervical and lumbar spine, care by a neurologist, and a neuro-optometry evaluation. 
(Ex. 1) No doctor has opined any of the care recommended by Dr. LaHolt in his IME 
report is inappropriate or unreasonable. 
The defendants acted on Dr. LaHolt’s recommendations. They have arranged for 
care with: 
 Matthew Hahn, M.D., for Nielsen’s back and neck; 
 Dr. Arnold for the left knee; 
 Dr. Arias for neuropsychological testing; and 

NIELSEN V. MIDWEST MEDICAL TRANSPORT COMPANY 
Page 4 
 
 Joel Cotton, M.D., which would change Nielsen’s treating neurologist from Dr. 
Chen. 
However, Nielsen is not satisfied with the proposed care. She does not want to 
change from Dr. Chen to Dr. Cotton as her treating neurologist. Nielsen also wants to 
continue speech therapy and PT, which the defendants have not authorized at present. 
Moreover, Nielsen wants to undergo the MRI recommended by Dr. LaHolt for her knee 
before her appointment with Dr. Arnold. She further believes Dr. LaHolt’s 
recommendation of a neuro-optometry examination should be authorized. 
The defendants argue that it is reasonable to start Nielsen with a clean slate for 
care because they contend she has made misrepresentations to her treating doctors. 
However, it is unclear based on the record how any such alleged misrepresentations 
have resulted in care that is inappropriate for her injuries. There is consensus amongst 
the doctors that have treated and examined her that she needs to continue physical 
therapy and speech therapy. No doctor disputes that she needs a neuro-optometry 
examination or MRI, as recommended by the defendants’ chosen IME physician, Dr. 
LaHolt. There is no indication in the record that Nielsen has made a material 
misrepresentation to Dr. Chen that is of a nature so severe as to dictate ending his care 
and starting over with a different neurologist. 
Nielsen is happy with the care provided by Dr. Chen. He has diagnosed her 
issues and the treatment regime he implemented has helped reduce her symptoms. 
Nielsen does not want to change neurologists. (Testimony) 
Nielsen’s speech therapy has been ongoing. She was still participating in regular 
speech therapy appointments at the time of hearing. Jorgensen’s care is ongoing. 
Nielsen is happy with it. (Testimony) 
IV.  
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW. 
“Iowa Code section 85.27(4) affords an employer who does not contest the 
compensability of a workplace injury a qualified statutory right to control the medical 
care provided to an injured employee.” Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 
N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016) (citing R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 
195, 197 (Iowa 2003)). Under the law, the employer must “furnish reasonable medical 
services and supplies and reasonable and necessary appliances to treat an injured 
employee.” Stone Container Corp. v. Castle, 657 N.W.2d 485, 490 (Iowa 2003) 
(emphasis in original). Such employer-provided care “must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.” 
Iowa Code § 85.27(4).  
An injured employee dissatisfied with the employer-furnished care (or lack 
thereof) may share the employee’s discontent with the employer and if the parties 
cannot reach an agreement on alternate care, “the commissioner may, upon application 
and reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care.” Id. 
“Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.” Long v. 

NIELSEN V. MIDWEST MEDICAL TRANSPORT COMPANY 
Page 5 
 
Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 123 (Iowa 1995); Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. 
Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 436 (Iowa 1997). As the party seeking relief in the form of 
alternate care, the employee bears the burden of proving that the authorized care is 
unreasonable. Id. at 124; Bell Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 
at 209; Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d at 436. Because “the employer’s obligation under the 
statute turns on the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” an injured 
employee’s dissatisfaction with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough 
to find such care unreasonable. Id. “[W]hen evidence is presented to the commissioner 
that the employer-authorized medical care has not been effective and that such care is 
‘inferior or less extensive’ than other available care requested by the employee, the 
commissioner is justified by section 85.27 to order the alternate care.” Reynolds, 562 
N.W.2d at 437 (quoting Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124). 
A .   
N e u r o l o g i st .  
After the crash that caused the injuries at issue here, Nielsen was flown by 
helicopter to the ER and UNMC. The doctors there referred her to Dr. Kawamitsu. The 
defendants dispatched at least one NCM to attend multiple of Nielsen’s appointments 
with Dr. Kawamitsu. This demonstrates the defendants knew of the care and did not 
object to it or attempt to arrange care with another physician. 
A NCM retained as an agent of the defendants attended the appointment at 
which Dr. Kawamitsu referred Nielsen to Dr. Chen. A NCM attended Nielsen’s first 
appointment with Dr. Chen. There is an insufficient basis in the evidence from which to 
conclude the defendants objected to Dr. Chen providing care or took steps to make 
alternative arrangements. Dr. Chen’s care has been ongoing and effective. Nielsen is 
happy with Dr. Chen’s care and does not want to change doctors in the middle of care. 
Under these circumstances, Nielsen has met her burden to establish the challenged 
care—changing her treating neurologist—is unreasonable. 
B .  
S p e e c h  T h e r a p y.  
The ER doctors at UNMC referred Nielsen to Dr. Kawamitsu. He referred Nielsen 
to Dr. Chen. And Dr. Chen then recommended speech therapy and referred Nielsen to 
Jorgensen. There is no indication the defendants voiced an objection to this course of 
care. Moreover, Dr. LaHolt recommended Nielsen see her speech therapy through to 
completion. 
Nielsen is happy with her speech therapy and wants to continue her regular 
sessions. The defendants indicated they have had issues when requesting medical 
records from Jorgensen but that is not a reason to end it entirely, especially when two 
physicians have prescribed it. Under the circumstances, ceasing speech therapy 
prescribed by a treating physician and IME doctor and that is being provided by a 
therapist with whom Nielsen has an ongoing provider-patient relationship is 
unreasonable. 

NIELSEN V. MIDWEST MEDICAL TRANSPORT COMPANY 
Page 6 
 
C .  
P h y s i c a l  T h e r a p y.  
Dr. LaHolt recommended physical therapy for Nielsen’s cervical and lumbar 
spine. Nielsen wants physical therapy scheduled with a provider that is convenient for 
her. This is understandable, given the number of appointments she must juggle and for 
which she must travel.  
The defendants have refused to authorize the recommended physical therapy 
because the defendants want their chosen specialists to prescribe her care. These 
appointments are not scheduled for multiple months. It would be unreasonable to deny 
Nielsen the recommended care because of the logistical reality of the timing of her 
appointments with specialists. And the specialists will be able to alter her care as they 
see fit once they begin treatment. Under the circumstances, it would be unreasonable to 
deny Nielsen the care recommended by Dr. LaHolt because of its potential benefit, the 
potential harm of forgoing it, and the ability of the defendants’ chosen specialists to alter 
her course of care once they are able to begin treatment. 
D .  
N e u r o - O p t o me t r y  E v a l u a t i o n.  
Dr. LaHolt recommended a neuro-optometry evaluation based on Nielsen’s 
complaints. The defendants have refused to authorize it because they contend she 
misrepresented to Dr. LaHolt what other doctors have said regarding her symptoms. 
The need for a neuro-optometry evaluation is the traumatic brain injury that medical 
personnel seem to uniformly agree Nielsen sustained in the crash. Under these 
circumstances, it is reasonable for her to undergo such an evaluation. 
E .  
M R I .  
Dr. LaHolt recommended an MRI to assess Nielsen’s ongoing symptoms. The 
defendants have arranged care with Dr. Arnold for her leg. They want Dr. Arnold to 
determine whether an MRI is needed. Under the circumstances, it is reasonable to rely 
on the expert judgment of the defendants’ chosen specialist to make treatment 
determinations with respect to imaging such as an MRI. 
 
F.  
N e u r o p s yc ho l og i ca l  Te s t i n g .  
The defendants scheduled the neuropsychological testing recommended by Dr. 
LaHolt. They worked with claimant’s counsel to set up an appointment with Dr. Arias. 
The appointment will take about six hours. It is scheduled to take place in the morning 
of the same day on which Nielsen has an appointment scheduled with Dr. Kawamitsu. 
Dr. Arias charges a $4,000 cancellation fee. Under the circumstances, it is reasonable 
to maintain the currently scheduled neuropsychological testing and allow Nielsen to 
determine whether to reschedule or maintain her appointment with Dr. Kawamitsu. 
 
 

NIELSEN V. MIDWEST MEDICAL TRANSPORT COMPANY 
Page 7 
 
V. 
OR D ER . 
Under the above findings of facts and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 
1) Nielsen’s application is GRANTED as follows: 
 
a) The defendants shall continue to authorize Dr. Chen as Nielsen’s 
treating neurologist. 
 
b) The defendants shall continue to authorize Jorgensen as Nielsen’s 
treating speech therapist. 
 
c) The defendants shall authorize physical therapy for her cervical and 
lumbar spine at a reasonable location relative to Nielsen’s home and 
the offices where she sees her other care providers. 
 
d) The defendants shall authorize a neuro-optometry evaluation. 
 
2) Nielsen’s application is DENIED as follows: 
 
a) The defendants may maintain the scheduled neuropsychological 
testing with Dr. Arias as currently scheduled. It is up to the parties to 
determine whether the afternoon appointment with Dr. Kawamitsu is 
rescheduled.  
 
b) The defendants may rely on the recommendation of Dr. Hahn and Dr. 
Arnold with respect to the need for imaging such as an MRI. 
 
3) The parties are encouraged to openly communicate during the scheduling of 
future care and examinations. 
On February 16, 2015, the Iowa workers’ compensation commissioner issued an 
order delegating authority to deputy workers’ compensation commissioners, such as the 
undersigned, to issue final agency decisions on applications for alternate care. 
Consequently, there is no appeal of this decision to the commissioner, only judicial 
review in a district court under the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Iowa Code 
chapter 17A.  
Signed and filed this _3rd _ day of February, 2023. 
 
 
 
BEN HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 

NIELSEN V. MIDWEST MEDICAL TRANSPORT COMPANY 
Page 8 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Jennifer M. Zupp (via WCES) 
Madaline McGill (via WCES) 
 
 
