Case Number: 1645935.01
Case Title:  BEBOUT, AMY V. STATE OF IOWA
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Bebout Amy-1645935.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
AMY BEBOUT, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 File No. 1645935.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 
IOWA DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN  
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
SERVICES, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
STATE OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
Head Notes: 1100, 1104, 1402.30 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
1402.40, 1802, 1803 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
Claimant, Amy Bebout, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Iowa Department of Human Services , employer, and State 
of Iowa, insurer, both as defendant.  The hearing occurred before the undersigned via 
CourtCall on June 2, 2021. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing.  On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 4, Claimant’s Exhibits 
1 through 11, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through C.  All exhibits were received without 
objection.   
Claimant testified on her own behalf.  Claimant also called Lisa Wischler and 
Debra Johnson on her behalf.  Defendant did not call any witnesses.  The evidentiary 
record closed at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing.  Both parties served their 
post-hearing briefs on July 2, 2021, at which time this case was deemed fully submitted 
to the undersigned. 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
1. 
Whether claimant’s March 26, 2018, injury arose out of and in the course 
of her employment; 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Jan-18  13:13:40     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

BEBOUT V. IOWA DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES 
Page 2 
 
2. 
Whether the injury caused temporary disability and, if so, the extent of 
claimant’s entitlement to temporary disability benefits; 
3. 
Whether the injury caused permanent disability and, if so, the extent of 
claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits; 
4. 
Whether claimant is entitled to an award of past medical expenses; 
5. 
Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for the fees associated with 
an independent medical examination under Iowa Code section 85.39; and  
6. 
Costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Amy Bebout, a social worker for the Department of Human Services (DHS), was 
injured walking from her car to her office in the Scott County Administrative Center on 
the morning of March 26, 2018.  At approximately 8:15 a.m., Ms. Bebout parked her 
personal vehicle in a public parking space on West 4th Street, just south of the 
Administrative Center. (Hearing Transcript, page 62)  While the Scott County 
Administrative Center has an employee parking lot, Ms. Bebout was not permitted to 
utilize the same.  As such, Ms. Bebout parked her vehicle on the street, as close to the 
Administrative Center as possible. (Id.)  It is undisputed that the street and crosswalks 
that span 4th Street are not owned or controlled by the employer; rather, they are 
maintained and controlled by the City of Davenport.  After finding a parking space, Ms. 
Bebout exited her vehicle and walked along the curb towards the back of her vehicle. 
(Hr. Tr., pp. 62-63)  According to Ms. Bebout, snowbanks were present between the 
sidewalk and West 4th Street.  Unfortunately, Ms. Bebout’s right foot became stuck in a 
snowbank.  This caused Ms. Bebout to lose her balance and fall behind her vehicle.  
After pulling herself up and gathering her things, Ms. Bebout called her supervisor.  
Claimant’s supervisor and some co-workers subsequently came out and helped Ms. 
Bebout into her car and drove her to Concentra for medical treatment. (Hr. Tr., p. 64) 
 
After defendant denied compensability, Ms. Bebout presented to Myles 
Luszczyk, D.O. for medical treatment. (JE3)  An MRI of the right ankle dated July 26, 
2018, revealed a partial tear of the peroneal brevis tendon with evidence of 
tenosynovitis, a tear of the anterior talofibular ligament and strains of the posterior 
talofibular ligament and deltoid ligament. (JE3, pp. 28-29)  Ms. Bebout did not pursue 
surgical intervention on her right ankle as she was told that she would need to be off 
work for approximately three months and she had already exhausted all of her leave at 
work. (Ex. 11, p. 52)  Sunil Bansal, M.D. conducted an independent medical evaluation 
of claimant and assessed claimant with eleven percent (11%) right lower extremity 
impairment due to range of motion deficits. (Ex. 4, p. 15)  Dr. Bansal recommended 
permanent restrictions of no prolonged standing or walking greater than 30 minutes, 
and avoid multiple stairs and walking on uneven ground. (Id.)  Defendant did not obtain 
an impairment rating or request an evaluation of claimant’s impairment prior to Dr. 

BEBOUT V. IOWA DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES 
Page 3 
 
Bansal’s independent medical examination.  As such, I find claimant is not entitled to 
reimbursement for the fees associated with Dr. Bansal’s IME. 
 
Claimant sought workers’ compensation benefits from her employer, a self-
insured employer (defendant).  Defendant, relying on the “going and coming” rule, 
denied claimant’s injuries were compensable. 
 
Claimant has worked as a social worker for DHS since 2007. (Hr. Tr., p. 50)  As a 
social worker, claimant develops case plans, writes reports, meets with families, 
conducts home visits, transports children, and appears in court.  When she was not 
conducting home visits or appearing in court, claimant worked out of the DHS office 
located on the third floor of the Scott County Administrative Center in Davenport, Iowa. 
(Hr. Tr., p. 38)   
On the date of injury, claimant was on her way to the Administrative Center.  
According to the job description for a Social Worker II, claimant, and similarly situated 
employees, were expected to work from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.  However, claimant 
testified she regularly worked outside of the normal business hours. (Hr. Tr., pp. 55, 59-
60)  More specifically, claimant testified she regularly worked two nights per week, and 
sometimes three. (Hr. Tr., p. 60)  She further testified that she had to work around the 
schedules of the children and families she was assigned to. (Id.)  
 
All three witnesses testified to what a typical day as a social worker for DHS 
looks like. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 14-15, 33-34, 55)  Ms. Wischler testified the social worker 
position did not have a fixed location or fixed hours. (Hr. Tr., p. 18)  Ms. Wischler and 
Ms. Johnson testified that social workers could be in and out of the office up to six times 
per day depending on the casework assigned. (Hr. Tr., p. 14; see Hr. Tr., pp. 42-43)  At 
times, social workers would be able to plan their schedules; however, they were also 
expected to respond to emergency situations.  According to Ms. Wischler, social 
workers were sometimes expected to adhere to a one-hour response time. (Id.)  
Claimant primarily handled cases in Scott County; however, she was, at times, 
expected to travel outside of Scott County. (See Hr. Tr., p. 15) 
 
Travel was an essential component of claimant’s employment.  As a social 
worker, claimant traveled to homes, schools, hospitals, mental health centers, 
substance abuse centers, courts, and various other places throughout the State of Iowa. 
(See Hr. Tr., pp. 52, 55)  Claimant routinely used her own vehicle for travel.  Claimant 
was paid mileage if she used her personal vehicle for work; however, she was not 
reimbursed for travel to and from her home in Blue Grass, Iowa.  Claimant was required 
to keep a log of how many miles she traveled in a given day.  Then, at the end of the 
month, she would fill out a voucher requesting reimbursement from the state. (Hr. Tr., p. 
15)  At times, claimant would have to install car seats in her personal vehicle to 
transport children.  The state provided the necessary car seats. (Hr. Tr., p. 43)  
Alternatively, claimant had the ability to sign-out a state-owned vehicle, “if it was 
available.” (See Hr. Tr., pp. 15, 34, 56)   
Lisa Wischler and Debra Johnson testified that having a vehicle was a 
requirement of their employment with DHS. (Hr. Tr., pp. 14, 34)  More specifically, Ms. 
Johnson testified social worker IIs were required to have a valid driver’s license, to be 

BEBOUT V. IOWA DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES 
Page 4 
 
insured, and to have a means of transportation. (Hr. Tr., p. 34)  Whether using her own 
vehicle or one provided by the state, having access to a vehicle was instrumental in 
meeting with families, conducting home visits, and transporting children.   
 
As previously mentioned, claimant was not allowed to park her personal vehicle 
in the parking lot attached to the Administrative Center.  Claimant’s parking privileges 
were revoked after she violated the Campus Parking Policy.  As a result, claimant could 
not park in any county owned parking place.  Individuals banned from parking in the 
Administrative Center parking lot still had the option of parking in the “5th & Western” lot 
or on the street. (Ex. 2, p. 4; Hr. Tr., pp. 22, 23, 39, 79)  There is no evidence that DHS 
management instructed claimant to park on the street; however, it is clear parking on 
the street was common practice for employees working at the Administrative Center.  
Additionally, the Scott County Parking Map in evidence depicts the four main parking 
lots and provides, “On-street parking also available.” (Ex. 1, p. 1)   
 
The Campus Parking Policy acknowledges that there is limited parking available 
to visitors, customers, and employees near the Administrative Center.  The Campus 
Parking Policy does not guarantee off-street parking for county or state employees, 
employees temporarily assigned to a campus building, other organizations occupying 
workspace in or at county facilities, or volunteers working at the county campus. (Ex. 2, 
p. 2)  The parking policy, coupled with the parking bans, was “extremely frustrating” to 
DHS employees and “added to a lot of inconvenience, a lot of unnecessary time 
consumption” for social workers who were constantly coming and going from the office. 
(Hr. Tr., p. 21) 
 
For reasons that will be addressed in the Conclusions of Law section, I find the 
evidence as a whole indicates that Ms. Bebout was required to drive her own vehicle to 
work for use during her workday.  As such, I find the trip to and from work is by that fact 
alone embraced within the course of employment.  I further find that claimant’s injury 
arose out of and in the course of employment. 
 
Having found claimant’s injury arose out of and in the course of her employment, 
the next issue to be addressed is whether the injury caused temporary and permanent 
disability. 
The parties stipulate that Ms. Bebout was off work between March 26, 2018, and 
July 5, 2018, as a result of the alleged work injury.  Ms. Bebout returned to her full duty 
position with DHS on July 6, 2018. (See Ex. 5, p. 18; Ex. 11, p. 51)  Dr. Bansal placed 
claimant at maximum medical improvement as of August 29, 2018. (Ex. 4, p. 15)   
 
Dr. Bansal is the only physician to offer an opinion as to claimant’s level of 
functional impairment.  Utilizing the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, Fifth Edition, Dr. Bansal  assessed claimant with 11 percent lower extremity 
impairment due to range of motion deficits. (Id.)  I accept Dr. Bansal’s assessment as 
credible and convincing, and find claimant sustained permanent disability as a result of 
the work injury. 
 
Ms. Bebout also seeks an award of past medical expenses.  Defendant 
concedes that the expenses were causally connected to the medical conditions upon 

BEBOUT V. IOWA DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES 
Page 5 
 
which the claim of injury is based. (Hearing Report)  Having found that the claimed 
injury occurred, I similarly find that the claimed past medical expenses are causally 
connected to the March 26, 2018, work injury, the fees charged by the providers are fair 
and reasonable, and the treatment was reasonable and necessary.  
 
Costs will be addressed in the Conclusions of Law section. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The threshold issue in this case is whether Ms. Bebout’s injury arose out of and 
in the course of her employment. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  An 
injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the injury 
and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment. Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
 
This case is largely concerned with the “in the course of” prong.  With regard to 
“in the course of,” the general rule is that, absent special circumstances, an employee is 
not entitled to compensation for injuries occurring off of the employer's premises on the 
way to and from work. Frost v. S.S. Kresge, 299 N.W.2d 646, 648 (Iowa 1980).  An 
employee who has a fixed place to work and fixed hours to work is not covered by 
workers' compensation on the way to and from work. Waterhouse Water Cond. v. 
Waterhouse, 561 N.W.2d 55, 57-58 (Iowa 1997); Frost v. S.S. Kresqe Co., 299 N.W.2d 
646, 648 (Iowa 1980); Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143,150-51 (Iowa 1996) 
This legal proposition is frequently referred to as the “going and coming” 
rule. Bailey v. Batchelder, 576 N.W.2d 334, 339 (Iowa 1998) (“[U]nder 
‘the going and coming’ rule, workers' compensation does not cover an injury occurring 
off of the employer's premises, on the way to or from work.”).  The rationale for the 
going and coming rule is that as an employee travels to work he or she is engaged in 
his or her own business, and the employment commences only after the employee 
reaches the employer's premises. See Otto v. Independent Sch. Dist., 237 Iowa 991, 
994, 23 N.W.2d 915, 916 (1946). 
 
There are several recognized exceptions to this rule. See Frost, 299 N.W.2d at 
648–49.  These exceptions apply “when it would be unduly restrictive to limit coverage 
of compensation statutes to the physical perimeters of the employer's premises.” Ciha, 
552 N.W.2d at 151.   

BEBOUT V. IOWA DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES 
Page 6 
 
Additionally, under a separate rule which acts as an exception to the “going and 
coming” rule, an employee's trip to and from work is considered within the course of 
employment if the employee is required, as a part of his or her employment, to provide a 
vehicle for use during the working day. See Davis v. Bjorenson, 229 Iowa 7, 11, 293 
N.W. 829, 830 (1940); 1 A. Larson, The Law of Workmen's Compensation § 17.50 at 4–
239 (1985).  The rule has been called the “Personal Vehicle” rule, “Own Conveyance” 
rule, and “required vehicle” rule.   
The Iowa Supreme Court has recognized, under certain circumstances, that 
when the special demands of a job make it incumbent upon the employee to have ready 
transportation, travel to and from work may be considered within the course of 
employment.  Medical Assocs. Clinic, P.C. v. First Nat'l Bank of Dubuque, 440 N.W.2d 
374, 375 (Iowa 1989).  In recognizing this rule, the Iowa Supreme Court cited Professor 
Larson:  
As stated by Professor Larson: 
The theory behind this rule is in part related to that of the employer-
conveyance cases: the obligations for the job reach out beyond the 
premises, make the vehicle a mandatory part of the employment 
environment, and compel the employee to submit to the hazards 
associated with private motor travel, which otherwise he would have the 
option of avoiding. But in addition there is at work the factor of making the 
journey part of the job, since it is a service to the employer to convey to 
the premises a major piece of equipment devoted to the employer's 
purposes. Since these are the reasons supporting the rule, care must be 
exercised not to confuse these cases with the more common cases ... in 
which attention is focused exclusively on the journey itself—in particular, 
on the question: was the employee paid for the time or expenses of the 
journey itself? In the present category, it is immaterial whether the 
employee is compensated for the time or expenses of the journey, since 
work-connection is independently established by the fact of conveying the 
vehicle to the operating premises.  1 A. Larson, § 17.50 at 4–239–44.   
Medical Assocs. Clinic, P.C., 440 N.W.2d at 375-376. 
The “own conveyance” rule was applied by the court to allow compensation in 
Davis and Medical Assocs. Clinic, P.C. 
 
In Davis, the claimant worked as a mechanic for a business.  Under the 
employment agreement, the claimant regularly furnished his automobile to the employer 
for use in the business as a service car. 293 N.W. at 829.  The claimant took the vehicle 
home at night and answered emergency service calls overnight. Id.  During regular 
business hours, the claimant’s vehicle was used in the business by the claimant and by 
other employees, and the employer furnished gas and oil for the vehicle. Id.  The 
claimant was injured while driving his vehicle twelve blocks from his home on the way to 
his employer early in the morning. Id.  The court found the claimant’s injury arose out of 
and in the course of his employment because the vehicle was an instrumentality of the 
business given the claimant was required under his contract to drive his own vehicle 

BEBOUT V. IOWA DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES 
Page 7 
 
from his home to the shop where it was available to his employer for use in his 
employer’s business. Id. at 830.  The court found that “the car was an instrumentality of 
the business at all hours of the day and was subject to that use at night.” Id.  It was 
claimant's duty to take the car to work for its use in the business and “in so doing he 
was performing for his employer a substantial service required by his employment at the 
place and in the manner so required.” Id. 
 
In Medical Associates Clinic. P.C., Miles Martin, a thoracic surgeon, died in an 
automobile accident on his way from home to work at Mercy Hospital in Dubuque. 440 
N.W.2d at 374.  Dr. Martin had an employment contract with Medical Associates Clinic, 
which required him to personally pay automobile and transportation expenses he 
incurred in his work as a physician, and which provided his employer was under no 
obligation to pay the expenses. Id. at 374-75.  Medical Associates argued the Davis 
case was distinguishable because Davis was required by contract to provide a vehicle, 
the vehicle was used by all of the employees to make service calls, and the employer 
furnished the gas and oil for the vehicle. Id. at 376.  The court disagreed, concluding the 
employer read the Davis case too narrowly.  The court noted, “[w]hat was significant 
was that claimant was required to bring the vehicle to work for its use in the business to 
make service calls.  As a result, ‘claimant had no selection of his mode of travel to 
work.”’ Id.  The court found Dr. Martin (1) was required to bring his vehicle to work, (2) 
he had no fixed hours or work situs and instead made frequent trips between the 
Medical Associates office and several area hospitals, and (3) it was incumbent upon Dr. 
Martin to have ready transportation available. Id.    
 
Defendant asserts there is no evidence that claimant’s contract for hire required 
her to furnish her own method of transportation.  While claimant’s employment contract 
was not submitted into the evidentiary record, Ms. Wischler and Ms. Johnson both 
testified that having a vehicle was a requirement of their employment with DHS. (Hr. Tr., 
pp. 14, 34)  More specifically, Ms. Johnson testified social worker IIs were required to 
have a valid driver’s license, to be insured, and to have a means of transportation. (Hr. 
Tr., p. 34)  Defendant did not present any evidence to rebut the claims made by Ms. 
Wischler and Ms. Johnson.  I accept the testimony of claimant’s witnesses as credible. 
 
Importantly, travel was a major component of claimant’s job.  It is undisputed that 
travel and the ability to travel was required for social worker IIs.  In the matter at hand, 
the evidence as a whole indicates that the use of claimant’s personal vehicle was 
required.  Claimant’s vehicle was regularly used to conduct home visits and transport 
children.  Claimant’s vehicle was also utilized in emergency situations where it would be 
impractical to obtain a vehicle from the state vehicle pool.  There is no testimony as to 
whether the vehicle pool has a sufficient number of vehicles for daily use by all social 
workers and other state employees; however, it is difficult to imagine that the pool could 
meet such demand.  To this end, claimant testified she could obtain a vehicle from the 
state vehicle pool “if one was available.”  Surely DHS would have been surprised and 
dismayed if all social worker IIs arrived at work by bus or taxi to perform their duties 
each day.  Such actions would negatively impact response times and, consequently, 
negatively impact the services provided to children in the State of Iowa.  It is 
undoubtedly a benefit to the employer that claimant conveyed to work a major piece of 

BEBOUT V. IOWA DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES 
Page 8 
 
equipment devoted to employer's purposes.  
 
A number of defendant’s arguments fail to recognize the distinguishing 
characteristics within the “own conveyance” class of cases and, instead, treat claimant’s 
case like a normal going and coming case.  Similar to the defendants in Medical 
Associates, DHS reads the holdings in Davis and Medical Associates too narrowly. In 
doing so, defendant focuses almost exclusively on the journey itself, rather than the 
obligations of the job.  Factors such as whether claimant was compensated for the time 
or expenses of the journey, whether she was on call or responding to an emergency 
situation, and whether she was performing a job duty at the time of injury are immaterial 
under the “own conveyance” framework.  As discussed above, the work-connection is 
independently established by the fact she conveyed her personal vehicle to the 
operating premises in order to have it available for her employer’s purposes during the 
day.  See Medical Associates, 440 N.W.2d at 376. (“What was significant was that 
claimant was required to bring the vehicle to work for its use in the business to make 
service calls.”)  Like the claimant in Davis and Medical Associates, claimant was 
engaged in conveying her personal vehicle to the employer’s place of business as it 
was regularly used by claimant for her employer’s purposes throughout the workday. 
 
Defendant questions whether the own conveyance rule applies when the 
accident occurred, not during the trip itself, as was the case in Davis and Medical 
Associates, but after the driving portion of the trip had ended.  Professor Larson argues 
such a distinction is inconsequential.  He explains: 
If the car trip from home to office was in the course of employment under 
the special rule, it would appear illogical to carve out a small segment of 
the total trip, that from garage to office, and for that distance reconvert the 
trip to a personal one.  After all, the employee had to use his car to get to 
work because he had to have it available for his employer’s purpose 
during the day; it follows that he had to put the car in a garage; and 
thereafter he had to travel from the garage to the office.  In short, the 
character of the journey from beginning to end was colored by the 
employment requirement of furnishing his own car during the day. 
1 A. Larson, The Law of Workmen's Compensation § 15.05[4] at 15–16 (2009)  In such 
a scenario, the vehicle is essentially treated as a floating fragment of the premises, and 
Iowa has long held that injuries sustained during travel between two separate premises 
of an employer can be covered under a divided premises exception. (See Frost v. S.S. 
Kresge Co., 299 N.W.2d at 649)  This line of thought is consistent with the language 
used by the court in Davis and Medical Associates. (See Davis, 293 N.W.2d at 830) 
(“an employee's trip to and from work is considered within the course of employment if 
the employee is required, as a part of his employment, to provide a vehicle for his use 
during the working day.”)  An employee’s trip to work does not end when the vehicle is 
parked.  Absent a deviation, it would be illogical to carve out a small segment of the 
total trip, that from on-street parking to office, and for that distance reconvert the trip to a 
personal one.  The character of claimant’s journey from beginning to end was colored 
by the employment requirement of furnishing her own vehicle during the day. 

BEBOUT V. IOWA DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES 
Page 9 
 
 
Ultimately, I find claimant was required to bring her vehicle to work.  Her work as 
a social worker II necessitated that she regularly travel to various locations within the 
county and state.  The uncertainty surrounding her day-to-day activities and the 
possibility of a child emergency made it incumbent upon her to have ready 
transportation available.  In summary, the facts of this case demonstrate that Ms. 
Bebout was required to bring her vehicle to work for its use in furtherance of the 
employer’s interests.  I therefore conclude claimant’s injury arose out of and in the 
course of her employment. 
 
Claimant also argued that the work injury fell within other recognized exceptions 
to the general “going and coming” rule.  I find it unnecessary to address whether any 
other exceptions apply to the facts of this case as it has been determined that the injury 
occurred within the course and scope of employment under the “own conveyance” rule.   
For the sake of argument, there is ample evidence to support a finding that this 
case is compensable under the “zone of protection” exception to the premises rule.  Ms. 
Bebout sustained an injury in an area customarily or habitually used by other DHS 
employees.  DHS employees utilized on-street parking if they were banned from other 
parking lots, if the regular parking lots were full, or if parking on-street was simply more 
convenient.  The employer was aware that employees parked on the streets 
surrounding the administrative building, and the employee parking map specifically 
references the availability of on-street parking.  The site of Ms. Bebout’s injury was so 
closely related in time, location, and employee usage to the work premises to bring the 
claimant within the zone of protection. (See Frost, 299 N.W.2d at 649-650)  Defendant 
briefly argues that it did not exercise control over the area where claimant’s injury 
occurred.   While the exercise of control was a factor considered in the “Extension of 
Premises” exception, the exercise of control was immaterial to the court’s “zone of 
protection” analysis. (See Frost, 299 N.W.2d at 649)   
 
At this juncture, it is worth pointing out that the undersigned did not expressly find 
whether Ms. Bebout had both a fixed place and fixed hours of work. Waterhouse Water 
Conditioning, Inc. v. Waterhouse, 561 N.W.2d 55, 58 (Iowa 1997) (“The [Going and 
Coming Rule] only applies to employees who have both a fixed place and fixed hours of 
work.”)  This is because the “own conveyance” rule is not an exception to the Going and 
Coming rule, it only acts as an exception to the Going and Coming rule. 1 A. Larson, 
The Law of Workmen's Compensation § 17.50 at 4–239 (1985).  In other words, it is an 
exclusion from the Going and Coming rule rather than an exception to the Going and 
Coming rule.  This point is highlighted in Medical Assocs. Clinic, P.C., wherein the court 
relied upon the “own conveyance” rule to allow compensation despite the fact the 
claimant “had no fixed hours or work situs.” 440 N.W.2d at 376 (“In short, the facts 
demonstrate Martin was required to bring his car to work for its use in furtherance of 
Medical Associates' practice. We therefore conclude Martin's death in an automobile 
accident on the way to work arose out of and in the course of his employment.”) 
 
Having concluded that the injury occurred in the course and scope of claimant's 
employment, I must also decide whether claimant has proven she sustained injuries as 
a result of that accident.  The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of 
the evidence that the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is 

BEBOUT V. IOWA DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES 
Page 10 
 
based.  A cause is proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it 
need not be the only cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal 
connection is probable rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 
569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa 
App. 1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke's Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP. Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods. Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling. Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
Ms. Bebout seeks an award of healing period benefits from March 26, 2018, 
through July 5, 2018.  Defendant stipulates that claimant was off work during this period 
of time.   
 
Iowa Code section 85.34(1) provides healing period benefits are payable to an 
injured worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has 
returned to work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery. 
 
In this instance, claimant was not capable of performing substantially similar 
employment between March 26, 2018, and July 5, 2018, and she was not placed at 
MMI until August 29, 2018.  Having found that claimant returned to work on July 6, 
2018, I conclude claimant is entitled to an award of healing period benefits from March 
26, 2018, through July 5, 2018. Iowa Code section 85.34(1) 
 
Having found the medical opinions of Dr. Bansal most convincing in the 
evidentiary record, I also found that claimant proved a causal connection between her 
claim of permanent disability and the March 26, 2018, work injury.   
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or for loss of earning capacity under section 85.34(2)(v).  The 
extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is entitled is 
determined by using the functional method.  Functional disability is “limited to the loss of 
the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. Fruehauf Corp., 502 
N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998).   
In all cases of permanent partial disability described in paragraphs “a” through 
“u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not loss of earning 

BEBOUT V. IOWA DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES 
Page 11 
 
capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of permanent impairment shall be determined 
solely by utilizing the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by 
the American Medical Association, as adopted by the workers' compensation 
commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency expertise shall 
not be utilized in determining loss or percentage of permanent impairment pursuant to 
paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and 
not loss of earning capacity. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x) 
 
Having found claimant established a permanent injury to her right lower 
extremity, I conclude claimant is entitled to an award of permanent partial disability 
benefits. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(p). 
 
Where an injury is limited to a scheduled member the loss is measured 
functionally, not industrially. Graves v. Eagle Iron Works, 331 N.W.2d 116 (Iowa 1983). 
The 2017 statutory amendments also change prior case law, which held that functional 
disability was not limited to an impairment rating.  As revised, Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(x) provides that when determining functional disability, the extent of loss or 
percentage of permanent impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides 
to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the workers' compensation commissioner by rule pursuant to 
chapter 17A.  Lay testimony or agency expertise shall not be utilized in determining loss 
or percentage of permanent impairment. Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(x). 
 
Having adopted the impairment rating assigned by Dr. Bansal, I found claimant 
proved a functional loss of 11 percent to the right lower extremity.  Pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(w), claimant is entitled to a proportional award equivalent to 11 
percent of 220 weeks. Therefore, I conclude that claimant is entitled to an award of 24.2 
weeks of permanent partial disability benefits, commencing on August 30, 2018. Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(p), (w). 
 
Ms. Bebout seeks to recover any unpaid medical bills and out-of-pocket medical 
expenses causally related to the work injury.  A list of the medical expenses can be found 
in Exhibit 9. 
 
An employer is required to furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, 
osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, hospital 
services and supplies, and transportation expenses for all conditions compensable 
under the workers' compensation law. Iowa Code § 85.27(1).  The employer has the 
right to choose the provider of care, except when the employer has denied liability for 
the injury.  The Iowa Supreme Court has held the employer has the right to choose the 
provider of care, except when the employer has denied liability for the injury, or has 
abandoned care. Iowa Code § 85.27(4); Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 
779 N.W.2d 193, 204 (Iowa 2010). 
 
Ms. Bebout sustained a work injury arising out of and in the course of her 
employment.  Having reached this conclusion, I similarly conclude that she has 
established entitlement to past medical expenses. Defendant shall pay medical 
providers directly, reimburse claimant for any payments made, and shall hold claimant 
harmless against any liens or third-party payments for all causally related medical 

BEBOUT V. IOWA DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES 
Page 12 
 
expenses contained in Exhibit 9.  
 
Ms. Bebout next asserts a claim for reimbursement of her independent medical 
evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.  Specifically, claimant requests 
reimbursement of Dr. Bansal's $2,472.00 charge.  Alternatively, claimant requests that 
the costs associated with Dr. Bansal’s report be taxed as a cost against defendant. 
 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
 
Defendant is responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination. See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not ultimately prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify 
for reimbursement under section 85.39. See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008). 
 
However, claimant must establish the pre-requisites of Iowa Code section 85.39 
to establish entitlement to reimbursement.  “An employer ... is not obligated to pay for 
an evaluation obtained by an employee outside the statutory process.” Des Moines 
Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 844 (Iowa 2015). 
 
In this case, claimant obtained an evaluation by Dr. Bansal, which provided an 
impairment rating.  Defendant did not obtain an evaluation or permanent impairment 
rating from a physician of its choosing prior to Dr. Bansal's evaluation.  Claimant 
contends a blanket denial should serve as the equivalent of a zero percent impairment 
rating.  This position is contrary to the Iowa Supreme Court's literal interpretation of 
Iowa Code section 85.39.  See, e.g., DART v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 
2015).  In that decision, the Supreme Court held that an employee can obtain an IME at 
the employer's expense only if an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by 
an employer-retained physician.  The record in this case shows there was no 
impairment rating from any physician chosen by defendant because defendant 
determined the alleged injury did not arise out of and in the course of employment.  
There is no evidence claimant obtained defendant’s consent to the IME, nor did 
defendant agree to pay the cost of the IME.  As such, claimant cannot recover the cost 
of Dr. Bansal's IME under section 85.39. 
 
The cost of Dr. Bansal’s IME report is recoverable from defendant as a taxable 
cost under rule 876-4.33.  Only the cost associated with the preparation of the written 
report can be reimbursed as a cost at hearing under rule 876-4.33.  Young, 867 
N.W.2d, at 846-847.  Dr. Bansal’s invoice is itemized.  Dr. Bansal charged $1,941.00 for 
drafting his report.  Defendant asserts no argument with respect to the reasonableness 
of Dr. Bansal’s fees.  As such, I find the cost of obtaining Dr. Bansal’s report is 
appropriate and assessed pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(6). 

BEBOUT V. IOWA DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES 
Page 13 
 
 
Finally, Ms. Bebout requests costs be assessed against defendant.  Costs are 
assessed at the discretion of the agency.  Iowa Code section 86.40.  
 
Claimant is seeking her filing fee in the amount of $100.00, and service costs in 
the amount of $13.34.  These are permissible costs pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33(7) 
and 876 IAC 4.33(3).  I conclude defendant is liable for these costs. 
 
Claimant is also seeking $100.00 for her deposition transcript.  This is a 
permissible cost pursuant to rule 876 IAC 4.33(2).  I conclude defendant is liable for this 
cost. 
 
As analyzed above, claimant is also entitled to the costs associated with Dr. 
Bansal’s IME report.  
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Defendant shall pay claimant healing period benefits from March 26, 2018 
through July 5, 2018. 
 
Defendant shall pay claimant twenty-four and one-fifth (24.2) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits commencing on August 30, 2018. 
 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated weekly rate of seven hundred 
seventeen and 64/100 dollars ($717.64) per week. 
 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant's costs totaling two thousand one hundred 
fifty-four and 34/100 dollars ($2,154.34). 
Signed and filed this _____18th ___ day of January, 2022. 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Andrew Bribriesco (via WCES) 
Meredith Cooney (via WCES) 
 

BEBOUT V. IOWA DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES 
Page 14 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
 
  
