Case Number: 20009310.02
Case Title:  CACERES, BRAYAN V. NORTHWEST STEEL ERECTION, INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Caceres Brayan-20009310.02M.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
BRAYAN CACERES, 
File No. 20009310.02 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
NORTHWEST STEEL ERECTION INC., 
ALTERNATE CARE DECISION 
 
Employer, 
TWIN CITY FIRE INSURANCE 
COMPANY, 
Headnotes:  2701 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
I.  
STATEMEN T OF TH E C AS E 
On August 10, 2022, Brayan Caceres applied with the agency for alternate care 
under Iowa Code section 85.27 and agency rule 876 IAC 4.48 for alleged work injuries 
to the right knee, left knee, back, and body as a whole.1 The agency scheduled the case 
for an alternate care hearing on August 23, 2022. The defendants, employer Northwest 
Steel Erection Inc. (Northwest) and insurance carrier Twin City Fire Insurance Company 
(Twin City), answered on August 22, 2022, accepting liability for the right knee injury 
and asserting they could neither admit nor deny liability for the alleged injuries to the left 
knee, back, or whole body before an independent medical examination with Robert 
Broghammer, M.D., scheduled for August 29, 2022.  
The undersigned presided over an alternate care hearing held by telephone and 
recorded on August 23, 2022. The audio recording constitutes the official record of the 
proceeding under agency rule 876 IAC 4.48(12). Caceres participated personally and 
through attorney Nicholas W. Platt. The defendants participated through attorney Jane 
V. Lorentzen. The record consists of: 
 Claimant’s Exhibits 1 through 3; and 
 Defendants’ Exhibits A through D and F.2 
                                                 
1 Caceres moved to amend the petition to allege injuries to the right knee, left knee, back, and 
body as a whole. The defendants’ answer responded to the injuries identified in the motion to the amend. 
The undersigned issued an oral ruling granting the motion to amend during the hearing. 
2 The defendants withdrew proposed Exhibit E so their exhibits total ten or fewer pages in 
accordance with agency rule 876 IAC 4.48(9). 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2022-Aug-23  15:09:57     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

CACERES V. NORTHWEST STEEL ERECTION INC. 
Page 2 
 
II.  
D ISMISSAL WITH OU T  PR EJU D IC E  
Caceres seeks alternate care for alleged injuries to his right knee, left knee, 
back, and body as a whole. In the defendants’ answer, they admit liability for the claim 
relating to Caceres’s right knee. However, they also assert they “can neither admit nor 
deny” the alleged work injuries to his left knee, back, or body as a whole before an 
independent medical examination scheduled to occur after the hearing. This places the 
defendants’ liability for the alleged injuries to Caceres’s left knee, back, and whole body 
at issue and as explained below, requires dismissal without prejudice of Caceres’s 
application for alternate care relating to the alleged injuries to his left knee, back, and 
whole body. 
Liability for the alleged injury is a threshold issue when the agency considers an 
application for alternate care. See, e.g., Tyson Foods, Inc. v. Hedlund, 740 N.W.2d 192, 
198–99 (Iowa 2007). Such an application cannot be filed “if the liability of the employer 
is an issue. If an application is filed where the liability of the employer is an issue, the 
application will be dismissed without prejudice.” 876 IAC 4.48(7). The Iowa Supreme 
Court has “emphasize[d] that the commissioner’s ability to decide the merits of a section 
85.27(4) alternate medical care claim is limited to situations where the compensability of 
an injury is conceded, but the reasonableness of a particular course of treatment for the 
compensable injury is disputed.” R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 197 
(Iowa 2003).  
The defendants’ denial of liability means they lose the right to choose the care 
received by Caceres for the alleged injury. Winnebago Indus., Inc. v. Haverly, 727 
N.W.2d 567, 575 (Iowa 2006) (citing Trade Prof’ls, Inc. v. Shriver, 661 N.W.2d 119, 124 
(Iowa 2003)). Caceres may obtain reasonable care from any provider for the alleged 
injury, at the claimant’s expense, and seek reimbursement for such care using regular 
claim proceedings before this agency. See Shriver, 661 N.W.2d at 121–25 (affirming on 
judicial review an agency decision ordering the payment of medical expenses for 
unauthorized care because the defendants denied liability for the alleged injury and 
therefore lost the right to control care). 
The denial of liability and resultant dismissal without prejudice also limit the 
defendants’ ability to assert a lack-of-authorization defense with respect to care relating 
to the injury alleged by the claimant. 
The authorization defense is applicable when the commissioner has 
denied a claimant’s petition for alternate care on its merits. But it is 
inapplicable where the claimant’s petition for alternate care was denied on 
procedural grounds such that the commissioner could not adjudicate the 
petition’s merits, as is the case when the employer disputes the 
compensability of the injury. 
Brewer-Strong v. HNI Corp., 913 N.W.2d 235, 243–44 (Iowa 2018) (citing Barnett, 670 
N.W.2d at 97). 

CACERES V. NORTHWEST STEEL ERECTION INC. 
Page 3 
 
However, the defendants’ initial denial of liability does not necessarily forever bar 
them from asserting an authorization defense in this case for care relating to the injuries 
or conditions alleged in the petition. See id. at 244. The defendants may change their 
position to accept liability if new information provides sufficient proof to justify doing so. 
Id. And if the defendants change their position, the defendants may regain the 
“authorization defense and the statutory rights and obligations to provide and choose 
appropriate medical care pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27” moving forward, unless 
they subsequently change their position to once again deny liability or the commissioner 
grants a subsequent application for alternate care by the claimant. Id. at 245; see also 
Haverly, 727 N.W.2d at 575 (“There might, in some cases, be a significant change in 
the facts after the admission of liability that could justify a change of position by the 
employer . . . .”). 
III .  
ISSU E  
The issue under consideration is whether Caceres is entitled to alternate care in 
the form of a second opinion regarding his right knee injury. 
IV.  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T  
Caceres sustained a work injury to his right knee on . The defendants accepted 
liability and directed care. The injury has required treatment. 
First, Dr. Nicholson performed surgery including anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) 
reconstruction and microfracture of the medial femoral condyle. (Ex. A, p. 1) Because 
Caceres experienced ongoing pain, Dr. Nicholson referred him to Dr. Honkamp, who 
recommended an injection. (Ex. A, p. 1) After that proved ineffective, Dr. Honkamp 
performed a scope and cartilage biopsy. (Ex. A, p. 1)  
Dr. Honkamp referred Caceres to Dr. Sullivan at Des Moines Orthopaedic 
Surgeons (DMOS), who recommended medial meniscus transplant and concomitant 
osteochondral allograft to the medial femoral condyle. (Ex. A, p. 2) The defendants 
obtained a second opinion at the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC) with 
Dr. Bollier, who concurred with Dr. Sullivan’s recommendation and performed surgery. 
(Exs. C, D, and F)  
After the surgery, Caceres continued to experience symptoms. (Exs. 1, C, D, F) 
He obtained counsel to help get additional care. (Ex. 1) Claimant’s counsel informed the 
defendants of Caceres’s alleged injuries to his left leg, back, and whole body as well as 
ongoing symptoms and request for additional care for his right knee multiple times 
between May 27, 2022, and the filing of the petition concerning application for alternate 
care that initiated this case. (Exs. 1–3) 
On July 25, 2022, Dr. Bollier saw Caceres and noted: 
He reports that his medial knee pain has been relatively same since last 
visit. However, his overall pain, function, and leg pain is improved. He has 

CACERES V. NORTHWEST STEEL ERECTION INC. 
Page 4 
 
pain when he is ambulatory, reports some swelling if he is up and about 
for long periods of time. Also some difficulty with stairs.  
**** 
Overall improved but still having medial knee pain. This is not unexpected 
after 3 knee surgeries and a bad knee problem. 
(Ex. C, pp. 1–2) Nonetheless, Dr. Bollier found Caceres was at maximum medical 
improvement (MMI), requested a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) to inform the 
assignment of work restrictions, assessed permanent disability, and released Caceres 
from care despite his congoing complaints. (Ex. C, p. 2) 
Claimant’s counsel sent a follow-up email, dated July 26, 2022, in which he 
asked about additional care because Caceres “was released today for his knee despite 
ongoing issues.” (Ex. 3, p. 3) On August 2, 2022, claimant’s counsel again emailed the 
defendants regarding authorization of care and informed them he would apply with the 
agency for alternate care if they did not act. (Ex. 3, p. 6) On August 10, 2022, Caceres 
applied with the agency for alternate care by filing the petition that initiated this case and 
prayed for direction to medical care for right knee. 
After the July 26, 2022 email from claimant’s counsel, the defendants have 
arranged for an IME with Dr. Broghammer regarding Caceres’s alleged injuries to the 
left leg, back, and whole body. (Answer) However, they had not arranged for additional 
care for his right knee as of the time of hearing. At hearing, defense counsel stated the 
defendants were willing to arrange for additional care with Dr. Bollier. It is unclear why 
the defendants had not arranged for additional care with Dr. Bollier during the nearly 
four weeks between July 26, 2022, and the date of hearing. At hearing, claimant’s 
counsel requested care with another doctor because Dr. Bollier had found Caceres at 
MMI and released him from care despite his ongoing complaints. 
V. 
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW 
“Iowa Code section 85.27(4) affords an employer who does not contest the 
compensability of a workplace injury a qualified statutory right to control the medical 
care provided to an injured employee.” Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 
N.W.2d 759, 769 (Iowa 2016) (citing R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 190, 
195, 197 (Iowa 2003)). Under the law, the employer must “furnish reasonable medical 
services and supplies and reasonable and necessary appliances to treat an injured 
employee.” Stone Container Corp. v. Castle, 657 N.W.2d 485, 490 (Iowa 2003) 
(emphasis in original). Such employer-provided care “must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.” 
Iowa Code § 85.27(4).  
An injured employee dissatisfied with the employer-furnished care (or lack 
thereof) may share the employee’s discontent with the employer and if the parties 
cannot reach an agreement on alternate care, “the commissioner may, upon application 

CACERES V. NORTHWEST STEEL ERECTION INC. 
Page 5 
 
and reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care.” Id. 
“Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.” Long v. 
Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 123 (Iowa 1995); Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. 
Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 436 (Iowa 1997). As the party seeking relief in the form of 
alternate care, the employee bears the burden of proving that the authorized care is 
unreasonable. Id. at 124; Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d at 209; Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d at 436; 
Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124. Because “the employer’s obligation under the statute turns on 
the question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” an injured employee’s 
dissatisfaction with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough to find such 
care unreasonable. Id. 
The statute requires an employee to notify the defendants of his dissatisfaction 
with care before applying to the agency for alternate care to allow the parties an 
opportunity to reach an understanding regarding care. Here, Caceres sought care 
generally for his ongoing right-leg symptoms. There is an insufficient basis in the record 
from which to conclude Caceres notified the defendants he was dissatisfied with Dr. 
Bollier individually and wanted a second opinion until the time of hearing. Put otherwise, 
Caceres requested additional care without specifying his desire regarding the physician 
providing it. 
Nonetheless, about a month has passed since Dr. Bollier released Caceres from 
care with no recommendation regarding future care despite his ongoing symptoms. It is 
unreasonable given the short amount of time and lack of intervening event to expect a 
different outcome after a follow-up appointment. It would be unreasonable to return 
Caceres to Dr. Bollier for additional care under the circumstances. 
The defendants did not act on his request with respect to additional care for the 
right knee. While the defendants have arranged an IME with Dr. Broghammer regarding 
his alleged injuries to the left knee, back, and whole body, they have not arranged care 
with Dr. Bollier for Caceres’s ongoing symptoms. Iowa Code section 85.27(4) requires 
that employer-controlled care must be “offered promptly.” The defendants have known 
for a month that Caceres wants additional care for symptomatic right knee and have not 
acted on his complaint. This delay is unreasonable. The defendants have failed to 
promptly offer care as required by statute. 
Logistically, there can be a delay between when a doctor has availability to see a 
patient and when care is arranged. Here, the defendants must finalize arrangements for 
care with a provider and Caceres within fourteen days of the date of the decision with 
the date of the appointment with the provider occurring as soon as possible, given the 
parties’ respective schedules. The defendants may make arrangements for additional 
care with a provider of their choice.  
VI.  
OR D ER  
Under the above findings of facts and conclusions of law, it is ordered: 

CACERES V. NORTHWEST STEEL ERECTION INC. 
Page 6 
 
1) The application for alternate care with respect to the alleged work injuries to 
Caceres’s left knee, back, and whole body is DISMISSED WITHOUT 
PREJUDICE. 
 
2) The application with respect to Caceres’s right knee injury is GRANTED. 
 
3) Within fourteen (14) days of the date of this decision, the defendants shall 
finalize arrangements for Caceres to receive care for his right knee with a 
provider of their choice, other than Dr. Bollier, with the appointment occurring 
as soon as possible. 
On February 16, 2015, the Iowa workers’ compensation commissioner issued an 
order delegating authority to deputy workers’ compensation commissioners, such as the 
undersigned, to issue final agency decisions on applications for alternate care. 
Consequently, there is no appeal of this decision to the commissioner, only judicial 
review in a district court under the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Iowa Code 
chapter 17A.  
Signed and filed this 23rd day of August, 2022. 
 
 
 
BEN HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Nicholas W. Platt (via WCES) 
Jane V. Lortenzen (via WCES) 
 
 
