Case Number: 23013565.01
Case Title:  SMITH, TANDA V. MICHAEL SCHMITT FARMS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Smith Tanda-23013565.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
TANDA SMITH, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
             File No. 23013565.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                 
MICHAEL SCHMITT FARMS, 
  : 
         ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
WESTFIELD INSURANCE COMPANY,   : 
 
 
  : 
           Head Notes: 1404, 1601 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Tanda Smith, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Michael Schmitt Farms, employer and Westfield Insurance 
Company, insurance carrier, as defendants.  Hearing was held via Zoom 
videoconference on April 30, 2025.     
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision.  The parties are bound by their stipulations.  
Tanda Smith and Michael Schmitt were the only witnesses to testify live at trial.  
The evidentiary record also includes joint exhibits 1-5, claimant’s exhibits 1-9, and 
defendants’ exhibits A-J.  All exhibits were admitted without objections. The evidentiary 
record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.       
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on June 10 and June 11, 2025, at 
which time the case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant’s compensation is barred by operation of Iowa Code 
section 85.16(2) due to intoxication. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Jul-07  12:20:22     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

SMITH V. MICHAEL SCHMITT FARMS 
Page 2 
 
2. Whether claimant is entitled to any temporary total disability/healing period 
benefits. 
 
3. Whether claimant sustained any permanent disability as the result of the work 
injury.  If so, the nature and extent of disability.   
 
4. The appropriate commencement date for any permanent partial disability 
benefits. 
 
5. Whether defendants are responsible for past medical expenses. 
 
6. Whether defendants should reimburse claimant for an independent medical 
examination. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
 Claimant, Tanda Smith, was 43 years old at the time of the hearing.  (Transcript 
pages 11-12) At the time of the alleged November 28, 2023 injury she was employed at 
Michael Schmitt Farms.  Michael (“Mike”) Schmitt was her boss.  (Tr. p. 120) Mike farms 
around 640 acres.  (Tr. p. 107) He also custom feeds turkeys and feeds hogs.  (Tr. p. 
107) Tanda began working for Schmitt Farms in 2015.  (Tr. pp. 19-20) She performed 
maintenance and helped in the turkey barns. (Tr. p. 23) Tanda testified that as part of 
her job for Schmitt Farms she operated pay loaders, skid loaders, tractors, tractors with 
trailers, and four-wheelers.  (Tr. p. 25)   
 
On November 28, 2023, Tanda was injured in an accident on Schmitt Farms.  
(Tr. p. 27) The injury occurred while she and Mike were attempting to place a large door 
back on its tracks to attach it to the turkey barn.  (Tr. pp. 32-33) Tanda referred to the 
door as a “20-by-20” and estimated that it weighed 700 to 800 pounds.  (Tr. pp. 33-34) 
The door had a couple rollers on top which allowed the door to roll back and forth along 
a track on the wall of the barn. (Tr. pp. 33-34)  
 
Tanda testified that a couple days before her accident Mike was upset and rather 
than just opening the door, he took the door completely off the barn and used the pay 
loader to place the door in nearby grass.  (Tr. p. 36) On the date of the accident Tanda 
was on a different part of the property when Mike called her on her cell phone to come 
help him. (Tr. pp. 31-32) When she got to Mike he told her that he wanted her to push 
the door to the barn.  (Tr. p. 39) The pay loader and skid loader were both nearby.  (Tr. 
p. 32) Approximately 15 minutes before Mike called Tanda to help, Adam1 had tried to 
start the skid loader but it would not start.  (Tr. pp. 40-41) The door was no longer on 
the grass; it had been picked up and put on the front of the skid loader.  (Tr. pp. 36-37) 
                                                 
1 Adam is Tanda’s boyfriend. (Tr. pp. 72-73) The undersigned makes no findings whether Adam worked 
for the defendant-employer.   

SMITH V. MICHAEL SCHMITT FARMS 
Page 3 
 
Tanda testified that she did not have anything to do with putting the door onto the forks 
of the skid loader.  (Tr. p. 39) It is her understanding that Mike placed the door on the 
skid loader the previous day.  (Tr. pp. 40, 69) Claimant’s exhibit 9, page 70 is a picture 
of a skid loader that is similar to the one used at the time of the accident.  (Tr. p. 37) 
The red lines depict how the door was sitting up against the skid loader.  (Tr. p. 38) The 
blue on the picture is where Tanda was sitting inside of the skid loader.  (Tr. p. 38) The 
yellow is where Mike was standing on top of the roll cage above the light.  (Tr. pp. 38-
39)   
 
According to Tanda, at one point there was a strap that she wanted to be placed 
around the door.  (Tr. p. 40) On a prior occasion Adam had put the door back onto the 
barn.  (Tr. p. 40) Tanda had also previously helped Mike put up barn doors.  (Tr. p. 79) 
Earlier in the day on November 28, 2023, Tanda and Adam saw the door on the skid 
loader.  (Tr. p. 69) Tanda and Adam placed a strap on the door because it was windy.  
(Tr. pp. 69-70, 78-79, 110) Adam had confidence putting the door back onto the barn 
using the skid loader and pay loader.  (Tr. p. 40) Adam wanted to put the door back on 
the barn.  (Tr. pp. 69-70) However, Tanda did not feel comfortable attempting to put the 
door back into place without Mike because if anything went wrong with the door it would 
be a big problem because there would be 10,000 birds in the field and she did not want 
to be responsible. (Tr. p. 40)  
 
Tanda testified that on the date of the accident Mike just wanted to push the door 
against the opening to at least get the door closer to where it ultimately needed to be.  
(Tr. p. 43) Tanda testified that right before they began trying to place the door, Tanda 
went to her car and when she came back Mike was standing on top of the skid loader’s 
roll cage.  (Tr. p. 44) She believes this was around 6:00 p.m. and it was dark.  (Tr. p. 68) 
Tanda had concerns about trying to place the door with only the skid loader; she voiced 
her concerns to Mike.  (Tr. pp. 43-44, 102-103) She wanted to use the skid loader and 
the pay loader as they had done in the past.  (Tr. p. 45) Previously, they had not used 
their bodies to push a door.  (Tr. p. 45) Usually there is one person in the pay loader 
and one person in the skid loader.  (Tr. pp. 55, 65-66) Typically there is one on the 
inside of the barn, and one outside the barn.  This allows the door to be maneuvered in 
a certain way.  (Tr. p. 55) Also, if the door were to fall through the opening of the barn it 
is easier to catch or stop the door with the pay loader buckets so the door would not fall 
on anyone. (Tr. pp. 56, 66) On the date of the accident, the pay loader was just a few 
feet away.  (Tr. p. 66)  
When Tanda asked why they were doing it this way, Mike told her he was late for 
a school board meeting.  (Tr. pp. 45, 103) So, according to Tanda, Mike was on top of 
the skid loader, and Tanda got into the seat of the skid loader. (Tr. p. 47) She could 
hear Mike struggling to push the door.  (Tr. p. 49) She stood up and also started 
pushing the door because she knew he would run out of arm length.  (Tr. p. 49) Mike fell 
off the top of the skid loader and onto the forks which were raised slightly above the 
ground.  (Tr. p. 49) She thinks he hit the forks with his shoulder and dislocated his 
shoulder.  (Tr. p. 50) He was screaming in pain.  (Tr. p. 50) As Mike’s son was coming 
around the corner of the barn, the door hit Tanda and she was crushed between the 

SMITH V. MICHAEL SCHMITT FARMS 
Page 4 
 
door and the skid loader.  (Tr. pp. 50-52) The son helped get the door off of her. (Tr. p. 
51) She felt instant pain and felt every bone in her body crack.  (Tr. pp. 51-52)  
There are several photos of the accident scene that were taken by the sheriff.  
(Tr. p. 54) Claimant’s exhibit 2, page 26 is a picture of the accident scene, including the 
skid loader and how it sat after the injury.  (Tr. p. 53) The door is leaning against the 
skid loader.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 26) Claimant’s exhibit 2, page 27 is a side view of the same. 
(Tr. p. 53) Both pictures were taken from outside the building.  (Tr. pp. 53-54) 
Claimant’s exhibit 2, page 28 is also of the accident scene but taken from inside the 
building and also shows the door leaning against the skid loader.  (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 28) 
Claimant’s exhibit 2, page 29 is also from inside the building and the door is obstructing 
the view of the skid loader.  (Tr. p. 54) Claimant’s exhibit 2, page 30 is also taken from 
inside the building.  (Tr. p. 54)  
 
 After the door fell on Tanda she had instant pain and told Mike she was hit by 
the door and it was not good and she needed to get to the hospital.  (Tr. p. 52) Tanda 
does not remember everything that happened.  (Tr. pp. 56-57) She knew that an 
ambulance picked her up and the next thing she remembers is that they cut off her 
clothes. (Tr. pp. 56, 84) She was told that she was taken to the Loring Hospital.  (Tr. p. 
56) She was later told that at the Loring Hospital a urine drug test was performed.  (Tr. 
p. 82) She tested positive for amphetamines and methamphetamines. (Tr. p. 82) She 
woke up in a helicopter, but had no recollection of getting into it.  (Tr. p. 57) She has 
since found out that the helicopter took her to Mercy.  (Tr. p. 57)  
 
Mike Schmitt also testified at the hearing.  (Tr. pp. 105-143) At the time of the 
hearing Mike was 55 years old. (Tr. p. 107) He admitted he was the one who took the 
broken door off the barn and used the skid loader to put it on the ground out of the way 
so they could clean the barn out.  (Tr. p. 109) He did not want to take the barn door 
down, and he told Tanda that, but because they messed around too much and did not 
get their jobs done, he had to take the door off.  (Tr. p. 109) Because Tanda did not get 
the old manure out of the barn before the new bedding arrived, the only way to get the 
old manure out was to remove that door.  (Tr. p. 109)  
 
Mike testified that on the date of the accident he called Tanda over to help him 
with the door.  (Tr. p. 121) When Tanda came over to help him the door was leaning up 
against the building.  (Tr. p. 111) Mike had used the skid loader the day or night before 
to prop the door up against the building, but the door still needed to be squared up with 
the doorway.  (Tr. pp. 117-119) He had used a jumper to get the skid loader running.  
(Tr. pp. 110-111) Mike testified that Tanda and Adam had figured out how they could 
move the door using the straps.  (Tr. pp. 111, 121-122) He did not think that using the 
straps was careless if the fork lift was maneuvered correctly.  (Tr. p. 124) According to 
Mike, Tanda was sitting in the operator’s seat of the skid loader, she moved the door, 
and that is when the door fell back onto the skid loader.  (Tr. pp. 124-125) Mike believes 
that if the forks had been tilted properly, then the straps would have held the door in 
place.  (Tr. p. 125) However, Mike believed Tanda tilted the forks toward her, the straps 
came loose, and that brought the door back onto the skid loader.  (Tr. pp. 125, 129) 
Mike believed things began to go wrong as soon as Tanda started moving the skid 

SMITH V. MICHAEL SCHMITT FARMS 
Page 5 
 
loader.  (Tr. p. 126) Mike testified that he did not get up onto the skid loader until the 
door tipped back toward the skid loader.  Once he was on top of the skid loader, he tried 
to push the door back toward the building.  (Tr. p. 126) Mike pushed the door, but he got 
over-balanced and that is when he fell.  (Tr. pp. 127-128) He is unsure exactly what 
happened after that.  (Tr. p. 128) He remembers Tanda asking for help.  (Tr. p. 128) He 
felt the fastest way to get to Storm Lake would be to get in his pickup and go because 
he could get there faster in only one direction versus an ambulance having to come pick 
them up.  (Tr. p. 128)  
Mike attributed the accident to Tanda’s lack of experience with the skid loader 
and the rough ground.  (Tr. pp. 125, 127) If she had kept the weight away from the skid 
loader, the straps would have remained tight.  (Tr. p. 129) Mike said Tanda had 
operated a skid loader before the date of the accident and did not have any problems 
when she operated it; it was just this day she had a problem.  (Tr. p. 130) Mike admitted 
that Tanda did not appear any different the date of the accident than she did any other 
day she worked for him.  (Tr. p. 128) He also agreed that he did have a school board 
meeting that night.  (Tr. p. 128)  
Mike indicated that the method of how the door was to be placed was determined 
by Tanda.  He testified, 
So, I didn’t argue with her, I let her do it; and she dropped the door back 
on the skid loader so that’s when I jumped on top of the skid loader to 
push it off.   
And then she come out from inside the skid loader and was helping push, 
and then I got over-centered, and I fell, and then I don’t really know what 
happened after that other than, I know, she said she was hurting. 
I said: 
‘Well, let’s get in the pickup and go to Storm Lake because I knew it would 
be faster than an ambulance. 
But we started going, we got maybe a half mile down the road and she 
said she had to get out, so we stopped and that’s where we waited for the 
ambulances. 
(Tr. pp. 111-112) 
 
Mike was asked if the straps came off the door at some point.  He responded, 
“Yes.  When she maneuvered the door with the skid loader forks, it dropped back on the 
skid loader, and then the straps fell off.”  (Tr. p. 112) Mike testified that his son, John, 
was nowhere near the site when the accident happened.  (Tr. p. 113) However, he later 
admitted that his son saw the entire accident.  (Tr. p. 137) His son’s deposition 
testimony was that Tanda and Adam removed the straps and then the door slipped 
forward; there was no movement of the skid loader.  (Tr. pp. 138-139)  

SMITH V. MICHAEL SCHMITT FARMS 
Page 6 
 
Mike said that in the past when these types of doors came off they used mainly 
just a pay loader to put it back.  (Tr. p. 116) He admitted that in the past they have used 
both a pay loader and a skid loader.  (Tr. pp. 116-117) According to Mike, on the date of 
the accident the pay loader was right there at the location where the door was being put 
on to the building.  (Tr. p. 117) However, he said the pay loader was being used by his 
son.  (Tr. p. 117)  
 
The Sac County ambulance transferred Tanda to the Loring Hospital. (Cl. Ex. 3, 
pp. 31-38) The records indicate they received the call at 1735.  (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 32) The 
notes state they were dispatched, 
For 2 subject that are trapped under a turkey barn door.  While en route 
law enforcement advised that they were on a dirt road.  Patient is laying 
on the ground with jackets over top of her.  Patient is very anxious.  She 
state that she can’t breath [sic].  She is alert and oriented x4.  Skin is pink 
cold and dry.  We struggle with getting information out of the patient but 
she does state hat [sic] they were trying to hang a door on a turkey barn 
when it fell on top of h. Unknown how she got to the dirt road where we 
found her…. Patient does admit to meth use prior to this event.  IV is 
initiated in left AC as noted.  Assessment is difficult due to patient being 
uncooperative. 
(Cl. Ex. 3, p. 33) 
 
The Loring Hospital medical records show Tanda was admitted to the LSC 
emergency department on November 28, 2023.  A urine sample was collected at 1845. 
(JE1, p. 1) The rapid drug screen was positive for amphetamines, methamphetamines, 
Benzodiazepines, and opiates. (JE1, p. 3)  
 
The trauma flow record from MercyOne Siouxland Medical Center notes Tanda 
arrived via Mercy Air at 2012.  (JE2, p. 35) She was involved in a reported crush injury.  
Tanda reported she was moving a 2,000 pound door when it fell and trapped her until 
friends freed her.  (JE2, p. 36) The notes state, “Pt. offered swabs md reports RN ‘better 
figure her shit out fast because pt. will be drinking water.’ Pt. then proceeds to call RN a 
‘bitch. That isn’t doing anything to help.’. . . . Pt. screams at staff that ‘they aren’t doing a 
fucking EKG’.” (JE2, p. 36) 
 
The November 28, 2023, the emergency room physician notes that the patient 
presented with a conflicting story.  (JE2, p. 41) The notes state, “possibly falling out of a 
skid loader/holding onto a barn door which fell on top of her…” (JE2, p. 41) The notes 
also state, “[p]atient had been found to have methamphetamines on board.” (JE2, p. 41) 
She denied any illicit drug use.  (JE2, p. 41)  
 
Tanda was admitted to Mercy Medical Center in Sioux City on November 28, 
2023, and discharged on December 1, 2023.  (JE2, p. 45) The November 29, 2023, 
note indicates she had been crushed between a large door and a skid loader yesterday 
afternoon.  She was methamphetamine positive and has a history of this use.  (JE2, p. 

SMITH V. MICHAEL SCHMITT FARMS 
Page 7 
 
45) The assessment included right pneumothorax with subcu emphysema, multiple 
right-sided rib fractures, right scapular fracture, and methamphetamine use.  (JE2, p. 
45) Her chest x-ray was reviewed and showed enlargement of the right pneumothorax.  
Chest tube placement was recommended.  The chest tube placement was attempted 
under sedation because the patient was agitated and uncooperative. A chest tube was 
then placed operatively.  (JE2, pp. 45-65) 
Tanda acknowledged and her medical records show that she has used 
methamphetamine in the past.  (Tr. p. 70; DE E, pp. 27, 34, 36) She testified that it 
stays in her system for a long period and she was definitely not doing 
methamphetamine that day. (Tr. p. 70) She testified, “I had amphetamines in my 
system, yes, but I’m, I don’t smoke – I don’t smoke whenever I’m at work or anything 
like this, and it just happened to be my birthday week and we went to a friend’s house 
that – that – yeah.  That’s how that works.”  (Tr. pp. 70-71) 
 
During cross-examination Tanda was asked about a medical record from the 
emergency department at Mercy Medical Center.  (JE2, p. 41) The record stated, 
“[p]atient had been found to have methamphetamines on board.”  (JE2, p. 41) Tanda 
does not believe that it would have been possible for her to have methamphetamines on 
the helicopter because they cut her clothes and even her shoes off her body at the 
Loring Hospital.  (Tr. pp. 84-85) 
 
On April 16, 2025, Rick Garrels, M.D. issued an Independent Medical 
Examination report.  (Def. Ex. G) Dr. Garrels was asked to confirm that Ms. Smith 
tested positive for amphetamines/methamphetamines on 11/2/23.  He responded, 
From review of the medical records it appears Ms. Smith underwent a 
urine drugs of abuse screen on admission to Mercy Emergency 
Department and tested positive for amphetamine/methamphetamine, 
benzodiazepines and opiates.  The urine appears to be a valid sample 
based on the sample temperature, urine pH and specific gravity and 
creatinine.  The records do not report any issues with the collection 
method.  This appears to be a valid drug test result.  The record also  
suggest a urine drug screen was completed on 11/5/2023 which also 
tested positive for amphetamine/methamphetamine.  The medications 
listed in her medical records for the 11/28/23 Mercy ED includes home 
medications of Albuterol, Lithium, One-A-Day Vitamin and B12.  It also list 
Inpatient medications of Ativan, Lidocaine, Morphine, Toradol, Norco, 
Versed and Zofran.  None of these medication would explain the positive 
tests for amphetamines/methamphetamines.  Transport staff documented 
finding methamphetamines on Ms. Smith during the helicopter transport.  
Methamphetamine is quickly metabolized and be detected in the urine for 
3 days after use.  Methamphetamine can cause hallucinations, 
hyperactivity, and confusion. 
(Def. Ex. G, pp. 42-43) 

SMITH V. MICHAEL SCHMITT FARMS 
Page 8 
 
 
I find that Dr. Garrels’ opinions regarding the drug testing and results are 
unrebutted.  I find that immediately following the injury Tanda had positive test results 
reflecting the presence of amphetamine/methamphetamine, benzodiazepines and 
opiates. 
I find that the preponderance of the evidence demonstrates that Tanda was 
performing her employment duties for Schmitt Farms at the time of the accident. It is 
clear that her boss, Mike, asked her to help him put the barn door in place.  I find that at 
the time of the accident Tanda was performing employment duties at a time and place 
where she was reasonably expected to be performing her duties. 
Unfortunately, the details of how the accident occurred are not clear.  Tanda 
testified that Mike asked her to assist with the door. (Tr. p. 31) When she got to where 
Mike wanted help with the door, the door was already leaned up against the skid loader.  
(Tr. pp. 33-34, 37, 39; CE9, p. 70) Before she helped Mike with the door, she went to 
her car quick, and when she got back to the area where the door was, Mike was already 
on top of the skid loader’s roll cage.  (Tr. p. 44) She also testified that the position of the 
door as shown in claimant’s exhibit 2, page 27 was approximately the way the door was 
when Mike started pushing. (Tr. p. 103) Tanda testified that Mike decided how they 
were going to move the door and she questioned the method.  (Tr. p. 45) However, 
Mike testified that Tanda and Adam had figured out how they could move the door using 
straps and that he did not argue with her, he just let her do it.  (Tr. pp. 111,121-122) 
Mike testified that when Tanda climbed into the driver’s seat of the skid loader the door 
was leaning against the building, not against the skid loader.  (Tr. p. 122) Mike testified 
that he did not get on top of the skid loader until after Tanda was in the skid loader, 
moved the forks, and the door had fallen back onto the skid loader. (Tr. pp. 111, 126-
128) Mike’s son’s deposition testimony was that Tanda and Adam removed the straps 
from the door and that’s when the door slipped; there was no movement of the skid 
loader.  (Tr. pp. 138-139) I did not find the testimony of any one witness to be more 
credible than the other.  
Two witnesses testified live at the hearing, each providing a different version of 
how the accident occurred.  There is a third witness whose deposition testimony 
contradicts the stories of both live witnesses.  Based on the evidence in this case, I 
cannot determine exactly how the accident occurred or what was or was not a 
substantial factor in causing the accident.    
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. 
Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). The words “arising out of” refer to the 

SMITH V. MICHAEL SCHMITT FARMS 
Page 9 
 
cause or source of the injury. The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 
1995).  An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists 
between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. The injury must 
be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely 
incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); 
Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it 
happens within a period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may 
be when performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties 
or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d at 150. 
Although the hearing report indicates that the defendants dispute whether the 
injury arose out of and in the course of employment, the crux of their argument is that 
claimant’s compensation is barred due to her intoxication. Based on the above findings 
of fact, I conclude claimant was performing employment duties at a time and place 
where she may reasonably be expected to be performing her duties at the time of the 
November 28, 2023 injury.   
Defendants assert that claimant is barred from recovery under Iowa Code section 
85.16(2) because she was intoxicated at the time of the injury.  In 2017 the Iowa 
legislature made substantive changes to this code section.  It now reads,  
No compensation under this chapter shall be allowed for an injury caused: 
... 
(2) (a) By the employee's intoxication, which did not arise out of and in the 
course of employment but which was due to the effects of alcohol or 
another narcotic, depressant, stimulant, hallucinogenic, or hypnotic drug 
not prescribed by an authorized medical practitioner, if the intoxication 
was a substantial factor in causing the injury. 
(b) For the purpose of disallowing compensation under this subsection, 
both of the following apply: 
(1) If the employer shows that, at the time of the injury, or immediately 
following the injury, the employee had positive test results reflecting 
the presence of alcohol, or another narcotic, depressant, stimulant, 
hallucinogenic, or hypnotic drug which drug either was or was not 
prescribed by an authorized medical practitioner or was not used in 
accordance with the prescribed use of the drug, it shall be presumed 
that the employee was intoxicated at the time of the injury and that 
intoxication was a substantial factor in causing the injury. 
(2) Once the employer has made a showing as provided in subparagraph 
(1), the burden of proof shall be on the employee to overcome the 
presumption by establishing that the employee was not intoxicated at the 

SMITH V. MICHAEL SCHMITT FARMS 
Page 10 
 
time of the injury, or that intoxication was not a substantial factor in 
causing the injury. 
Iowa Code section 85.16(2). 
The medical evidence in this case demonstrates that claimant had a positive 
drug test immediately after the injury which demonstrated the presence of 
amphetamine/methamphetamine, benzodiazepines and opiates.  Iowa Code section 
124.206(4)(b) lists methamphetamine as a scheduled II stimulant.  Claimant admitted 
that she had used methamphetamine prior to the date of injury and the medical records 
indicate they found methamphetamine on board while treating her. I conclude that the 
employer has demonstrated that at the time of the injury, or immediately following the 
injury, the employee had positive test results reflecting the presence of a stimulant 
which was not prescribed by an authorized medical practitioner.   
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude claimant was intoxicated at the 
time of her injury. Under the statute, there is a presumption that the claimant was 
intoxicated at the time of her injury and that the intoxication was a substantial factor in 
causing her injury.  See Iowa Code section 85.16(2).  The burden then shifts to the 
employee to overcome the presumption and offer proof that she was not intoxicated at 
the time of the injury, or that her intoxication was not a substantial factor in causing the 
injury.  Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude claimant has failed to carry her 
burden of proof to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that she was not 
intoxicated at the time of the injury, or that her intoxication was not a substantial factor 
in causing the injury.  As such, I conclude that claimant’s compensation under chapter 
85 is barred by operation of Iowa Code section 85.16(2).  Therefore, all other issues are 
rendered moot.  
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Claimant shall take nothing from these proceedings. 
Each party shall bear their own costs. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
 
 
 
 

SMITH V. MICHAEL SCHMITT FARMS 
Page 11 
 
Signed and filed this __7th ___ day of July, 2025. 
 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Steve Hamilton  
(via WCES) 
Paul Salabert  
(via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321.  The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
 
 
  
                ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
