Case Number: 19003586.01
Case Title:  JAY, TRAVIS V. ARCHER SKID LOADER SERVICE LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Jay, Travis-19003586.01.District Court Decision.PDF
========================================================================

IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR POLK COUNTY 
 
TRAVIS JAY, 
            Petitioner, 
 
vs. 
 
ARCHER SKID LOADER SERVICE, 
LLC, and GRINNELL MUTUAL. 
            Respondents. 
 
 
 
Case No. CVCV064318 
 
RULING ON PETITION FOR JUDICIAL 
REVIEW OF AGENCY DECISION 
 
On April 14, 2023, the above-captioned matter came before this Court for hearing. 
Petitioner Travis Jay was represented by attorney Brian Keit. Petitioner’s employer, Respondent 
Archer Skid Loader Service, LLC (Archer), and its employer’s workers’ compensation carrier, 
Respondent Grinnell Mutual (Grinnell), were represented by attorney Aaron T. Oliver. After 
hearing the arguments of Counsel, and reviewing the court file, including the Certified 
Administrative Record (“Cert. Rec.”), the Court enters this Order. 
I. 
BACKGROUND FACTS. 
The review sought by this Petition is a reversal of the Appeal Decision (Decision) issued 
by Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner Joseph S. Cortese II (the Commissioner) on 
August 23, 2022. The dispute was first heard by the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commission 
on July 15, 2021. Deputy Commissioner Benjamin G. Humphrey entered an Arbitration Decision 
in the matter on March 17, 2022. Cert. Rec. pp. 45-57. Therein, the Deputy Commissioner awarded 
Petitioner a 15% partial permanent disability (PPD) rating for impairment to Petitioner’s left 
shoulder resulting from a workplace injury which occurred on September 19, 2019. Id. p. 56.  
The Commissioner’s Decision generally affirmed the Deputy Commissioner’s factual 
findings but made an alteration to the impairment rating chosen. The Deputy Commissioner’s 
rating of 15% was the sum of 5% attributable to permanent range of motion damage and 10% 
E-FILED                    CVCV064318 - 2023 MAY 22 10:56 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 1 of 9

 
 
2 
 
attributable to the operation performed on Petitioner. Id. pp. 50-51. Respondents appealed the 
Arbitration Decision arguing the 15% impairment rating was not supported. Petitioner argued 
before the Commissioner to uphold the Arbitration Decision. 
The Commissioner’s task in deciding the impairment rating on appeal was one of parsing 
expert credibility. Though both parties’ experts made similar medical findings, they differed in 
their impairment rating attributable to the distal clavicle procedure that Petitioner underwent to 
repair the injury. On one hand, the Respondent’s expert witness Dr. Vincent offered a rating of 
0% for the distal clavicle excision. Id. pp. 7-9. Dr. Vincent’s opinion was quoted at length in the 
Decision: 
During a distal clavicle excision, one is removing a portion of diseased or 
pathological bone. Consider the procedure, subacromial decompression, which 
results in a small portion of the body. The bone is that is excised, however, is an 
abnormality. Similarly, the patient undergoing an appendectomy for a diseased 
infected tissue does not get a base impairment for the removal of the appendix. This 
is because removal of this defective diseased tissue results in improved function, 
not diminished function. Excision of an inferiorly spur from the distal clavicle 
should approve function. Because removal of this liability is beneficial, it should 
result in no and even perhaps negative impairment. 
 
Id. p. 8 (emphasis added). Thus, the expert opinion offered by Dr. Vincent did not assign a rating 
attributable to Petitioner’s distal clavicle excision. Dr. Vincent viewed the operation as one with 
the potential to increase a patient’s use of their shoulder rather than one deserving a rating for a 
PPD. Id. 
 
Opposing Dr. Vincent’s opinion that “no impairment rating should be awarded based solely 
on the distal clavicle procedures being performed” is the opinion and rating of Dr. Taylor.  Dr. 
Taylor’s expert opinion and rating of 15% was adopted by the Deputy Commissioner, because it 
was in line with the Fifth Edition of the American Medical Association’s (AMA) guidelines. Id. 
p. 12. Without dismissing the medical expertise held by Dr. Vincent, the Deputy Commissioner 
E-FILED                    CVCV064318 - 2023 MAY 22 10:56 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 2 of 9

 
 
3 
 
commented that Dr. Vincent’s medical opinion “does not govern determinations of functional 
impairment under Iowa law. The Fifth Edition of the [AMA] Guides does.” Id. p. 55. The Deputy 
Commissioner used Dr. Taylor’s expert opinion in the form of Petitioner’s PPD rating, because 
his rating was more credible in that it did include a rating for the operation performed on Petitioner. 
In the Deputy Commissioner’s words, 
Table 16-27 on page 506 of the [AMA] Guides provides that a ten percent 
impairment is used for distal clavicle resection . . . Dr. Vincent’s impairment rating 
is given less weight because he intentionally did not follow the Guides. For this 
reason, Dr. Taylor’s Opinion is more credible and is adopted. 
 
Id. Between one expert opinion that accounted for a required rating and one that did not, the Deputy 
Commissioner chose the former: Dr. Taylor’s 15% rating. 
Under Iowa’s workers’ compensation laws, benefits for PPD are paid in monthly amounts 
for a duration dependent upon the impairment rating. Iowa Code § 85.34(2). For an injury to the 
shoulder, Iowa law establishes a starting schedule for the calculation of monthly obligations at 400 
weeks. Id. § 85.34(2)(n). That number is multiplied by the PPD rating to arrive at the number of 
weeks an amount will be owed. Id. § 85.34(2). Applying this process, the Deputy Commissioner 
arrived at a calculation of 60 weeks of entitlement to benefits for PPD. Cert. Rec. p. 56.  
The Commissioner upheld an award of stand-alone reimbursements to Petitioner in the 
amounts of $103.00, $14.00, $285.00 and $88.15 for administrative costs incurred in the litigation, 
“[w]ithout further analysis.” Id. The Commissioner additionally affirmed the Deputy 
Commissioner’s factual finding that Petitioner suffered from PPD caused by the work injury, but 
“modif[ied] in part” and “reverse[d] in part” the 15% PPD rating decided by the Deputy 
Commissioner. Id. Respondents’ chief argument before the Commissioner was that the five 
percent rating should not have been considered by the Deputy Commissioner due to a non-
workplace reaggravation or reinjury of the same shoulder: 
E-FILED                    CVCV064318 - 2023 MAY 22 10:56 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 3 of 9

 
 
4 
 
On appeal, defendants assert the deputy erred in finding claimant sustained a five 
percent impairment rating for loss of motion. As noted by Dr. Taylor in his report, 
the range of motion findings are similar. Defendants argue the difference is due to 
a reinjury. I find the deputy commissioner properly found claimant’s reinjury was 
temporary and did not result in any additional disability. 
 
Id. pp. 10-11. Respondents do not argue before this Court that the Commissioner erred in affirming 
the Deputy Commissioner’s finding that Petitioner did not suffer a re-injury of the shoulder that 
would lessen Respondents’ liabilities on a contribution theory. Instead, Petitioner seeks judicial 
review of the Commissioner’s reduction of the 15% rating found by the Deputy Commissioner. 
Respondents desire that the Decision be affirmed in full. Resp’ts’ Br. 13. 
 
The portion of the Deputy Commissioner’s Arbitration Decision that was reversed was his 
calculation of the rating to be attributed to Petitioner’s distal clavicle excision. Having ruled out 
Dr. Vincent’s rating because it did not include any rating for the procedure, the Deputy 
Commissioner was left with the 15% rating offered by Dr. Taylor. However, Dr. Taylor’s rating 
was also flawed for its failure to apply a modification coefficient to the rating. Cert. Rec. p. 12. 
The Deputy Commissioner did not notice the error in Dr. Taylor’s calculation and issued the 15% 
impairment rating without acknowledging its failure to apply a modification. The effect of not 
applying the modifier was beneficial to Petitioner because the modifier reduces the impairment 
rating. 
The Commissioner’s Decision sums up the errors in both experts’ ratings and his decision 
to set the disputed PPD rating at 7.5 percent: 
Claimant underwent a distal clavicle excision. The AMA Guides direct the 
physician to assign a rating for [the procedure] contrary to Dr. Vincent’s opinion. 
The AMA Guides also require application of a 25 percent multiplier. This results 
in a 2.5 percent impairment for a distal clavicle excision under the plain text of the 
AMA Guides. I find claimant sustained a five percent permanent impairment for 
loss of range of motion and additional 2.5 percent impairment for the distal clavicle 
excision. Using . . . the AMA Guides, claimant has sustained seven percent 
E-FILED                    CVCV064318 - 2023 MAY 22 10:56 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 4 of 9

 
 
5 
 
impairment and is entitled to 28 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits . . . 
at the stipulated weekly rate of $950.24. 
 
Id. Applying the modifier demanded by the AMA guides, the Commissioner began with an 
impairment rating of 10%, accepting the Deputy Commissioner’s finding that Dr. Taylor’s rating 
and opinion were more credible. Id. Then because the applicable modifier was 25%, the 
impairment rating was reduced to one-fourth its original amount, 2.5%. Id. This was then added to 
the 5% impairment rating to arrive at a PPD rating of 7.5%. 
II. 
STANDARD OF REVIEW. 
A party to a workers’ compensation action may seek judicial review under Iowa Code 
§17A.19(1) if they are “aggrieved or adversely affected by any final agency decision.” See Des 
Moines Area Reg’l Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 841-42 (Iowa 2015). The standard of 
review is controlled by the existence of a statute delegating the authority to exercise discretion to 
decide an issue. “When discretion has been vested in the commissioner,” the Court should “reverse 
only if the commissioner’s application was ‘irrational, illogical, or wholly unjustifiable.’” Id. at 
842 (quoting Larson Mfg. Co. v. Thorson, 763 N.W.2d 842, 850 (Iowa 2009)); see also Iowa Code 
§ 17A.19(10)(l). Where the commissioner has not been given authority to exercise discretion by 
the legislature, the review is for errors at law. Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(c). 
“Application of workers’ compensation laws to facts as found by the commissioner is 
clearly vested in the commissioner.” Midwest Ambulance Service v. Ruud, 754 N.W.2d 860, 864 
(Iowa 2008) (citing Mycogen Seeds v. Sands, 700 N.W.2d 328, 330 (Iowa 2005)). The 
commissioner’s findings are only reversed when they are not supported by substantial evidence 
when the record is viewed as a whole. Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(f). A finding of substantial 
evidence occurs when a “neutral, detached, and reasonable person” determines that the evidence 
is sufficient to establish a fact that has serious and important consequences. Id. § 17A.19(10)(f)(1). 
E-FILED                    CVCV064318 - 2023 MAY 22 10:56 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 5 of 9

 
 
6 
 
Where the application of facts to law is vested in the commissioner’s discretion, an “irrational, 
illogical, or wholly unjustifiable” application of law to fact is required for reversal. Id. § 
17A.19(10)(m). 
III. 
ANALYSIS. 
The Decision producing the decreased rating is challenged by Petitioner for two reasons. 
First, Petitioner argues that the Commissioner acted outside his scope of authority by issuing his 
own impairment rating rather than adopting one offered by a physician. Second, Petitioner alleges 
that even if this was within the Commissioner’s authority, he nonetheless committed an error of 
law when calculating the duration of Petitioner’s entitlements to PPD benefits from Respondents. 
Petitioner’s argument that the PPD rating selected by the Commissioner must be one 
offered by an expert witness is not persuasive. Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(x) provides: 
In all cases of permanent partial disability . . . when determining functional 
disability and not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides to 
evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American medical 
association, as adopted by the workers’ compensation commission by rule pursuant 
to chapter 17A. 
 
Petitioner would have the Commissioner adopt a medical rating that would be in direct violation 
of the AMA guidelines. Both expert opinions were flawed and adopting either in whole would 
have been in violation of the Commissioner’s duty to calculate ratings in conformance with the 
AMA’s guidelines. 
The record indicates that the Commissioner avoided accepting an impairment rating that 
controverts the plain meaning of Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(x). The Commissioner did so by correcting 
the flaw in Dr. Taylor’s rating so that it was calculated correctly under the AMA guidelines. The 
Court concludes the Commissioner did not act in excess of his authority when he issued his own 
impairment rating. The Commissioner did not violate Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(x). To the contrary, 
E-FILED                    CVCV064318 - 2023 MAY 22 10:56 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 6 of 9

 
 
7 
 
he promoted it by not accepting ratings that did not follow the provision’s demands of conformance 
with the AMA. Given Dr. Taylor’s error, if the Commissioner had been required to accept one of 
the doctor’s ratings, his only option would be Dr. Vincent’s rating of 0%. Such a decision would 
have been worse for the Petitioner. The Commissioner did not exceed his authority.  
Turning to the Petitioner’s second argument, the Court affirms the formula used by the 
Commissioner to reach the 7.5% rating but finds error with the award of 28 weeks of benefits. 
Weeks of benefits for a scheduled shoulder injury are calculated by multiplying the impairment 
rating percent by 400. See Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(n). Petitioner points to the 5th Edition of AMA 
Guidelines which states, “The final calculated whole person impairment rating, whether it is based 
on the evaluation of one organ system or several organ systems, should be rounded to the nearest 
whole number.” Ex. 3, p. 2. The AMA Guidelines offer direct corroboration that the 7.5% 
impairment rating must be a whole number. There is no question the whole number used by the 
Commissioner to calculate PPD benefits was the number seven rather than eight. 
Respondents argue that the proper impairment rating is 7% because “the Commissioner 
was not ‘rounding;’ he was making a disability determination.” Resp’ts’ Br. p. 9. Contrary to 
Respondents’ assertion that the resulting 28 weeks awarded in the Decision was intentional, the 
Commissioner made clear he assigned “a 2.5 percent impairment [rating] for the distal clavicle 
excision under the plain text of the AMA Guidelines.” Cert. Rec. p. 12. The AMA guidelines 
clearly establish that an impairment rating needs to be rounded to a whole number. Using standard 
principles of mathematics, when 7.5 is rounded to the nearest whole number, the result is eight.  
The Court concludes that the Commissioner’s award of 28 weeks of PPD benefits was an 
error of law. When the 7.5 percent rating is rounded to the nearest whole number of 8 percent and 
E-FILED                    CVCV064318 - 2023 MAY 22 10:56 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 7 of 9

 
 
8 
 
multiplied by the value over which the scheduled injury is to be compensated for, the resulting 
period of benefits is 32 weeks. 
IV. 
DISPOSITION. 
For all reasons set forth above, the Petitioner is awarded 32 weeks of benefits, payable in 
the manner as if they had been awarded by the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commission.  
 
E-FILED                    CVCV064318 - 2023 MAY 22 10:56 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 8 of 9

State of Iowa Courts
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV064318
TRAVIS JAY V ARCHER SKID LOADER SERVICE LLC
Type:
ORDER FOR JUDGMENT
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2023-05-22 10:56:53
E-FILED                    CVCV064318 - 2023 MAY 22 10:56 AM             POLK    
CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT                    Page 9 of 9
