Case Number: 20015441.02
Case Title:  WOLFE, SCOTT V. SEDONA STAFFING INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Wolfe Scott-20015441.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
SCOTT WOLFE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
File No. 20015441.02 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
SEDONA STAFFING, INC., 
  : 
        ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                            
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
ACE AMERICAN INSURANCE CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
     Headnote Nos.: 1400; 1800; 1803; 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
         2907; 3000; 3001; 3002; 4100 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
The claimant, Scott Wolfe, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from employer Sedona Staffing, Inc. (“Sedona”), and its insurer, 
ACE American Insurance Company.  Zeke McCartney appeared on behalf of the 
claimant.  Peter Thill appeared on behalf of the defendants.  Also present was Sedona’s 
corporate representative, Nikki Kiefer. 
 
The matter came on for hearing on September 10, 2025, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips.  Pursuant to an order of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, the hearing occurred electronically via Zoom.  
The hearing proceeded without difficulty.  
 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-6, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-6, and 
Defendants’ Exhibit A-M.  The exhibits were received into the record without objection. 
 
Mr. Wolfe testified on his own behalf.  Ms. Kiefer testified on behalf of the 
defendants.  Deb Hoadley was appointed the official reporter and custodian of the notes 
of the proceeding.  The matter was considered fully submitted following briefing by the 
parties on November 21, 2025.     
STIPULATIONS 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing, 
the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Dec-18  09:30:16     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 2 
 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged injury. 
  
2. That the claimant sustained an injury, which arose out of, and in the course of, 
his employment on December 16, 2020. 
 
3. That the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery. 
 
4. That the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
 
5. That, although entitlement to temporary disability and/or healing period 
benefits cannot be stipulated, the claimant was off of work from December 21, 
2020, to March 18, 2021.   
 
6. That the permanent disability is an industrial disability. 
 
7. That the commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits is May 
27, 2021. 
  
8. That the claimant was single and entitled to two exemptions at the time of the 
alleged injury.   
 
9. That, prior to the hearing, the claimant was paid weekly benefits.   
 
10. That the costs listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 5 have been paid. 
 
The defendants waived their affirmative defenses.   
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the claimant is entitled to temporary disability and/or healing period 
benefits from December 21, 2020, to March 18, 2021. 
  
2. The extent of the claimant’s permanent disability. 
 
3. The claimant’s gross earnings, and weekly compensation rate.   
 
4. Whether the claimant is entitled to reimbursement for the entire cost of an 
independent medical examination pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39, and 
whether the cost of the IME was reasonable.   
 

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 3 
 
5. Whether the claimant can assert the odd-lot doctrine at hearing, as it was not 
alleged in their initial petition.1 
 
6. Whether the claimant is permanently and totally disabled, including under the 
odd-lot doctrine. 
 
7. Whether the cost of failing to attend an IME arranged by the defendants 
should be taxed against the claimant. 
 
8. Whether the claimant is entitled to a taxation of costs as itemized in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 5. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Scott Wolfe, the claimant, was 57 years old at the time of the hearing.  
(Testimony).  He resided in Dubuque, Iowa, since 2010, and was a widower.  
(Testimony).  In 2020, he had two dependent children.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Wolfe graduated from high school in 1986.  (Testimony).  He then attended 
the University of Nebraska and obtained a bachelor’s degree in business administration 
in 1991.  (Testimony; Defendants’ Exhibit F:64).  In 1996, he obtained a master’s in 
business administration (“MBA”) from Westmar University in LeMars, Iowa.  (DE F:64).   
Mr. Wolfe worked in a family business at Baker Hydra-Fork from early life.  
(Testimony).  The business entailed family farming as well as a manufacturing facility.  
(Testimony).  He worked as a farmhand and helped sweeping up a shop and loading 
scrap metal.  (Testimony).  He then worked for the State of Nebraska’s Tourism 
Department for a short time.  (Testimony).  Next, he worked as a store manager of a 
pharmacy, wherein he stocked shelves, assisted customers, and performed office work.  
(Testimony).   
Mr. Wolfe has an extensive history in human resources, including in 
management and upper management.  (DE E:40-41; F:62-63).  From 1991 to 1993, Mr. 
Wolfe worked as a personnel manager at Keystone Manufacturing in Omaha, 
Nebraska.  (DE F:63).  He supervised a payroll clerk and secretary, and managed 
human resources duties.  (DE F:63).  He then worked for Tri-Manufacturing in Fort 
Dodge, Iowa, from 1993 to 1997, as their human resources director.  (DE F:63).  This 
job involved managing a human resources department, including supervising a safety 
coordinator and a secretary.  (DE F:63).   
 
1 The defendants objected to the inclusion of the odd-lot doctrine as a disputed issue in this case.  
Arguments were heard at the hearing on this issue, but the undersigned requested that the parties brief 
the issue in their posthearing briefs so that further consideration could be given to the arguments.  The 
parties arguments will be addressed and a ruling will be made within the Conclusions of Law. 

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 4 
 
Mr. Wolfe left Tri-Manufacturing in 1997 for a position with Oakland Foods in 
Oakland, Iowa, where he served as a human resources manager until 1999.  (DE F:62-
63).  This involved supervising a number of management level employees and creating 
a human resources and safety program for the facility.  (DE F:62-63).  Mr. Wolfe then 
worked for Pepsi as a human resources manager.  (DE F:62).  He supervised several 
other human resources employees and implemented human resources programs.  (DE 
F:62).   
From 2004 to 2005, Mr. Wolfe worked for Honeywell Electronics & Lighting.  (DE 
F:62).  He supervised eight people, and had direct responsibility of human resources for 
locations around the United States and Europe.  (DE F:62).  Mr. Wolfe moved to 
become the director of human resources for Kerry Group in Beloit, Wisconsin, from 
2006 to 2009.  (DE E:40).  He had “direct human resources authority for [b]usiness 
[u]nits totaling $1 [b]illion in revenue in North America and 25 sites.”  (DE E:40).  For 
several months in 2011, Mr. Wolfe was a human resources leader for Links Snacks 
International, in Minong, Wisconsin.  (DE E:40).  He had global human resources 
responsibility for this company, including locations in the United States, Canada, New 
Zealand, Brazil, and Germany.  (DE E:40).   
Mr. Wolfe also served as a volunteer firefighter and EMT for the Centralia Peosta 
Fire Department and Epworth Fire Department from 2014 to 2024.  (DE E:40).  Through 
this, he obtained certifications in Hazmat, as a fire fighter, and as an EMT.  (DE E:40).  
Mr. Wolfe testified that his work as a volunteer firefighter and EMT required him to lift 
heavy items and/or patients.  (Testimony).  He testified that he stopped being able to 
attend meetings after his wife passed away.  (Testimony).  As a result, he had to resign 
from these roles in 2019 and 2020.  (Testimony).  However, he also attempted to claim 
that he could not physically perform the job after his work injury.  (Testimony).  It is 
unclear from his testimony whether he resigned prior to his injury or subsequent to his 
work injury.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Wolfe visited with his personal provider, Cortney Kueter, P.A., at Grand River 
Medical Group on June 29, 2020.  (Joint Exhibit 6:20-21).  This was for an annual 
physical.  (JE 6:20).  It was noted that Mr. Wolfe had some issues with heart palpitations 
and Type II diabetes.  (JE 6:20).   
Mr. Wolfe was hired by Sedona on November 3, 2020.  (DE J:83; Testimony).  
He was placed at Advanced Precast in Dyersville, Iowa, as a concrete finisher.  (DE 
J:83; Testimony).  He testified that this was intended to be a full-time position.  
(Testimony).  Mr. Wolfe noted that his first role with Advanced Precast was to cut foam 
to be placed inside of cast concrete slabs.  (Testimony).  Once Advanced Precast found 
out that he had experience operating large trucks as a volunteer firefighter, he moved to 
a role wherein he drove concrete trucks from an onsite concrete plant into a 
manufacturing building.  (Testimony).  In order to move to this position, Mr. Wolfe 
obtained a Class B CDL.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Wolfe returned to see Ms. Kueter on December 9, 2020.  (JE 6:22-23).  He 
took metformin for his diabetes.  (JE 6:22).   

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 5 
 
On December 16, 2020, Mr. Wolfe drove a cement truck to the manufacturing 
side of the Dyersville Die Cast plant.  (Testimony).  As he exited the cement truck, he 
fell backwards onto his back.  (Testimony).  He testified that he fell about four feet.  
(Testimony).  He described feeling an “explosion” in his lower back.  (Testimony).  He 
reported his injury to the office and was taken to Medical Associates in Dubuque, Iowa.  
(Testimony; Joint Exhibit 1:1-2).   
At his visit at Medical Associates, Mr. Wolfe noted he could ambulate with normal 
strength, and had no radiculopathy.  (JE 1:1).  Upon examination, Mr. Wolfe displayed 
tenderness to palpation along his thoracic and lumbar spinous processes.  (JE 1:1).  He 
also had diffuse pain in his lumbar spine.  (JE 1:1).  He had full range of motion in his 
lower back.  (JE 1:1).  X-rays were done, which showed mild superior end-plate 
compression fractures at T12 and L1.  (JE 1:1).  The provider contacted orthopedics, 
which recommended he wear a brace and follow-up with orthopedics.  (JE 1:1).  Mr. 
Wolfe was taken off of work during this visit until his orthopedic follow-up.  (JE 1:2).   
On December 21, 2020, Mr. Wolfe followed-up with Michael Chapman, M.D., at 
Medical Associates Clinic.  (JE 3:8).  Mr. Wolfe wore a brace and used a heating pad to 
improve his pain.  (JE 3:8).  Mr. Wolfe described his pain as aching, burning, and 
stabbing in his low back and upper buttock.  (JE 3:8).  Dr. Chapman observed that Mr. 
Wolfe appeared “very stiff” when he walked.  (JE 3:8).  Flexion and extension 
aggravated the pain.  (JE 3:8).  Dr. Chapman recommended an MRI “to see if there is a 
significant posterior ligamentous complex disruption at the thoracolumbar junction.”  (JE 
3:8).   
An MRI done on December 31, 2020, showed “isolated mild acute superior 
endplate compression fractures of T12 and L1.”  (JE 3:9).  The MRI showed no other 
acute abnormalities in the thoracic or lumbar spine.  (JE 3:9-10).  The MRI of the 
thoracic spine noted that the fractures were better visualized on the MRI of the lumbar 
spine.  (JE 3:10).  Mr. Wolfe seemed to think that the MRI showed a bulging disc and 
that this information was “withheld” from him.  (Testimony).   
On January 8, 2021, Mr. Wolfe returned to see Dr. Chapman to review the 
results of the MRI.  (JE 3:11).  Mr. Wolfe told Dr. Chapman that he continued to have 
pain in his low back with occasional spasms in his left leg.  (JE 3:11).  Dr. Chapman 
observed that Mr. Wolfe continued to be very stiff with painful flexion and extension.  
(JE 3:11).  Dr. Chapman ordered a standing lateral x-ray of the thoracolumbar junction.  
(JE 3:11).   
Mr. Wolfe returned to see Dr. Chapman on January 29, 2021.  (JE 3:12).  He 
continued to complain of significant pain in his back, which was especially intense upon 
standing.  (JE 3:12).  Mr. Wolfe also experienced increasing pain when he did not wear 
his brace.  (JE 3:12).  Dr. Chapman observed Mr. Wolfe to have pain with forward 
flexion and extension.  (JE 3:12).  The doctor then recommended that Mr. Wolfe spend 
increasing amounts of time out of his brace; however, he noted that Mr. Wolfe should 
continue to wear it while in the car or walking outside.  (JE 3:12).  Dr. Chapman ordered 

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 6 
 
physical therapy to work on strengthening Mr. Wolfe’s core muscles and improving his 
range of motion.  (JE 3:12).   
On March 12, 2021, Mr. Wolfe followed-up with Dr. Chapman regarding his 
compression fractures.  (JE 3:13).  Mr. Wolfe continued to have pain with prolonged 
sitting.  (JE 3:13).  Forward flexion also aggravated his back.  (JE 3:13).  Dr. Chapman 
noted that Mr. Wolfe may have some discogenic pain, but that the treatment for this was 
identical to the treatment for his fractures.  (JE 3:13).  Dr. Chapman recommended that 
Mr. Wolfe become more aggressive with core strengthening.  (JE 3:13).  He allowed Mr. 
Wolfe to complete activities as tolerated.  (JE 3:13).   
Dr. Chapman visited with Mr. Wolfe again on April 9, 2021.  (JE 3:14).  Mr. 
Wolfe’s thoracolumbar pain improved, but his low back pain was “dramatically worse.”  
(JE 3:14).  Mr. Wolfe had trouble sleeping.  (JE 3:14).  Dr. Chapman described Mr. 
Wolfe as “significantly deteriorated than when I saw him last.”  (JE 3:14).  Upon 
examination, Dr. Chapman found Mr. Wolfe to be very stiff with flexion.  (JE 3:14).  He 
also noted that Mr. Wolfe’s pain was aggravated with nerve tension signs.  (JE 3:14).  
Dr. Chapman diagnosed Mr. Wolfe with lumbosacral disc degeneration and a 
compression fracture.  (JE 3:14).  He ordered PT to add certain exercises, and also 
ordered a new MRI of the lumbar spine.  (JE 3:14).  At the conclusion of this visit, Dr. 
Chapman took Mr. Wolfe off of work until after his next MRI.  (JE 3:15).   
On April 19, 2021, Mr. Wolfe reported to Mercy Medical Center in Dubuque, 
Iowa, where had an MRI of his lumbar spine.  (JE 2:4).  The MRI showed mild 
degenerative findings, especially at L5-S1 with no significant spinal canal or neural 
foraminal narrowing.  (JE 2:4).  The MRI also showed “[c]hronic superior endplate 
compression fractures of T12 and L1 with unchanged mild vertebral body height loss.”  
(JE 2:4).  Finally, the MRI showed mild degenerative endplate edema at L1.  (JE 2:4).     
Mr. Wolfe returned to visit Dr. Chapman again on April 29, 2021.  (JE 3:16).  Mr. 
Wolfe noted that he continued to do “poorly,” as the only time that he did not experience 
any pain was when he was lying down.  (JE 3:16).  Dr. Chapman reviewed the results of 
the recent MRI and noted that Mr. Wolfe had disc degeneration at L5-S1 with a central 
bulge; however, Dr. Chapman noted the bulge was “not dramatic.”  (JE 3:16).  Dr. 
Chapman opined that Mr. Wolfe’s issues were “not classically discogenic…” but instead 
that Mr. Wolfe had “multiple pain generators.”  (JE 3:16).  Since Mr. Wolfe did not have 
radicular pain, Dr. Chapman did not think an injection would help.  (JE 3:16).  Mr. Wolfe 
testified that he did not want an injection in his back, and again expressed an opinion 
that he did not trust Dr. Chapman, as he felt that Dr. Chapman withheld that he “had 
bulging discs for three months.”  (Testimony).  Dr. Chapman recommended that Mr. 
Wolfe continue with physical therapy to improve his strength.  (JE 3:16).  Dr. Chapman 
concluded that Mr. Wolfe would not be able to “reliably work” due to the soreness he 
experienced at the time of the appointment.  (JE 3:16).   
On April 30, 2021, Sedona offered Mr. Wolfe a temporary accommodation on a 
full time basis.  (DE E:52).  It appears that Mr. Wolfe attempted to add his own 

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 7 
 
addendum to the offer, and crossed out a portion of the letter in which Sedona outlined 
the consequences of a refusal to accept the temporary offer.  (DE E:52-53).   
Mr. Wolfe then signed off on a letter, dated May 14, 2021, in which he accepted a 
return to temporary employment with Sedona.  (DE E:54).  This included working 
general or office labor on a full-time basis during the day shift at the pay rate of 
seventeen and 00/100 dollars ($17.00) per hour.  (DE E:54).  His restrictions listed in 
the letter included: no repetitive lifting, bending or twisting, and an option to change 
positions every 15 minutes.  (DE E:54).  His duties included: assembling papers into 
packets, doing computer tutorials and evaluations, and general office clerk duties within 
his restrictions.  (DE E:54).  
On May 19, 2021, Mr. Wolfe attempted to work on a light duty basis at Sedona.  
(Testimony).  He testified that he began to experience pain in his low back and left leg 
after collating paperwork, which he claimed required excessive twisting.  (Testimony).  
An ambulance was called for Mr. Wolfe.  (JE 4:18).  The ambulance took Mr. Wolfe to 
the emergency room at Mercy Medical Center for complaints of pain in his leg and a 
feeling as though his left leg fell asleep.  (JE 2:5-7).  He noted his previous fall.  (JE 
2:5).  He told the provider that his symptoms started to improve after he lay flat on his 
back for a period of time.  (JE 2:6).  The emergency room diagnosed him with a low 
back strain and discharged him.  (JE 2:7).   
Dr. Chapman examined Mr. Wolfe again on May 27, 2021, for Mr. Wolfe’s 
ongoing back pain.  (JE 3:17).  Mr. Wolfe noted that he was “the same” as his last visit 
with continued pain.  (JE 3:17).  Mr. Wolfe went to work for 30 minutes, and his left leg 
ended up numb or dead.  (JE 3:17).  Mr. Wolfe indicated that he spent 14 to 16 hours 
per day in bed, as he was only comfortable while laying down.  (JE 3:17).  Upon 
examination, Dr. Chapman observed that Mr. Wolfe had significant pain with axial 
compression of his shoulders and with waist rotation.  (JE 3:17).  To Dr. Chapman, this 
represented symptom magnification.  (JE 3:17).  Additionally, Dr. Chapman observed 
that Mr. Wolfe had pain with a Faber maneuver, but not with other provocative testing of 
the SI joint.  (JE 3:17).  Dr. Chapman noted that Mr. Wolfe’s fractures were healed, and 
that he had “little disc desiccation at L5-S1…” with no neurocompression.  (JE 3:17).  
Dr. Chapman concluded: 
I am at a loss to explain his symptoms and why he is not able to tolerate 
even sedentary work.  I recommended he get another opinion.  There are 
some physical exam findings that suggest symptom magnification.  I do not 
doubt he is in some pain but I do not find any physiological explanation for 
this degree of disability based on what I see on his imaging. 
(JE 3:17).   
 
Mr. Wolfe saw Ms. Kueter again on June 14, 2021, for another annual physical.  
(JE 6:24-25).  Mr. Wolfe described a myriad of issues, including with his heart, his 
diabetes, and his prostate.  (JE 6:24).  There was no mention of his back issues.  (JE 
6:24).   

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 8 
 
 
On July 9, 2021, Mr. Wolfe reported to Chad Abernathey, M.D., for his ongoing 
low back pain.  (JE 5:19).  Dr. Abernathey is a board certified neurosurgeon.  (DE A:2).  
Mr. Wolfe recounted his history including his conservative care.  (JE 5:19).  Dr. 
Abernathey reviewed the previous MRIs including T12 and L1 compression deformities 
without significant neural compromise; however, the MRI also showed a “small disc 
protrusion at L5-S1.”  (JE 5:19).  Dr. Abernathey concluded: 
Scott Wolfe presents with subjective chronic low back pain related to a work 
event.  I do not recommend an aggressive neurosurgical stance due to a 
paucity of clinical or radiographic findings.  His neural elements are well 
decompressed on his MRI images and his neurologic function is intact.  … 
I offered him the opportunity to undergo an epidural steroid injection, but he 
declined.  The patient states that he had previously been vice president of 
human resources at a large corporation.  He says that injections were never 
helpful in any of his employees and he is adamantly opposed to pain 
management.  I will defer to his primary physicians regarding additional 
management. 
(JE 5:19).  Mr. Wolfe felt that this examination only lasted five minutes.  (Testimony).   
 
Following this visit, Dr. Abernathey responded to a check-box-type letter from 
Joseph Feldkamp of ESIS.  (DE A:1).  In his response, dated August 11, 2021, Dr. 
Abernathey indicated that Mr. Wolfe had no permanent impairment relating to the 
December 16, 2020, date of injury, that he reached maximum medical improvement 
(“MMI”) as of June 16, 2021, and that he required no work restrictions due to his work 
injury.  (DE A:1).   
 
Mr. Wolfe saw Ms. Kueter again on December 22, 2021.  (JE 6:26-27).  Mr. 
Wolfe made no mention of his low back pain.  (JE 6:26-27).  However, he noted having 
a double bypass surgery.  (JE 6:26).  He contemplated taking testosterone and human 
growth hormone.  (JE 6:26).   
 
On June 22, 2022, Mr. Wolfe returned to Ms. Kueter’s office.  (JE 6:28-29).  Mr. 
Wolfe made no mention of his low back pain or issues.  (JE 6:28).  He continued to take 
medications for his diabetes and heart issues.  (JE 6:28).  He walked for about one hour 
per day and used a rowing elliptical to exercise.  (JE 6:28).   
 
During 2022, Sedona reached out to Mr. Wolfe on several occasions.  (DE J:83).  
Mr. Wolfe either did not respond or declined to call them back.  (DE J:83; Testimony).  
By October of 2022, Mr. Wolfe responded to Sedona and indicated that he was not 
seeking work.  (DE J:83; Testimony).  Thus, Sedona placed Mr. Wolfe into an inactive 
status.  (DE J:83-84; Testimony).  This meant that they would no longer call him for 
available jobs.  (Testimony).   
 
Ms. Kueter examined Mr. Wolfe again on February 8, 2023.  (JE 6:30-31).  He 
continued to take medication for his cardiovascular issues and for his diabetes.  (JE 
6:30).  He began to take Mounjaro for his diabetes.  (JE 6:30-31).   

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 9 
 
 
On August 16, 2023, Mr. Wolfe returned to see Ms. Kueter for his annual 
physical.  (JE 6:32-33).  Mr. Wolfe made no mention of back complaints.  (JE 6:32).  He 
engaged in an extended discussion regarding his myriad of other health issues.  (JE 
6:32).   
 
Ms. Kueter examined Mr. Wolfe again on February 22, 2024.  (JE 6:34-35).  He 
continued to have issues with diabetes and his heart.  (JE 6:34-35).  There was no 
mention of his low back pain.  (JE 6:34-35).   
 
At the arrangement of claimant’s counsel, Mr. Wolfe presented to David Segal, 
M.D., J.D., for an independent medical examination on January 19, 2024.  (Claimant’s 
Exhibit 2:5-29).  Dr. Segal issued a report outlining his findings and opinions.  (CE 2:5-
29).  Dr. Segal is board certified in brain and spine neurosurgery.  (CE 2:5).2  Mr. Wolfe 
recounted this examination lasting from one-and-a-half to two hours.  (Testimony).   
 
In preparing his report, Dr. Segal reviewed a number of medical records.   (CE 
2:30-37).  Dr. Segal noted in his record review in the initial IME report that Mr. Wolfe 
relayed that he felt Dr. Abernathey “dismissed” him.  (CE 2:10).  Dr. Segal then 
interviewed Mr. Wolfe prior to examining him.  (CE 2:7-8).  Mr. Wolfe outlined the 
incident of December 16, 2020, when he fell from the cement truck.  (CE 2:8).  Mr. 
Wolfe rated his pain 1 out of 10, but noted that it could be up to 8 out of 10.  (CE 2:7).  
He located the pain to the lower back below the beltline, and noted that it radiated to 
both sides and both of his legs.  (CE 2:7).  Doing things like bending, changing position, 
coughing, activities of daily living, lifting, lying down in an incorrect position, pulling, 
pushing, sitting, sneezing, squatting, standing, twisting, and walking, caused his pain to 
flare up.  (CE 2:7).  Mr. Wolfe described situations where his pain flared-up that would 
“bring him to his knees” where there would be no position of relief.  (CE 2:8).  Mr. Wolfe 
noted that his flare-ups happen if he does not maintain an “S-curve position in his back.”  
(CE 2:8).  Mr. Wolfe told Dr. Segal that he could not return to even sedentary work 
because he could not sit during a flare-up.  (CE 2:10).  He also indicated that his life 
was “in a holding pattern” due to the results of his injury.  (CE 2:10).   
 
Dr. Segal’s report then delved into the Oswestry disability index which Dr. Segal 
outlined while Mr. Wolfe experienced a “flare up” and when he did not experience a 
“flare up.”  (CE 2:11).  He found that Mr. Wolfe was in a “crippled category” when he 
experienced a “flare up,” and was severely disabled when he did not have a flare-up.  
(CE 2:11).   
 
Dr. Segal next undertook a physical examination of Mr. Wolfe.  (CE 2:11).  He 
found Mr. Wolfe to have tenderness at L1 and L3-S1 at the midline.  (CE 2:11).  He also 
 
2 It should be noted that Dr. Segal was alleged to demonstrate professional incompetency during his time 
in practice by inappropriately utilizing certain surgical techniques, failing to have proper coverage 
arrangements for patients during an absence, maintaining pre-signed prescriptions, and receiving 
overpayments.  (DE K:88-105).  Dr. Segal voluntarily discontinued his surgical practice and agreed to a 
citation, warning and paid a five thousand and 00/100 dollar ($5,000.00) civil penalty in a settlement 
agreement with the Iowa Board of Medicine.  (DE K:88-105).  He also agreed to take a professional ethics 
program.  (DE K:88-105).   

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 10 
 
showed sensory losses in the left L3 and S1 dermatomal distribution.  (CE 2:11).  Dr. 
Segal measured range of motion in Mr. Wolfe’s lumbar spine.  (CE 2:11-12).  He found 
Mr. Wolfe to have flexion to 40 degrees, extension to 10 degrees, right lateral flexion to 
10 degrees, and left lateral flexion to 15 degrees.  (CE 2:11-12).  These ranges of 
motion were all significantly less than what Dr. Segal noted to be “normal.”  (CE 2:11-
12).   
 
The report continued with Dr. Segal’s personal interpretation of the multiple 
imaging studies taken of Mr. Wolfe’s low back.  (CE 2:12-13).  Specifically, Dr. Segal 
opined as to the findings of the April 19, 2021, MRI of Mr. Wolfe’s lumbar spine.  (CE 
2:12-13).  Dr. Segal noted that the mechanism of the compression fractures was the 
“axial load on the spine during the impact.”  (CE 2:13).  He noted that, “[a] fall from a 
height can generate significant force, causing hyperextension and rotational stress on 
the spine...” which can lead to a fracture.  (CE 2:13).  Dr. Segal opined that the disc 
findings at L5-S1 could be acute, but could also pre-exist the work injury.  (CE 2:13).  
Since they were asymptomatic, Dr. Segal concluded that “…[t]he work injury lit up that 
area, causing the lower back pain and left radicular symptoms.”  (CE 2:13).  He also 
concluded that the central and left-sided disc herniation at L5-S1 slightly compressed 
the left S1 nerve root.  (CE 2:13).   
 
Dr. Segal continued his report by providing his opinions as to a number of items.  
(CE 2:13-29).  He opined that Mr. Wolfe had four “independent areas of injury” as 
follows: 
1. Superior endplate compression fracture T12 
2. Superior endplate compression fracture L1 
3. Lumbar radiculopathy with possible direct injury to the nerve roots 
4. Disc protrusion (possible permanent aggravation of preexisting 
condition) 
(CE 2:14).  Dr. Segal noted that even though “T12 and L1 are adjacent, they are part of 
different spine areas…”  (CE 2:14).  He continued by opining that Mr. Wolfe “likely 
injured the lumbar nerve roots and/or injured the discs in a way that causes nerve root 
irritation.”  (CE 2:14).  Dr. Segal then turned to his diagnosis of Mr. Wolfe as suffering 
from lumbar radiculopathy.  (CE 2:14-15).  He noted that Mr. Wolfe had “…symptoms of 
lumbar radiculopathy that are classic symptoms.”  (CE 2:14).   
 
The report continued with Dr. Segal’s diagnoses “…caused by the acute work 
injury of December 16, 2020…”  (CE 2:16).  These included: a superior endplate 
fracture at L1 with height loss, disc protrusion at L5-S1, lumbar radiculopathy at the L3 
and S1 nerve roots, mechanical low back pain syndrome, and a superior endplate 
fracture at T12 with height loss.  (CE 2:16).  Dr. Segal opined that the injuries suffered 
by Mr. Wolfe on December 16, 2020, were caused by his fall due to the “…combination 
of rotational, flexion, and compressive forces…”  (CE 2:16).  Dr. Segal attributed some 
of Mr. Wolfe’s mechanical low back pain due to an antalgic gait; however, he admits 
that this is entirely based upon Mr. Wolfe’s subjective history and not his observation of 
Mr. Wolfe’s gait.  (CE 2:17).  Dr. Segal then indicated that Mr. Wolfe had left L3 and S1 

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 11 
 
radiculopathy findings upon examination, despite denying pain or numbness in his legs.  
(CE 2:17).   He also opined that Mr. Wolfe’s medical records support a diagnosis of 
radiculopathy.  (CE 2:17).  Dr. Segal opined that all of Mr. Wolfe’s diagnoses were 
“directly and causally related to the work injury.”  (CE 2:21).  Dr. Segal based his 
opinions on both the acute fractures suffered by Mr. Wolfe and by opining that Mr. Wolfe 
had degenerative issues that were aggravated or lit-up by the work injury.  (CE 2:21-
22).   
 
Dr. Segal continued by outlining his opinions on Mr. Wolfe’s permanent 
impairment by referencing the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 
Fifth Edition.  (CE 2:22-23).  Dr. Segal noted that Mr. Wolfe had multilevel injuries to his 
lumbar spine.  (CE 2:22).  As a result, he felt that the ROM method was the most 
appropriate for calculating Mr. Wolfe’s permanent impairment as it related to his lumbar 
spine.  (CE 2:23).  Dr. Segal performed his own measurements of the August 24, 2022, 
MRI and found Mr. Wolfe to have a 48 percent height loss due to the L1 vertebral 
compression fracture.  (CE 2:23).  This resulted in a 7 percent whole person 
impairment.  (CE 2:23).  Turning next to the ROM impairment, Dr. Segal referred to the 
range of motion measurements that he obtained during the IME.  (CE 2:23).  He found 
Mr. Wolfe to have a 4 percent whole person impairment due to lumbar flexion and 
sacral flexion, a 5 percent whole person impairment due to lumbar extension issues, a 2 
percent whole person impairment due to side bend on the left and a 3 percent whole 
person impairment due to side bend on the right.  (CE 2:23-24).  This resulted in a 14 
percent whole person impairment based upon the ROM method.  (CE 2:24).  The doctor 
next turned to a spinal nerve deficit based upon his opinions that Mr. Wolfe had nerve 
roots with deficit at the right L5 and S1 level.  (CE 2:24).  He found Mr. Wolfe to have a 
4 percent “LEI” for left L3 nerve issues, a 4 percent “LEI” due to left S1 nerve issues, 
and a 3 percent “LEI” for motor weakness.  (CE 2:24).  He combined these impairments 
into a 4 percent whole person impairment for nerve root dysfunction.  (CE 2:24).  Dr. 
Segal then used the combined values chart to arrive at a 22 percent whole person 
impairment due to injuries to the claimant’s lumbar spine.  (CE 2:25).   
 
Dr. Segal next turned to the thoracic spine.  (CE 2:25).  He used the DRE 
method to rate the claimant’s thoracic spine injuries.  (CE 2:25).  He placed Mr. Wolfe in 
a DRE Category II, as he performed his own measurements on Mr. Wolfe’s MRI studies 
and found a 36 percent height loss.  (CE 2:25).  This resulted in a 12 percent whole 
person impairment.  (CE 2:25).  Dr. Segal then placed Mr. Wolfe in a DRE Category III 
for impairment based on radiculopathy.  (CE 2:25).  He provided a 16 percent 
impairment of the whole person due to this radiculopathy.  (CE 2:25).  Dr. Segal 
combined the lumbar rating of 22 percent of the whole person with the 16 percent of the 
whole person using the combined valued chart on page 604 of the Guides to arrive at a 
34 percent whole person impairment.  (CE 2:25).   
 
Dr. Segal then delved into his opinions on necessary work restrictions for Mr. 
Wolfe.  (CE 2:25-26).  Dr. Segal opined: “…due to the impact of the work injury on Mr. 
Wolfe’s functional abilities, he does not have the work capacity that he did before that 
work injury.”  (CE 2:25).  Dr. Segal recommended the following restrictions: 

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 12 
 
- 
Sitting: No restrictions if in the “right chair” with back support 
- 
Standing: 15 minutes at a time, then rest for 15 minutes, total 4 hours 
per day 
- 
Walking: 10 minutes at a time, then rest for 15 minutes, total 3 hours per 
day 
- 
Bending, one bend: Occasionally (but very carefully) 
- 
Bending, repetitive: Never 
- 
Use of Vibratory Tools: Never 
- 
Lifting/Carrying: 10 pounds Occasionally, 15 pounds, Rarely 
- 
Pushing/Pulling: Rarely 
- 
Stairs: One flight Rarely 
- 
Kneeling: Rarely 
- 
Crouching/Squatting: Rarely 
- 
Ladders: Never 
(CE 2:26).   
 
Dr. Segal discussed his opinions on whether Mr. Wolfe reached MMI.  (CE 2:26-
27).  Since Mr. Wolfe had no new treatments planned and was “plateaued for quite 
some time…,” Dr. Segal opined that he reached MMI.  (CE 2:26).  He placed Mr. Wolfe 
at MMI as of May 27, 2021.  (CE 2:26).   
 
Finally, Dr. Segal made recommendations on the need for immediate and future 
treatment.  (CE 2:27-28).  Dr. Segal recommended that Mr. Wolfe have an evaluation 
from a pain management doctor and a neurosurgeon.  (CE 2:27).  Specifically, Dr. 
Segal recommended injections and an appointment with a “Dr. Buchanan” in Waterloo, 
Iowa.  (CE 2:27).  He also felt Mr. Wolfe should consider a lumbar discogram.  (CE 
2:27).  Dr. Segal recommended the following treatments as “potential future treatments:” 
- 
Imaging: 
o Periodic X-rays with flexion/extension 
o CT scans 
o MRIs (dynamic MRI lumbar) 
- 
Pain Medication 
- 
TENS Unit 
- 
Physical Therapy/Occupational Therapy 
- 
Aquatic Therapy 
- 
Cortisone/PRP Injections 
- 
Electromyography (EMG) 
- 
Nerve Conduction Velocity (NCV) 
- 
Discography 
- 
Lumbar Epidural Steroid Injections 
- 
Repeat Lumbar Facet Injections/Medial branch block/Radiofrequency 
ablation 
- 
Evaluation by Neurosurgeon/Orthopedic Spine Surgeon 
- 
Vertebroplasty or kyphoplasty 
- 
Lumbar Discectomy and laminectomy 

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 13 
 
- 
Lumbar Fusion 
- 
Orthotics (Back Brace) 
(CE 2:27-28).   
 
On June 24, 2024, Mr. Wolfe returned to visit Ms. Kueter.  (JE 6:36-37).  He 
discussed his multiple ongoing health issues, but made no mention of anything related 
to his back.3  (JE 6:36).   
 
In April of 2025, Mr. Wolfe pled guilty to a Class D felony of enticing a minor.  
(DE H:74).   
 
On August 6, 2025, at the arrangement of the defendants, Mr. Wolfe was seen 
for an IME by Jonathon Fields, M.D., M.B.A., M.P.H., C.I.M.E.  (DE B:15-31).4  Dr. 
Fields is board certified in occupational and environmental medicine and is a certified 
independent medical examiner.  (DE B:32).  He is also the president of Summit 
Industrial Medicine, which is provides “…care of complex worker’s [sic] compensation 
cases throughout [n]ortheastern Iowa.  Services include [t]ake [o]ver [c]are, 
[i]ndependent [m]edical [e]xaminations, [i]mpairment [r]atings, [f]itness for [d]uty, 
[second] opinions, [and[ [m]edicolegal [c]ase [r]eview.”  (DE B:32).   
 
Prior to the IME, Dr. Fields’ office had Mr. Wolfe complete a health assessment 
questionnaire and a pain diagram.  (DE B:15-18).  Mr.  Wolfe indicated that he 
experienced aching, burning, stabbing, and numbness in his lower back, along his 
beltline.  (DE B:18).  He rated his pain 9 out of 10.  (DE B:18).  He also indicated that he 
had numbness and pain down his left leg.  (DE B:18).  Mr. Wolfe indicated that he could 
do the following “with much difficulty”: dressing himself, standing up from a straight 
chair, getting in and out of bed, walking outdoors on flat and even ground, climbing up 
five steps with a guard rail, wash and dry his body, getting on and off of the toilet, 
running errand and shopping, and getting in and out of a car.  (DE B:15-16).  He could 
do the following with “some difficulty”: lifting a cup or glass to his mouth, opening a milk 
carton, opening car doors, opening previously opened jars, and turning faucets on and 
off.  (DE B:15-16).  Finally, he noted that he could not shampoo his own hair, take a 
bath in a tub, reaching and grabbing a five-pound object from above his head, bending 
down to pick things up, and doing chores such as vacuuming or yard work.  (DE B:15-
16).  Mr. Wolfe noted that he used a special or built up chair and a raised toilet seat.  
(DE B:15-16).  Mr. Wolfe noted that he could do “a little.”  (DE B:17).  He indicated that 
his pain over the previous week was 90 out of 100, where 100 represented “severe 
pain.”  (DE B:17).  Mr. Wolfe rated his overall health a 10, indicating close to “very well.”  
(DE B:17).   
 
3 Mr. Wolfe testified that he never made any mention to Ms. Kueter of his ongoing back complaints 
because “she is not … the doctor approved for my back.  She can’t do anything with it.”  (Testimony). 
4 Mr. Wolfe testified that he attempted to see Dr. Fields on two prior occasions.  (Testimony).  During the 
first visit, Mr. Wolfe indicated that Dr. Fields was not at the correct office to examine him.  (Testimony).  
During the second visit, Mr. Wolfe refused to fill out certain pre-examination paperwork without his 
attorney reviewing it first.  (Testimony).   

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 14 
 
 
Dr. Fields issued a report on August 25, 2025, outlining the findings of his IME.  
(DE B:19-31).  Dr. Fields began his report by reviewing a number of medical records, 
the deposition of the claimant, the claimant’s discovery responses, and Dr. Segal’s IME 
report.  (DE B:19-23).  Dr. Fields then recounted Mr. Wolfe’s work history.  (DE B:24).  
Mr. Wolfe then described his current symptoms to Dr. Fields.  (DE B:24-25).  He noted 
that he did not have constant left leg pain, but that he experienced left leg symptoms 
during his “low back ‘episodes.’”  (DE B:24).  He described the pain as numbness, 
tingling, and buckling of his knee.  (DE B:24).  He rated his pain 7 out of 10 during his 
“episodes.”  (DE B:24).  He noted that these odd feelings stopped at his mid-calf.  (DE 
B:25).  Mr. Wolfe then outlined his low back pain, which he described as “the worst pain 
he has had in his entire life.”  (DE B:25).  He indicated that, at the time of the IME, his 
back was “way worse” than it was immediately following his injury, and that his low back 
continued to worsen.  (DE B:25).  He experienced “episodes” every two-to-three weeks 
where his pain moved to 11 out of 10.  (DE B:25).  The described “episodes” last three-
to-four days.  (DE B:25).  Heat helps to alleviate his pain.  (DE B:25).  Mr. Wolfe 
indicated that he undertook no physical activity, including no home exercising.  (DE 
B:25).  Finally, Mr. Wolfe noted that he uses a cart at the grocery store, but would not 
carry groceries into his home.  (DE B:25).  Instead, he has a friend help him bring his 
groceries into his home.  (DE B:25).   
 
Dr. Fields’ report continues with an outline of his physical examination of Mr. 
Wolfe, who he described as “somewhat confrontational.”  (DE B:26).  He observed that 
Mr. Wolfe stood from his seated position with no issues and ambulated with a normal, 
symmetric gait.  (DE B:26).  Mr. Wolfe also demonstrated the ability to perform a full 
squat.  (DE B:26).  Mr. Wolfe showed no tenderness to palpation on examination, and 
described his pain as “deep” when he experienced “episodes.”  (DE B:27).  Dr. Fields 
attempted to perform a straight leg raise test on Mr. Wolfe, but Mr. Wolfe refused to 
extend either leg and began to shake his legs when he attempted to extend them.  (DE 
B:27).  Dr. Fields opined that this appeared to be self-limiting behavior, as Mr. Wolfe 
could walk with both legs fully extended.  (DE B:27).  Dr. Fields documented “Waddell’s 
non-organic signs for low back pain” as follows” 
Sensitivity: Pain on light 
palpation in the lumbar 
region, Pain on 
disseminated palpation not 
corresponding to anatomical 
pattern 
No 
Simulation: Pain on axial 
cranial compression, Pain 
on shoulder rotation 
Yes.  Noted pain in this 
lumbar region with right 
sided shoulder rotation.   

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 15 
 
Distraction: Difference when 
raising leg in seated or 
supine position 
Unable to perform as would 
not fully extend either leg. 
Regional: Motor or sensitive 
abnormalities that cannot be 
explained on an anatomical 
basis 
No 
Sign of hyper-reaction: 
Verbalization or expression 
disproportionate to 
symptoms 
No 
(DE B:27).  Dr. Fields documented Mr. Wolfe’s range of motion as 30 degrees of 
forward flexion, 5 degrees of extension, 5 degrees of right lateral bend, and 5 degrees 
of left lateral bend.  (DE B:27).  Dr. Fields noted that after he examined Mr. Wolfe, he 
went to sit down in a chair and placed a pillow behind his back.  (DE B:28).   
 
The report continued with Dr. Fields’ opinions as to Mr. Wolfe’s condition 
following his work injury.  (DE B:28-30).  Dr. Fields indicated that Mr. Wolfe had mild 
compression fractures at T12 and L1 as a result of his fall, and that these healed by 
May 27, 2021.  (DE B:28).  Dr. Fields continued, “[i]t is my medical opinion that Mr. 
Wolfe’s current reported pain symptomatology is unrelated to the injury from December 
16, 2020.”  (DE B:28).  He goes on to concur with Drs. Abernathey and Chapman that 
there were no underlying physiological reasons to explain Mr. Wolfe’s ongoing pain, 
including no radiographic evidence of neurocompression due to a herniated disc, nor 
any signs of radiculopathy.  (DE B:28).  Dr. Fields found “clear inconsistencies” during 
the IME, which he attributed to symptom magnification due to Mr. Wolfe’s demonstration 
of pain on axial rotation and his unwillingness to straighten his legs.  (DE B:28).  Dr. 
Fields noted that Dr. Chapman and a physical therapist observed similar instances of 
symptom magnification.  (DE B:28).   
 
Dr. Fields next indicated that only the mild compression fractures at T12 and L1 
were causally related to the claimant’s fall on December 16, 2020.  (DE B:29).  Any 
ongoing symptoms were unrelated to the December 16, 2020, fall. (DE B:29).  Finally, 
Dr. Fields opined that Mr. Wolfe’s fractures were completely healed, and that there was 
no aggravation, lighting up or permanent change to explain his ongoing complaints.  
(DE B:29).  Considering the foregoing, Dr. Fields placed Mr. Wolfe at MMI as of May 27, 
2021.  (DE B:29).  He then considered permanent impairment pursuant to the Guides.  
(DE B:29).  He referenced Table 15-3 on page 384 of the Guides in placing Mr. Wolfe in 
the DRE Lumbar Category II, which resulted in a 5 percent whole person impairment.  
(DE B:29).  He then referenced Table 15-4 on page 389 of the Guides in opining that 

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 16 
 
Mr. Wolfe met the criteria for DRE Thoracic Category II, resulting in a 5 percent whole 
person impairment.  (DE B:29).  Dr. Fields used the combined values chart to arrive at a 
10 percent whole person impairment.  (DE B:29).   
 
Dr. Fields then provided commentary on Dr. Segal’s IME and resulting opinions.  
(DE B:30).  Specifically, he disagreed with Dr. Segal’s application of the Guides in using 
the range of motion (“ROM”) method for evaluating Mr. Wolfe’s lumbar spine.  (DE 
B:30).  Dr. Fields noted that the Guides provides that the ROM method should only be 
used if:  
A. There are fractures at more than 1 level in a spinal region. 
B. There is radiculopathy bilaterally or at multiple levels in the same spinal 
region 
C. There is multilevel motion segment alteration (such as multilevel fusion) 
in the same spinal region, or 
D. There is recurrent disc herniation or stenosis with radiculopathy at the 
same or a different level in the same spinal region; in this case, 
combined the ratings using the range of motion method. 
(DE B:30).  Dr. Fields opined, “…there is no objective medical evidence that Mr. Wolfe 
meets any of these criteria.  Therefore, Dr. Segal departs from the Guides methodology, 
producing an overstatement of impairment.”  (DE B:30).   
 
Dr. Fields recommended no permanent work restrictions for Mr. Wolfe due to his 
lack of objective deficits.  (DE B:30).  He also recommended no future treatments 
besides normal follow-up with Mr. Wolfe’s primary care provider for his personal health 
issues.  (DE B:30).  Mr. Wolfe testified that the whole examination took no more than 45 
minutes, and that he felt it was less thorough than Dr. Segal’s examination.  
(Testimony).   
 
At the time of the hearing, Mr. Wolfe continued to have low back pain.  
(Testimony).  He experienced “episodes” about once per month wherein he described 
“debilitating” pain and symptoms that prevent him from moving or living his life.   
(Testimony).  He rated his pain during these “episodes” as 25 out of 10, and testified 
further that he sometimes had numbness and tingling in his left leg.  (Testimony).  
These “episodes” would last for three-to-five days, and resulted in an inability to sleep.  
(Testimony).  He could tell when an “episode” was dissipating, as his pain would 
decrease to 7 out of 10.  (Testimony).  He noted that he could only sit in a chair for so 
long with a pillow behind his back before he needed to lay down in order to relieve rising 
back pain.  (Testimony).  At times, he used ice packs to help relieve his pain.  
(Testimony).  Mr.  Wolfe also testified that he avoided standing for longer than ten-to-
fifteen minutes, as it aggravated his back issues.  (Testimony).   
 
Mr. Wolfe testified that he used to walk one hour in the morning and the evening, 
but that he could no longer do so.  (Testimony).  He could still drive, but he used a 
heating pad on long trips.  (Testimony).  He also stopped several times on long trips in 
order to change positions.  (Testimony).  He modified the suspension on a Jeep 

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 17 
 
Wrangler that he previously owned so that it would not bounce around.  (Testimony).  
He also put a makeshift bed in the rear of his Jeep so that he could rest on long trips.  
(Testimony).  Mr. Wolfe testified that he has had a housekeeper since 2011 who does 
cleaning for him. (Testimony).  He noted that she has to do more work since his injury in 
helping to clean his apartment.  (Testimony).   
 
In his answers to interrogatories, Mr. Wolfe indicated that he earned ten 
thousand and 00/100 ($10,000.00) per month in investment income.  (DE I:78).  He also 
testified that he applied for over 100 jobs, but was unable to obtain employment.  
(Testimony).  He felt that he could not perform any of his previous jobs due to his 
ongoing pain in his low back.  (Testimony).  Instead, he spends his days reviewing and 
managing his investments.  (Testimony). 
 
Mr. Wolfe noted that he has experience using a cell phone and owns a computer.  
(Testimony).   
 
According to Mr. Wolfe he had not yet been released to work by a doctor.  
(Testimony).  He continued, “I don’t feel I’m capable of doing any kind of work.  … I’ve 
got to be upfront that I’ve got a back injury where I can’t lift, stand or sit for prolonged 
periods of time; and so I don’t think I’m going to get that job, if I’m honest that way…”  
(Testimony).  Mr. Wolfe also testified a number of times that he had extensive 
experience in human resources and seemed to have knowledge of the workers’ 
compensation system.  (Testimony).  It was thus odd that he testified that he did not 
know who his current doctor was and that he lacked knowledge that he was released 
from care.  (Testimony).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.904(3).   
Odd-Lot Permanent and Total Disability 
The first issue to consider in this case is whether the claimant may assert the 
applicability of the odd-lot doctrine as it relates to their permanent disability.  The 
claimant argues that they should be allowed to assert that they are permanently and 
totally disabled pursuant to the odd-lot doctrine despite not pleading permanent and 
total disability in their original notice and petition.  The claimant alleges that they raised 
the issue of “extent of disability” as a disputed issue in their original notice and petition, 
and that this is sufficient to put the defendants on notice of their assertion.   
The defendants argue that the claimant failed to plead permanent total disability 
as a disputed issue, and that it would be prejudicial to allow the claimant to assert that 
they are permanently and totally disabled pursuant to the odd-lot doctrine.   

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 18 
 
The claimant filed an original notice and petition (“petition”) on July 8, 2024.  In 
the petition, the claimant alleged that he sustained injuries to his left leg, left foot, back, 
and body as a whole as the result of a fall off of a truck on December 15, 2020.  The 
claimant further alleged disputed issues of: rate, causation, nature and extent of 
disability, interest, alternate care, medical expenses, mileage, penalty, and 
reimbursement for an IME.   
The claimant then amended their petition on July 11, 2024, to change the date of 
injury to December 16, 2020.  There were no additional amendments to the petition.   
It was not until the parties exchanged their proposed hearing reports shortly 
ahead of the hearing that the claimant informed the defendants that he asserted the 
application of the odd-lot doctrine to his permanent disability.  There is no record of any 
vocational expert report or any other report provided to the defendants at any point 
ahead of the hearing indicating that Mr. Wolfe was permanently and totally disabled, or 
that would indicate that the odd-lot doctrine would apply.  The claimant may point to the 
report of Dr. Segal; however, it is unclear as to when this was served on the defendants.   
Iowa Code section 86.14(1)5 states, “[i]n an original proceeding, all matters 
relevant to a dispute are subject to inquiry.”  Iowa Code section 86.17(1) provides, “[t]he 
deputy commissioner or the commissioner may make such inquiries in contested case 
proceedings as shall be deemed necessary, so long as such inquiries do not violate any 
of the provisions of section 17A.17.”  Further, Iowa Code section 86.18(1) states, 
“[e]vidence, process and procedure in contested case proceedings … shall be as 
summary as practicable consistent with the requirements of chapter 17A.”   
As noted by Deputy Humphrey in Maljkovic v. Tyson Foods, Inc.: 
The “as summary as practicable” statutory language dates back 
substantively to the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act’s inception.  See 
1913 Iowa Acts ch. 147, sec. 25.  The Iowa Supreme Court has held the 
analogous provision in the original version of the statute demonstrates, “It 
was the purpose of the legislature to create a tribunal to do rough justice—
speedy, summary, informal, untechnical.”  Zomer v. West River Farms, Inc., 
666 N.W.2d 130, 133 (Iowa 2003)(quoting Flint v. City of Eldon, 191 Iowa 
845, 847, 183 N.W. 344, 345 (1921)).  Under Iowa Code section 84A.5(6), 
the division of workers’ compensation is “responsible for the administration 
of the laws of this rate relating to workers’ compensation” and the executive 
head of the division is the commissioner.  Iowa Code section 86.8(1)(a) 
states the commissioner “shall” adopt rules necessary to implement Iowa’s 
workers’ compensation statutes. 
 
5 Iowa Code chapter 86 was transferred to Iowa Code section 10A.303, et seq. by the legislature, 
effective July 1, 2023.  See 2023 Iowa Acts ch. 19, sec. 1477.  Cases before the agency are governed by 
the edition of the Iowa Code in effect at the time of the alleged work injury.  See Stiles v. Annett Holdings, 
Inc., File No. 5064673 (App. Oct. 2, 2020).  This decision will cite to Iowa Code chapter 86 because the 
alleged injury date in this matter occurred before the changes to Iowa Code occurred. 

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 19 
 
See Maljkovic v. Tyson Foods, Inc., File No. 22005791.02 (Arb. Dec. Feb 20, 2025).   
In light of the statutory requirement, the agency has adopted rules governing 
contested cases in chapter 876 of the Iowa Administrative Code.  Specifically, 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 3.17(7) establishes forms to be used as an original notice and 
petition in certain types of cases, and references 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.6 for 
further description.  876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.6 states that a claimant’s Form 100 
“shall contain factors relevant to the contested case proceedings listed in rule 876—
4.1,” including an arbitration proceeding pursuant to Iowa Code section 86.14, such as 
the instant matter.  876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.6 provides further: 
A separate original notice and petition shall be filed for each claim that 
seeks benefits due to the occurrence of an injury, occupational disease or 
occupational hearing loss.  The original notice and petition shall allege a 
specific date of occurrence consisting of a day, month and year.  Alternate 
or multiple dates of occurrence may be alleged in the same original notice 
and petition if the claim or claims arose from the same occurrence or series 
of occurrences and uncertainty exists concerning the correct date of 
occurrence or the number of occurrences. 
See 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.6.  Our supreme court has held, “[a]n application 
for arbitration is not a formal pleading and is not to be judged by the technical rules of 
pleading.  Nor is the same conformity of proof to allegation necessary as in ordinary 
actions.”  Yaeger v. Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., 253 Iowa 369, 373-74, 112 N.W.2d 
299, 301-02 (1961).  “The whole idea is to get away from cumbersome procedures and 
technicalities of pleading, and to reach a right decision by the shortest and quickest 
possible route.”  Hoenig v. Mason & Hanger, Inc., 162 N.W.2d 188, 192-93 (Iowa 
1968)(quoting Larson, The Law of Workmen’s Compensation, Vol. 2, sec. 78.10).   
However, the court also recognized that, “there is a point beyond which the 
sweeping-aside of ‘technicalities’ cannot go, since evidentiary and procedural rules 
usually have an irreducible hard core of necessary function which cannot be dispensed 
with in any orderly investigation of the merits of a case.”  Id.  “When an employer is 
confronted with a petition for arbitration it has a substantive right to be at least generally 
informed as to the basic material facts upon which the employee relies as a basis for 
compensation in order to prepare and defend.”  Id. at 192.  This right is “a 
counterbalancing factor that cannot be ignored” when the sufficiency of the allegation in 
a petition are assessed.  Id.   
In this case, Sedona has the right to know the material facts on which Mr. Wolfe 
based his claim.  This includes the allegations to which type of compensation the 
claimant alleges entitlement, such as permanent and total disability under the odd-lot 
doctrine.  Knowing this information allows for an employer to adequately prepare their 
defense by consulting certain vocational experts and/or having the claimant examined 
by certain providers for IMEs.   

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 20 
 
Mr. Wolfe relies on checking the “extent of disability” box on the petition as 
providing Sedona with notice of his assertion of permanent and total disability as an 
issue.  I disagree.  Additionally, there is not sufficient evidence to show that Sedona was 
aware through the discovery process that Mr. Wolfe may be permanently and totally 
disabled.  For example, there are disputes among authorized treating providers and Dr. 
Segal as to the extent of permanent restrictions necessary for Mr. Wolfe.  Additionally, 
there are no reports of vocational experts present in the record.  These are generally 
crucial to deciding the issue of permanent and total disability under the odd-lot doctrine.   
As noted by Deputy Humphrey in Maljkovic, “[t]he legislature’s desire for speedy 
justice meted out by an informal tribunal does not override an employer’s right to know 
the material facts upon which an injured worker relies as the basis for workers’ 
compensation benefits.”  Maljkovic, File No. 22005791.02 at pg. 5.  The nature of 
benefits sought by the claimant are undoubtedly material facts.  Failing to plead 
permanent and total disability, even by the odd-lot doctrine, prevented Sedona from a 
full and fair opportunity to develop their defense regarding the claimant’s allegations.  
This is simply too prejudicial to the defendants to allow Mr. Wolfe to pursue such claims 
in this case.   
Industrial Disability 
The parties stipulated that Mr. Wolfe’s disability should be evaluated as an 
industrial disability in this case.   
Industrial disability was defined in Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 
587, 591, 258 N.W. 899, 902 (1935) as follows:  "It is therefore plain that the Legislature 
intended the term 'disability' to mean 'industrial disability' or loss of earning capacity and 
not a mere 'functional disability' to be computed in terms of percentages of the total 
physical and mental ability of a normal man." 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be 
given to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, 
loss of earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure 
to so offer.  McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Olson 
v. Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 1120, 125 N.W.2d 251, 256 (1963); Barton 
v. Nevada Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660, 663 (1961). 
Before considering the industrial disability analysis, I wanted to make note of my 
findings regarding Mr. Wolfe’s credibility.  Mr. Wolfe has extensive experience in 
workers’ compensation.  He was clearly an intelligent person.  However, some of his 
verbal answers consisted of questions posed in response to defendants’ counsel.  
Additionally, he testified that he modified his Jeep in order to have a bed in back in 
order to sleep on long drives.  However, Mr. Wolfe’s felony plea was in regard to a 
situation wherein he was apprehended in another city in Iowa, some distance from his 
home, while engaged in an attempt to entice a minor.  It was noted in the evidence that 

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 21 
 
Mr. Wolfe had a mattress in the back of his Jeep during his arrest.  It is difficult for me to 
square Mr. Wolfe’s explanation for why he had a mattress in the back of his Jeep with 
the circumstances of his felony conviction.  This, in addition to my other observations, 
concerned me with regard to Mr. Wolfe’s credibility. 
At the time of the hearing, Mr. Wolfe was 57 years old.  He possesses a high 
school diploma, and a bachelor’s degree from the University of Nebraska.  He later 
obtained an MBA from Westmar University in LeMars, Iowa.   
Mr. Wolfe worked in human resources for almost twenty years.  He worked in 
varying capacities from low level human resources work as a store manager to high 
level human resources positions for multi-national corporations like Pepsi, Honeywell, 
and Jack Links.  He is absolutely qualified to work in what would be considered “white 
collar” positions in human resources, as his prior experience suggests.  He also worked 
for almost ten years as a volunteer firefighter.   
In 2020, Mr. Wolfe began working for Sedona.  Sedona appears to be a staffing-
type agency, who placed Mr. Wolfe at Advanced Precast in Dyersville, Iowa.  Mr. Wolfe 
started as a concrete finisher wherein he cut foam to be placed inside of cast concrete 
slabs.  After Advanced Precast found out that Mr. Wolfe had experience driving large 
trucks as a volunteer firefighter, they moved him to a position operating concrete trucks 
at the Advanced Precast plant.  In order to move to this position, Mr. Wolfe needed to 
get a Class B CDL.  He maintained that CDL following the termination of his 
employment from Sedona, but he testified that he was unsure if he would be able to 
pass the DOT physical examination going forward.   
While working at Advanced Precast on December 16, 2020, Mr. Wolfe fell as he 
exited a cement truck.  He fell backwards onto his back, and felt an immediate 
“explosion” in his lower back.  He was eventually diagnosed with mild superior end-plate 
compression fractures at T12 and L1 in his back.  Following an initial visit, Mr. Wolfe 
commenced care which included an initial MRI, which showed no acute abnormalities 
beyond his fractures.  Despite this lack of objective evidence in the record, Mr. Wolfe 
was convinced that he had bulging discs and that this information was kept from him.   
Mr. Wolfe’s treatment continued with Dr. Chapman, who recommended that Mr. 
Wolfe wear a brace for his back.  He later recommended physical therapy.  By March of 
2021, Mr. Wolfe complained of significant pain in his back, which was worse when 
standing or sitting.  Dr. Chapman noted that there may be some discogenic explanation 
for these issues, but that the treatment plan remained unchanged.   
During an April of 2021 visit with Dr. Chapman, Mr. Wolfe presented as 
“significantly deteriorated” from his previous visit with Dr. Chapman.  As a result, Dr. 
Chapman ordered a repeat MRI of the lumbar spine.  Beyond the previously visualized 
fractures, the MRI showed mild degenerative findings, especially at L5-S1; however, 
there was no significant spinal canal or neural foraminal narrowing.  Dr. Chapman noted 
that the bulge seen at L5-S1 was “not dramatic.”  He further noted that Mr. Wolfe’s 
ongoing issues were “not classically discogenic…” but instead were the result of 

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 22 
 
“multiple pain generators.”  Dr. Chapman recommended continued physical therapy, 
and noted that, at the time, Mr. Wolfe could not “reliably work” due to his soreness.   
In mid-May of 2021, Sedona offered Mr. Wolfe a temporary accommodation on a 
full time basis in allowing Mr. Wolfe to work in general or office labor on a full-time basis.  
He was to be restricted from repetitive lifting, bending or twisting, and to be given an 
option to change position every 15 minutes.  He was to assemble papers into packets, 
and do other general office work duties.  Unfortunately, when Mr. Wolfe attempted this, 
he experienced pain in his low back and leg, which resulted in his transport to the 
hospital via EMS.  At the emergency room, he was diagnosed with a low back strain 
and discharged.   
Mr. Wolfe then returned to see Dr. Chapman on May 27, 2021, wherein he again 
complained of severe pain.  He recounted the issue at Sedona from mid-May to Dr. 
Chapman.  Mr. Wolfe told Dr. Chapman that he had to spend 14 to 16 hours per day in 
bed.  Dr. Chapman opined that Mr. Wolfe’s factures were healed and that he had no 
neurocompression in his low back.  Nevertheless, Dr. Chapman found Mr. Wolfe to 
have significant subjective pain with axial compression of his shoulders and with waist 
rotation.  According to the doctor these presentations represented symptom 
magnification.  Dr. Chapman also observed Mr. Wolfe to have pain with a “Faber 
maneuver” but not with other provocative testing in the area of the SI joint.  The doctor 
opined in his record: 
I am at a loss to explain his symptoms and why he is not able to tolerate 
even sedentary work.  I recommend he get another opinion.  There are 
some physical exam findings that suggest symptom magnification.  I do not 
doubt he is in some pain but I do not find any physiological explanation for 
this degree of disability based on what I see on his imaging.   
See JE 3:17.   
As a result of Dr. Chapman’s opinions, Mr. Wolfe was referred to Dr. Abernathey, 
a board certified neurosurgeon for an additional opinion.  Dr. Abernathey reviewed Mr. 
Wolfe’s records and the imaging, noting a “small disc protrusion at L5-S1.”  Dr. 
Abernathey opined: 
Scott Wolfe presents with subjective chronic low back pain related to a 
work event.  I do not recommend an aggressive neurosurgical stance due 
to a paucity of clinical or radiographic findings.  His neural elements are well 
decompressed on his MRI images and his neurologic function is intact.  … 
I offered him the opportunity to undergo an epidural steroid injection, but he 
declined.  The patient states that he had previously been vice president of 
human resources at a large corporation.  He says that injections were never 
helpful in any of his employees and he is adamantly opposed to pain 
management.  I will defer to his primary physicians regarding additional 
management. 

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 23 
 
See JE 5:19.  Mr. Wolfe opined that this visit with Dr. Abernathey lasted no more than 
five minutes.  Following this appointment, the doctor sent a check-box-type letter to an 
adjuster with ESIS.  In his letter, dated August 11, 2021, Dr. Abernathey indicated that 
Mr. Wolfe had no permanent impairment, nor did he require permanent work 
restrictions, as it related to the December 16, 2020, incident.  He further opined that Mr. 
Wolfe reached MMI as of June 16, 2021.   
After his appointment with Dr. Abernathey, Mr. Wolfe only visited with his primary 
care provider for medical care.  These visits consisted of maintenance for his diabetes 
and heart.  He made no mention during any of these visits of any back issues.  Mr. 
Wolfe attempted to explain away his failure to mention his low back pain to Mr. Kueter 
by arguing that she was not “the doctor approved for [his] back.”   
Claimant’s counsel then arranged for an IME with Dr. Segal.  Dr. Segal is board 
certified in brain and spine neurosurgery; however, he no longer practices medicine as 
a surgeon.  He performed an examination of Mr. Wolfe and measured the range of 
motion in his back.  He concluded that Mr. Wolfe’s fall and fractures “lit up” the disc 
findings at L5-S1 which caused Mr. Wolfe to have low back pain and left radicular 
symptoms.  He also opined that Mr. Wolfe had a slight compression of the left S1 nerve 
root.  His diagnoses of Mr. Wolfe were: 1. a superior endplate compression fracture at 
T12; 2. a superior endplate compression fracture at L1; 3. lumbar radiculopathy with 
possible direct injury to the nerve roots; and, 4. disc protrusion that was a possible 
permanent aggravation of his preexisting condition.  Dr. Segal opined that the 
December 16, 2020, work incident caused Mr. Wolfe’s diagnoses.  Despite some 
questionable findings, Dr. Segal found that Mr. Wolfe had radiculopathy.  Dr. Segal then 
used the AMA Guides to find that Mr. Wolfe had 34 percent whole person impairment.  
Dr Segal’s report contains the justification for his impairment rating.   
Dr. Segal opined that Mr. Wolfe no longer had “the work capacity that he did 
before” the December 16, 2020, work injury.  As a result, Dr. Segal recommended the 
following permanent work restrictions: 
Sitting: No restrictions if in the “right chair” with back support 
Standing: 15 minutes at a time, then rest for 15 minutes, total 4 hours per 
day 
Walking: 10 minutes at a time, then rest for 15 minutes, total 3 hours per 
day 
Bending, one bend: Occasionally (but very carefully) 
Bending, repetitive: Never 
Use of Vibratory Tools: Never 
Lifting/Carrying: 10 pounds Occasionally, 15 pounds, Rarely 

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 24 
 
Pushing/Pulling: Rarely 
Stairs: One flight Rarely 
Kneeling: Rarely 
Crouching/Squatting: Rarely 
Ladders: Never 
See CE 2:26.  Dr. Segal concluded that Mr. Wolfe reached MMI as of May 27, 2021.   
Mr. Wolfe then saw Dr. Fields, at the arrangement of the defendants.  Dr. Fields 
is board certified in occupational and environmental medicine.  He is also a certified 
independent medical examiner.  During his IME with Dr. Fields, Mr. Wolfe indicated that 
he had pain rated 9 out of 10, and that he could only do limited things with no difficulty.  
Mr. Wolfe told Dr. Fields that his low back continued to worsen following his injury, 
including “episodes” every two-to-three weeks wherein he rated his pain 11 out of 10 for 
three-to-four days.  Dr. Fields examined Mr. Wolfe and found him to have no tenderness 
to palpation on examination.  He also found Mr. Wolfe to have a normal, symmetric gait.  
Dr. Fields attempted to have Mr. Wolfe perform a straight leg raise test, but Mr. Wolfe 
refused to extend either leg during the examination.  Dr. Fields found Mr. Wolfe to have 
self-limiting behavior and documented certain non-organic signs for back pain in his 
examination.  Dr. Fields documented Mr. Wolfe’s range of motion in his low back.   
Dr. Fields opined that Mr. Wolfe had mild compression fractures at T12 and L1 
following his fall, which were healed by May 27, 2021.  Dr. Fields concurred with Drs. 
Abernathey and Chapman that Mr. Wolfe had no underlying physiological reasons to 
explain his ongoing pain, including no radiographic evidence of any neurocompression 
due to a herniated disc.  He also found Mr. Wolfe to have no signs of radiculopathy.  Dr. 
Fields also noted that Mr. Wolfe demonstrated “clear inconsistencies” during the IME 
such as pain on axial rotation and an unwillingness to straighten his legs.  Dr. Fields 
attributed these to symptom magnification.   
Dr. Fields placed Mr. Wolfe in the DRE Lumbar Category II and the DRE 
Thoracic Category II.  As a result, he provided Mr. Wolfe with a 10 percent whole 
person impairment based upon his fractures.  Dr. Fields was critical of Dr. Segal’s report 
insofar as it used the range of motion technique to calculate permanent disability.  Dr. 
Fields felt that Dr. Segal’s use of this technique resulted in “an overstatement of 
impairment.”   
Dr. Fields recommended no permanent work restrictions, nor further treatment.  
He placed Mr. Wolfe at MMI as of May 27, 2021.   
At the time of the hearing, Mr. Wolfe continued to complain of low back pain.  
Like his examination with Dr. Fields, he noted having “episodes” of pain which he now 
rated 25 out of 10.  He also complained of periodic numbness and tingling in his left leg.  

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 25 
 
He recounted difficulty with sitting or standing for long periods of time.  He noted 
modifying the suspension of his Jeep Wrangler in order to ease the bumpiness of its 
ride.  He also noted that he had a housekeeper.   
Mr. Wolfe was asked during the hearing whether he applied for any jobs since 
being released from medical care.  He noted that he attempted to work a light duty 
position before having a setback and going to the hospital via EMS.  He testified that he 
applied for over one hundred positions using LinkedIn, but that his LinkedIn was 
subsequently hacked.  Thus, he lost access to these applications.  Since regaining 
access to his LinkedIn, he applied for over one hundred more positions.  However, it is 
unclear as to the nature of these positions.  Mr. Wolfe supplied no evidence beyond his 
testimony as to his attempts to find further employment.  Mr. Wolfe testified that he felt 
he was not capable of performing any work.   
According to Sedona, they attempted to contact Mr. Wolfe on several occasions.  
He did not respond to their attempts to contact him until the final attempt.  During this 
call, a position was discussed with him.  He felt he could not do it.  There is a dispute as 
to whether he asked to be removed from consideration for further positions by Sedona 
or whether Sedona simply removed him from their consideration because he did not 
return contact with them and/or told them that he was not interested in a position with 
Sedona. 
I have concerns about Mr. Wolfe’s motivation to return to the workforce.  Several 
doctors place no restrictions on him at all.  Even Dr. Segal, his hand-chosen IME 
physician allows him to work in a sedentary position provided he had the “right chair” 
with back support.  This is certainly a reasonable accommodation that an employer 
could offer.  Considering his history in human resources, Mr. Wolfe would likely find a 
market in largely sedentary jobs.  However, Mr. Wolfe pled guilty to a Class D felony for 
enticing a minor in April of 2025.  This certainly would hamper his future employment 
prospects in human resources positions, and could hamper his prospects in other 
employment positions.   
In considering the extent of Mr. Wolfe’s industrial disability, I considered all of the 
relevant factors noted in our law.  I would initially note that Mr. Wolfe had several MRIs 
which showed only mild to minimal changes.  Dr. Chapman, the treating physician, 
noted the bulge to be “not dramatic.”  Additionally, Dr. Chapman found Mr. Wolfe’s 
issues to be “not classically discogenic…”  He also opined that he could not explain Mr. 
Wolfe’s ongoing symptoms nor why he could not tolerate even sedentary work.  He 
opined that Mr. Wolfe displayed certain findings that indicated symptom magnification, 
and recommended a second opinion.   
Dr. Abernathey provided a second opinion.  He opined that the objective 
radiographic findings showed nothing of consequence.  He opined that there was no 
significant neural compromise on the MRI despite the “small disc protrusion at L5-S1.”  
Dr. Abernathey recommended no work restrictions.   

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 26 
 
Dr. Fields examined Mr. Wolfe and found evidence of symptom magnification.  
He opined further that Mr. Wolfe’s pain symptomatology was unrelated to his December 
16, 2020, work injury.  Additionally, Dr. Fields opined that there was no radiographic 
evidence of neurocompression, nor was there any underlying physiological reason to 
explain Mr. Wolfe’s ongoing pain.  Dr. Fields documented a number of inconsistencies 
in Mr. Wolfe’s behavior during the examination.  He recommended no restrictions. 
Dr. Segal is the only doctor to opine that Mr. Wolfe has significant ongoing 
objective issues following his December 16, 2020, work incident.  Dr. Segal’s opinions 
appear to largely be based upon Mr. Wolfe’s subjective complaints.  As three different 
doctors note, Mr. Wolfe’s complaints do not correlate with the objective physiological 
findings.  He noted that Mr. Wolfe could return to work with no restrictions on sitting, 
provided he was given the “right chair.”   
As noted above, I also have concerns about Mr. Wolfe’s motivation to find further 
employment.  Considering even Dr. Segal would allow Mr. Wolfe to return to sedentary 
work under certain conditions, it is difficult to understand why he has not more diligently 
sought employment beyond simply LinkedIn searches.  I have these same concerns 
about his ability to find gainful employment due to his felony conviction.   
I also considered the functional impairment ratings provided by Drs. Segal and 
Fields, in addition to Dr. Abernathey’s opinion that Mr. Wolfe had no permanent 
impairment as a result of the December 16, 2020, work injury.   
Based upon my review of the relevant factors, I find that Mr. Wolfe has a fifteen 
percent industrial disability.  This results in an award of 75 weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits (15 percent x 500 weeks = 75 weeks).  Permanent partial disability 
benefits should commence on May 27, 2021, pursuant to the parties’ stipulation.  The 
defendants are entitled to a credit as stipulated. 
Rate 
The parties have a dispute as to the claimant’s gross earnings, and thus the rate 
of compensation.  As a result of this, there is also a dispute as to whether the 
defendants paid an improper rate from December 21, 2020, to March 18, 2021.   
Iowa Code 85.36 states “[t]he basis of compensation shall be the weekly 
earnings of the injured employee at the time of the injury.”  Weekly earnings are defined 
as the gross salary, wages, or earnings of an employee had the employee worked the 
customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee was injured as the 
employer regularly required for work of employment.  Id.  The subsections of Iowa Code 
85.36 set forth methods for computing weekly earnings depending upon the type of 
earnings and employment.   
In this case, Mr. Wolfe earned seventeen and 00/100 dollars ($17.00) per hour.  
He started working for Sedona on November 8, 2020.  He was paid on an hourly basis.  

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 27 
 
If an employee is paid on a daily, or hourly basis, or based upon output, weekly 
earnings are computed by dividing by thirteen (13) the earnings over the thirteen (13) 
week period immediately preceding the injury.  However, any week that does not fairly 
reflect the employee’s customary earnings shall be replaced by the closest previous 
week that is a fair representation of the employee’s customary earnings.  Iowa Code 
85.36(6).  The calculation shall include shift differential pay, but not overtime or 
premium pay in the calendar weeks immediately preceding the injury.  Id.  If the 
employee was absent during the time period subject to calculation for personal reasons, 
the weekly earnings are the amount the employee would have earned had the 
employee worked when work was available to other employees in a similar occupation 
for the employer.  Id.    
If an employee has been employed by the employer for less than thirteen (13) 
calendar weeks immediately preceding the injury, the employee’s weekly earnings shall 
be computed pursuant to Iowa Code 85.36(6), taking the earnings to be what the 
employee would have earned had the employee been so employed for the full thirteen 
(13) weeks immediately preceding the injury, and had worked when work was available 
to other similarly employed employees.  Iowa Code 85.36(7).  If the earnings of other 
employees cannot be determined, the employee’s weekly wage shall be the average 
computed for the number of weeks that the employee has been employed with the 
employer.  Id.   
In this case, the claimant worked for Sedona for four weeks prior to his injury.  
During this time, he worked 38 hours during the week of November 8, 2020, 25 hours 
during the week of November 15, 2020, 39.25 hours during the week of December 6, 
2020, and 36.75 hours during the week of December 13, 2020.   
The claimant argues that the 25 hours which he worked during the week of 
November 15, 2020, should be excluded as it represents a 34 percent drop in hours 
over the other three weeks.  Mr. Wolfe testified that it was his understanding that the 
position with Sedona was a full-time position.   
The defendants argue that all four weeks should be used in calculating the 
average hours considered in calculating the claimant’s gross earnings.  The defendants 
point to the testimony of Ms. Kiefer in support of their position.  Ms. Kiefer testified that 
Mr. Wolfe was not guaranteed a specific number of hours while working for Sedona and 
that his hours at Advanced Precast fluctuated based upon demand and weather 
conditions.   
Simply looking at the hours worked, it becomes apparent that a 25 hour week 
does not fairly reflect Mr. Wolfe’s customary earnings during the brief time that he 
worked for Sedona.  During the other three weeks in question, Mr. Wolfe worked 36 or 
more hours.  A reduction in hours of over 11 hours of wages is unrepresentative of Mr. 
Wolfe’s brief time with Sedona.   
For the reasons set forth above, I conclude that the claimant’s gross weekly 
wages are six hundred forty-six and 00/100 dollars ($646.00) per week.  The parties 

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 28 
 
stipulated that the claimant was single and entitled to two exemptions.  Thus, the 
claimant’s weekly workers’ compensation rate is four hundred twenty-four and 76/100 
dollars ($424.76) per week.   
As a result of this determination, it appears that the defendants paid an improper 
rate from December 21, 2020, to March 18, 2021.  Thus, the claimant is entitled to 
payment for the underpaid rate of compensation for this period. 
Medical Mileage 
 
The claimant makes a request in his brief for reimbursement of medical mileage.  
It should be noted that there is no note in the hearing report that the claimant is seeking 
reimbursement for medical mileage.  There is no indication that the claimant is seeking 
payment of medical expenses under section 8 of the hearing report, nor is there an 
indication that the claimant is seeking medical mileage under section 10 of the hearing 
report. 
 
“This agency relies on hearing reports to determine the issues to be decided by 
the presiding deputy commissioners.”  See Murray v. City of Missouri Valley, File Nos. 
1664884.03; 19700585.02 (App. Dec., June 14, 2022).  If an issue is not raised in a 
signed hearing report, nor is it raised with the deputy commissioner during a hearing, it 
is considered waived.  Id. at 3 (citing Bos v. Climate Eng’rs, 2016 WL 1178116, File No. 
5044761 (App. Dec. March 22, 2016); Hawkeye Wood Shavings v. Parrish, 2009 WL 
3337613 (Iowa Ct. App. 2009); Burtnett v. Webster City Custom Meats, Inc., 2007 WL 
254722 (Iowa Ct. App. 2007)).   
The claimant failed to raise medical mileage as an issue at the hearing, or in the 
hearing report.  Thus, this issue is waived. 
IME Reimbursement Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39 
 
The claimant seeks reimbursement for an IME performed by Dr. Segal, 
amounting to five thousand one hundred and 00/100 dollars ($5,100.00).  The 
defendants contend that the claimant is not entitled to reimbursement of Dr. Segal’s IME 
fees, as they were not reasonable. 
 
Iowa Code 85.39(2) states:   
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and upon 
delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its insurance 
carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, and reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses incurred for the examination. . .   An 
employer is only liable to reimburse an employee for the cost of an 
examination conducted pursuant to this subsection if the injury for which the 

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 29 
 
employee is being examined is determined to be compensable under this 
chapter or chapter 85A or 85B.  An employer is not liable for the cost of 
such an examination if the injury for which the employee is being examined 
is determined not to be a compensable injury.  A determination of the 
reasonableness of a fee for an examination made pursuant to this 
subsection shall be based on the typical fee charged by a medical provider 
to perform an impairment rating in the local area where the examination is 
conducted.     
Iowa Code section 85.39(2).     
 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant’s 
independent medical examination.  The claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  “The 
reasonableness of the fee for an IME ‘is to be based on the typical fee charged in the 
locale where the examination is performed.’”  P.M. Lattner Mfg. Co. v. Rife, 2 N.W.3d 
859, 867 (Iowa 2024)(citing Mid. Am. Constr. LLC v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838 (Iowa 
2024)).  The agency may also use its own experience in adjudicating IME 
reimbursement claims in the local area where the examination is performed.  Sandlin, 2 
N.W.3d at 849.  Additional facts to be considered for reasonableness should include the 
time spent with the claimant, the time spent on the report, and the time spent reviewing 
the claimant’s records.  Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d at 852 (citing Turner v. NCI Bldg. Sys., Inc., 
File No. 1652235.01 (Arb. Feb. 24, 2022)).   
An opinion finding a lack of causation is tantamount to a zero percent impairment 
rating.  Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 2021 WL 3890603 (Iowa Ct. App. 
2021).     
 
It is well accepted Iowa law that a claimant is only entitled to reimbursement for 
one IME pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39.  Larson Mfg. Co. Inc. v. Thorson, 763 
N.W.2d 842, 861 (Iowa 2009).   
 
In this case, the defendants only paid a portion of Dr. Segal’s IME fees.  The 
defendants contend that the claimant has not proven that Dr. Segal’s fee was 
reasonable.   
In using my experience adjudicating workers’ compensation matters in this area 
of Iowa, I do not find Dr. Segal’s fees to be reasonable.  Mr. Wolfe’s complaints are 
centered on his lower back.  Dr. Segal did not provide an impairment rating for any 
other part(s) of the body.  Also, Mr. Wolfe does not have a lengthy amount of treatment 
for his complaints.  Dr. Segal charged eight hundred fifty and 00/100 dollars ($850.00) 
per hour for six hours of work, which provides the total of five thousand one hundred 
and 00/100 dollars ($5,100.00).  I find that this is unreasonable considering the 
circumstances of this case.  Based upon my experience and the typical fees for an IME 
in this part of the state, a fee of four thousand and 00/100 dollars ($4,000.00) is 
reasonable.   

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 30 
 
It is unclear from the evidentiary record how much the defendants reimbursed 
Mr. Wolfe for Dr. Segal’s IME.  If the amount is less than four thousand and 00/100 
dollars ($4,000.00), then the defendants shall reimburse Mr. Wolfe for any difference.   
Reimbursement of No-Show Fee for IME 
 
The defendants seek reimbursement of a no-show fee for an IME with Dr. Fields.   
The undersigned could not find explicit justification in statute or the rules to 
assess a no-show fee.  The closest corollary would be to assess this no-show fee as a 
cost against the claimant.  Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy 
commissioner hearing the case.  See 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33; Iowa Code 
section 10A.328.  876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33(6) provides:  
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes.   
Pursuant to the holding in Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 
N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015), only the report of an IME physician, and not the examination 
itself, can be taxed as a cost according to 876 IAC 4.33(6).  The Iowa Supreme Court 
reasoned, “a physician’s report becomes a cost incurred in a hearing because it is used 
as evidence in lieu of the doctor’s testimony,” while “[t]he underlying medical expenses 
associated with the examination do not become costs of a report needed for a hearing, 
just as they do not become costs of the testimony or deposition.”  Id.  (noting 
additionally that “[i]n the context of the assessment of costs, the expenses of the 
underlying medical treatment and examination are not part of the costs of the report or 
deposition”).  The commissioner has found this rationale applicable to expenses 
incurred by vocational experts.  See  Kirkendall v. Cargill Meat Solutions Corp., File No. 
5055494 (App. Dec., December 17, 2018); Voshell v. Compass Group, USA, Inc., File 
No. 5056857 (App. Dec., September 27, 2019).   
 
The costs for the no-show fee do not fall under any of the eight categories 
contemplated by 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33.  The no-show fee is not the 
equivalent to a witness fee or the costs of a doctor’s deposition testimony.   

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 31 
 
 
Another possible avenue is a sanction pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 
4.36, which states: 
If any party to a contested case or an attorney representing such party shall 
fail to comply with these rules or any order of a deputy workers’ 
compensation commissioner or the workers’ compensation commissioner, 
the deputy workers’ compensation commissioner or the workers’ 
compensation commissioner may impose sanctions which may include 
dismissing the action without prejudice, excluding or limiting evidence, 
assessing costs or expenses, and closing the record in whole or in part to 
further activity by the party. 
See 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.36.  In failing to attend the scheduled IME, the 
claimant failed to comply with Iowa Code section 85.39(1).  This is not a failure to abide 
by the “rules” referenced by 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.36.  The scenario where 
this rule may apply would involve the defendants seeking (and being granted) an order 
to compel the claimant to attend the IME pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39(1).  If the 
claimant failed to attend the IME following the issuance of an order to compel the 
claimant to attend the IME, then sanction pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 
4.36 may be appropriate.  However, the defendants neither sought, nor obtained, an 
order to compel the claimant to attend the incidental IME.   
 
Iowa Code section 85.39(1) provides that when an employee refuses to submit to 
an IME pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39(1), the employee forfeits their right to any 
compensation for the period of the refusal.  See Iowa Code section 85.39(1).  This is the 
consequence or sanction of the failure to comply with the statute.  There is no other 
avenue for recovery of the no-show fee for the defendants in this case.   
 
Therefore, I find that the claimant is not responsible to reimburse the no-show fee 
to the defendants. 
Costs 
The claimant seeks an award of costs.  Costs are to be assessed at the 
discretion of the deputy commissioner hearing the case.  See 876 Iowa Administrative 
Code 4.33; Iowa Code section 10A.328.  876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33(6) 
provides:  
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 32 
 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes.   
Pursuant to the holding in Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 
N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015), only the report of an IME physician, and not the examination 
itself, can be taxed as a cost according to 876 IAC 4.33(6).  The Iowa Supreme Court 
reasoned, “a physician’s report becomes a cost incurred in a hearing because it is used 
as evidence in lieu of the doctor’s testimony,” while “[t]he underlying medical expenses 
associated with the examination do not become costs of a report needed for a hearing, 
just as they do not become costs of the testimony or deposition.”  Id.  (noting 
additionally that “[i]n the context of the assessment of costs, the expenses of the 
underlying medical treatment and examination are not part of the costs of the report or 
deposition”).  The commissioner has found this rationale applicable to expenses 
incurred by vocational experts.  See  Kirkendall v. Cargill Meat Solutions Corp., File No. 
5055494 (App. Dec., December 17, 2018); Voshell v. Compass Group, USA, Inc., File 
No. 5056857 (App. Dec., September 27, 2019).   
 
The claimant seeks one hundred twenty-eight and 75/100 dollars ($128.75) in 
costs for the filing fee.  In my discretion, I award the claimant the costs of the filing fee of 
one hundred twenty-eight and 75/100 dollars ($128.75).   
 
The claimant also seeks two hundred seventy-two and 05/100 dollars ($272.05) 
in costs for the claimant’s deposition transcript.  The claimant’s deposition transcript 
was not entered into evidence by either party.  In my discretion, I decline to award this 
as a cost. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
That the claimant is not entitled to seek odd-lot permanent total disability 
benefits, as these were not properly pled in his petition.   
That the claimant sustained a fifteen (15) percent industrial disability, resulting in 
entitlement to seventy-five (75) weeks of compensation at the below rate.   
That the defendants are entitled to a credit as stipulated in the hearing report. 
That the claimant’s gross weekly wages were six hundred forty-six and 00/100 
dollars ($646.00) per week, that he was single, and entitled to two exemptions. 
That the claimant’s rate of compensation is four hundred twenty-four and 76/100 
dollars ($424.76) per week. 

WOLFE V. SEDONA STAFFING, INC. 
Page 33 
 
That the defendants shall reimburse the claimant for underpayment of temporary 
disability benefits from December 21, 2020, to March 18, 2021.   
That the claimant failed to raise the issue of medical mileage at hearing, and thus 
waived the issue. 
That the defendants shall reimburse the claimant four thousand and 00/100 
dollars ($4,000.00) for Dr. Segal’s IME report. 
That the defendants shall reimburse the claimant one hundred twenty-eight and 
75/100 dollars ($128.75) in costs incurred. 
That the defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together 
with interest.  All interest on past due weekly compensation benefits shall be payable at 
an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal 
reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent.  
See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018).   
That the defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by 
this agency pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 3.1(2) and 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 11.7.   
Signed and filed this __18th _ day of December, 2025. 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Zeke McCartney (via WCES) 
Peter Thill (via WCES) 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
            ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
