Case Number: 20001051.02
Case Title:  DENEMARK, BRIAN V. ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND
Doc Type:    Decision - Court of Appeals
Source:      Denemark, Brian-20001051.02.Court of Appeals Decision.pdf
========================================================================

IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF IOWA 
 
No. 21-1851 
Filed September 21, 2022 
 
 
BRIAN DENEMARK, 
 
Petitioner-Appellant, 
 
vs. 
 
ARCHER DANIELS MIDLAND COMPANY, 
 
Respondent-Appellee. 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Polk County, Scott D. Rosenberg, 
Judge. 
 
 
An employee appeals the district court’s ruling on judicial review, which 
affirmed the workers’ compensation commissioner’s denial of two requests for 
alternate medical care.  AFFIRMED. 
 
 
Dennis Currell, Cedar Rapids, and Jeff Carter of Jeff Carter Law Offices, 
P.C., Des Moines, for appellant. 
 
Jean Z. Dickson and Peter J. Thill of Betty, Neuman & McMahon, P.L.C., 
Davenport, for appellee. 
 
 
Heard by Ahlers, P.J., and Badding and Chicchelly, JJ.

 
2
CHICCHELLY, Judge. 
 
Brian Denemark appeals the district court’s ruling on judicial review, which 
affirmed the workers’ compensation commissioner’s denial of two applications for 
alternate medical care.  He alleges the district court committed legal error by 
finding the agency had discretion in determining whether to authorize alternate 
medical care and by finding his employer investigated causation.  He also alleges 
the court erred by making its own legal findings and requiring him to prove his 
employer had an ulterior motive in denying care.  Finally, Denemark contends the 
district court erred by finding the agency’s decision did not conflict with its prior 
precedent.  Because the district court properly applied the law in conducting 
judicial review of the agency’s decision, we affirm. 
 
I. Background Facts. 
 
Denemark injured his left arm while working at Archer Daniels Midland 
Company (ADM)1 in December 2019.  His injury includes a longitudinal tear of the 
triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC).  ADM authorized Denemark to receive 
treatment from Dr. Meiying Kuo at Physician’s Clinic of Iowa (PCI), which included 
two ulnocarpal joint injections.  But Denemark reported that his pain began to 
return one month after the second injection and eventually worsened.  As a result, 
Dr. Kuo recommended at an August 2020 appointment that Denemark undergo 
arthroscopic surgery and debridement of the TFCC.  The surgery was scheduled 
for October 5. 
 
1 Throughout the opinion, we will refer to both Denemark’s employer and its 
workers’ compensation carrier as ADM. 

 
3
 
On September 18, ADM informed PCI that it had concerns about 
Denemark’s injury and intended to investigate causation before authorizing 
surgery.  PCI thus cancelled the scheduled surgery.   
 
ADM authorized Denemark’s surgery on October 21.  It then authorized 
PCI’s request to transfer Denemark’s care to the University of Iowa Hospitals and 
Clinics (UIHC) for the surgery.  Denemark was originally scheduled for an 
appointment with Dr. Ericka Lawler at UIHC on November 24, but the UIHC 
rescheduled for December 3.  ADM provided Denemark with transportation to the 
appointment.   
 
After the appointment with Dr. Lawler, Denemark scheduled the authorized 
surgery for December 29.  Because of a scheduling conflict, Denemark later 
rescheduled the surgery for January 12.  The UIHC required that Denemark have 
a pre-surgical screening for COVID-19 the day before surgery.   
 
Although ADM was to provide transportation to both Denemark’s COVID-
19 screening and surgery, it failed to schedule transportation to the screening.  
Because Denemark could not obtain a screening on his own in time to receive the 
results before the scheduled surgery, surgery had to again be rescheduled.  The 
surgery took place on January 29. 
 
II. Proceedings. 
 
Denemark petitioned for workers’ compensation benefits on October 19, 
2020.  Between then and his surgery three months later, Denemark filed two 
applications for alternate medical care.  He filed the first application on November 
3, alleging that ADM intentionally interfered with the medical care recommended 
by (1) sending its safety manager to attend Denemark’s medical appointments until 

 
4
January 2020, (2) seeking an improper causation opinion to delay the surgery, and 
(3) transferring Denemark’s care to the UIHC.  On November 17, after a hearing, 
a deputy workers’ compensation commissioner denied the application.  Although 
two months had passed since Dr. Kuo recommended Denemark undergo surgery, 
the deputy commissioner noted that Denemark “[wa]s not seeking an order 
directing ADM to schedule the surgery or any other treatment” and instead 
requested to direct his own care.  The deputy commissioner did not find the 
testimony about ADM’s safety manager attending medical appointments 
persuasive to support ongoing interference because the safety manager had not 
attended an appointment since January 2020.  The deputy commissioner found 
Denemark failed to show ADM “abandoned care or that the care offered [was] 
ineffective, inferior, or less extensive than the care requested by Denemark.” 
 
Denemark filed his second application for alternate care after the UIHC 
cancelled the January 12 surgery.  He alleged ADM intentionally failed to provide 
transportation to interfere with his medical care.  Denemark asked for an order for 
surgery with Dr. Lawler, uninterrupted follow-up care, and the ability to self-direct 
his care.  During the January 26 hearing, ADM agreed to provide Denemark 
transportation to the COVID-19 screening and surgery, and follow all of Dr. 
Lawler’s treatment recommendations.  The deputy commissioner denied 
Denemark’s request to self-direct his care, finding that ADM followed Dr. Lawler’s 
treatment recommendations and scheduled the recommended surgery, which was 
postponed by Denemark.  Although the rescheduled surgery was cancelled when 
ADM failed to provide Denemark transportation to the COVID-19 screening, it was 
rescheduled to take place seventeen days later.  The deputy commissioner found 

 
5
Denemark failed to prove ADM engaged in ongoing interference, that ADM had 
abandoned care, or that the care ADM offered was ineffective, inferior, or less 
extensive than the care Denemark requested. 
 
Denemark separately petitioned the district court for judicial review of the 
denial of both applications for alternate care.  In March 2021, the district court 
consolidated the petitions.  In July 2021, the district court entered its ruling on 
judicial review affirming both decisions.   
 
III. Discussion. 
 
The district court may grant relief to a petitioner seeking judicial review of 
an agency action only when the agency action (1) prejudiced the petitioner’s 
substantial rights and (2) falls within one of the criteria set forth in Iowa Code 
section 17A.19(10) (2020).  See Burton v. Hilltop Care Ctr., 813 N.W.2d 250, 256 
(Iowa 2012).  On appeal, our review is limited to determining whether the district 
court correctly applied the law in exercising its review.  See Tyson Foods, Inc. v. 
Hedlund, 740 N.W.2d 192, 195 (Iowa 2007).  If we reach the same conclusions as 
the district court, we affirm; if not, we reverse or modify.  See id.  Our standard of 
review therefore depends on the issues raised on appeal.  See Jacobson Transp. 
Co. v. Harris, 778 N.W.2d 192, 196 (Iowa 2010).   
 
Beginning with our standard of review, Denemark claims the agency’s 
decisions violate four of the criteria in section 17A.19(10).  He alleges the agency’s 
decision was: (1) based on “an erroneous interpretation of a provision of law whose 
interpretation has not clearly been vested by a provision of law in the discretion of 
the agency,” see Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(c); (2) based on a determination of fact 
that is not supported by substantial evidence in the record before the court when 

 
6
that record is viewed as a whole, id. § 17A.19(10)(f); (3) inconsistent with the 
agency’s prior practice or precedents, id. § 17A.19(10)(h); and (4) an otherwise 
unreasonable, arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion, id. § 17A.19(10)(n). 
 
We next turn to the statute providing an employee with means of receiving 
alternate medical care.  Iowa Code section 85.27(4) states that under our workers’ 
compensation statute, 
the employer is obliged to furnish reasonable services and supplies 
to treat an injured employee, and has the right to choose the 
care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly and be reasonably 
suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the 
care offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following 
which the employer and the employee may agree to alternate care 
reasonably suited to treat the injury.  If the employer and employee 
cannot agree on such alternate care, the commissioner may, upon 
application and reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow 
and order other care. 
 
This procedure “permits disputes over the medical care for compensable injuries 
to be quickly resolved in advance of a contested case hearing on a claim for 
workers’ compensation benefits.”  R.R. Donnelly & Sons v. Barnett, 670 N.W.2d 
190, 195 (Iowa 2003).  The commissioner may order alternate care if the treatment 
provided by the employer is not prompt or reasonably suited to treat the injury, or 
if the treatment causes “undue inconvenience to the employee.”  Id.  The employee 
bears the burden of proving the medical care authorized by the employer is 
unreasonable.  Id.  “[W]hen evidence is presented to the commissioner that the 
employer-authorized medical care has not been effective and that such care is 
‘inferior or less extensive’ than other available care requested by the employee, 
the commissioner is justified by section 85.27 to order the alternate care.”  Pirelli-

 
7
Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 437 (Iowa 1997) (internal 
citation omitted). 
 
A. Agency discretion. 
 
Denemark first alleges the district court erred by holding the commissioner’s 
authority to order alternate medical care is discretionary rather than mandatory.  
The district court based its determination on the use of “may” in the sentence 
stating that “the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable proofs of the 
necessity therefor, allow and order other care.”  Iowa Code § 85.27(4) (emphasis 
added).  When the word “may” is used in a statute, it confers a power.  See id. 
§ 4.1(30)(c).  Usually, the use of “may” implies an act is discretionary.  See Fortune 
v. State, 957 N.W.2d 696, 703 (Iowa 2021) (stating that “the term ‘may’ ordinarily 
vests [the actor] with discretion”); see also Biden v. Texas, 142 S. Ct. 2528, 2541 
(2022) (“This Court has ‘repeatedly observed’ that ‘the word “may” clearly connotes 
discretion.’” (citation omitted)); Kopecky v. Iowa Racing & Gaming Comm’n, 891 
N.W.2d 439, 443 (Iowa 2017) (“When the legislature uses the term “may” in a 
statute, it is usually permissive.”).  There are occasions when “may” is interpreted 
to confer a mandatory duty.  See Iowa Nat’l Indus. Loan Co. v. Iowa State Dep’t of 
Revenue, 224 N.W.2d 437, 440 (Iowa 1974) (noting that the court applies the 
construction that best carries the purpose of the statute into effect).  But when both 
“may” and “shall” are used in the same statue, it suggests the legislature has used 
them in their usual and ordinary sense: 
Where both mandatory and directory verbs are used in the same 
statute, or in the same section, paragraph, or sentence of a statute, 
it is a fair inference that the legislature realized the difference in 
meaning and intended that the verbs should carry with them their 
ordinary meanings.  Especially is this true where ‘shall’ and ‘may’ are 

 
8
used in close juxtaposition in a statutory provision, under 
circumstances that would indicate that a different treatment is 
intended for the predicates following them. 
 
Id. at 442 (citation omitted).   
 
Section 85.27(4) uses “may” four times while “shall” appears six times, 
showing the legislature intended them to have different meanings.  As used 
elsewhere in section 85.27(4), “may” is used in the discretionary sense to refer to: 
the possibility of an employer and an employee agreeing, an employee’s ability to 
choose medical care at the employer’s expense in certain emergencies, and the 
choice to have a hearing by telephone or in-person.  Likewise, “shall” is used 
elsewhere in the section in the mandatory sense for the categorization of actions 
under the subsection as original proceedings, how the hearing is conducted, and 
the timeframe in which a decision is issued.   
 
Denemark argues that section 85.27(4) use of “may” does not provide the 
agency with “absolute discretion” when deciding to grant requests for alternate 
medical care.  He claims that its use is given context by the conditional modifier 
that follows the term: “upon . . . reasonable proofs of the necessity thereof.”  In 
Denemark’s view, “may” is used because an employee must first meet the requisite 
burden of proof.  But section 85.27(4) uses “shall” in a similar way when describing 
how a hearing is conducted: “A request for an in-person hearing shall be approved 
unless the in-person hearing would be impractical because of the distance 
between the parties to the hearing.”  Id. (emphasis added).  The legislature could 
have required the commissioner grant a request for alternate medical care if an 
employee provides reasonable proof of its necessity by stating that “the 
commissioner shall, upon application and reasonable proofs of the necessity 

 
9
therefor, allow and order other care.”  It did not.  Instead, it allowed the 
commissioner discretion in deciding whether to grant an application for alternate 
medical care when an employee provides reasonable proof of its necessity.  Of 
course, that discretion must be “reasoned rather than absolute.”  Johnston v. Iowa 
Real Est. Comm’n, 344 N.W.2d 236, 239 (Iowa 1984) (noting that discretionary 
agency action depends on the facts before it and that “the applicant, the public and 
the courts upon judicial review are all entitled to know” the reason for the agency’s 
decision); see also Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(n) (allowing the court on judicial 
review to grant relief when the agency’s action is “unreasonable, arbitrary, 
capricious, or an abuse of discretion”).   
 
The district court applied the proper standard on judicial review of 
Denemark’s application for alternate care. 
 
B. Excusable delay. 
 
Denemark next contends the district court applied the wrong legal standard 
to excuse ADM’s denials of or delays in providing care.  He argues the court erred 
by finding that “ADM examined whether Denemark’s injury that needed surgery in 
August 2020 was the same workplace injury from December 2019, or whether 
there was some intervening cause, unrelated to the workplace injury, that 
necessitated surgery.”  He claims that the record does not support a finding that 
ADM ever investigated causation. 
 
The district court made the statement Denemark complains of in response 
to an argument advanced by Denemark.  In his brief for judicial review, Denemark 
claimed that ADM intentionally interfered with his medical care by failing to approve 
the surgery before its scheduled date of October 5 and no evidence showed “the 

 
10 
cancellation was unintentional or otherwise justifiable or excusable.”  The district 
court disagreed, noting that once an employer’s right to control medical care 
attaches under section 85.27(4), “it remains with the employer under the statute 
until the employer denies the injury is work-related, withdraws authorization of the 
care, or until the commissioner orders alternative care.”  Bell Bros. Heating & Air 
Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 207 (Iowa 2010).  Before losing the right 
to direct medical care, an employer must deny that the employee’s injury arose in 
the course and scope of employment.  See id.  A dispute over the extent of an 
injury that an employer concedes arose in the course and scope of employment 
“is not a ground, standing alone, for a determination that the employer has forfeited 
its right to select the medical care.”  Id.  In other words, any delay in approving the 
surgery for such an investigation would justify or excuse it.  The communications 
documented by PCI and Denemark’s attorney show that the reason given for the 
delay was for investigation.  However much investigation occurred, the overall 
delay was brief; ADM informed PCI of its concerns about causation on September 
18 but approved the surgery on October 21.2 
 
Denemark had the burden of showing the medical care ADM authorized 
was ineffective, inferior, or less extensive than the care he sought.  See Pirelli-
Armstrong Tire Co., 562 N.W.2d at 437.  The deputy commissioner found that 
 
2 Denemark claims a delay of 165 days from the time Dr. Kuo recommended 
surgery on August 18 until the surgery was performed on January 29.  But this 
claim overlooks intervening delays that occurred during that period, which spanned 
two applications for alternate care, with UIHC rescheduling one appointment and 
Denemark rescheduling the December 29 surgery. 

 
11 
Denemark failed to do so on the delay in surgery scheduled for October 5.  The 
district court agreed, and we reach the same conclusion. 
 
C. Improper fact-findings and legal elements. 
 
Denemark contends the district court applied the wrong legal standard by 
engaging in its own fact-finding during the judicial review process.  We disagree.  
The district court found substantial evidence supports the factual findings that led 
to the denial of Denemark’s application for alternative care.  We reach the same 
conclusion. 
 
We also reject Denemark’s claim that the district court required proof of an 
ulterior motive for ADM’s delay or denial of medical care.  The district court’s ruling 
states there is “little or no evidence to suggest that ADM had ulterior motives to 
prevent Denemark from receiving proper care.”  But rather than imposing this 
burden on Denemark, the district court was merely responding to Denemark’s 
argument on judicial review.      
 
D. Agency precedent. 
 
Finally, Denemark contends the agency failed to explain its departure from 
prior precedents.  See Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(h) (allowing relief when an agency 
action “is inconsistent with the agency’s prior practice or precedents”). 
 
In applying the provisions of the Iowa Administrative Act on prior agency 
precedent, the supreme court had distinguished a final decision in a contested 
workers’ compensation case from an agency decision rendered after a public 
hearing when there is no contested case.  See Finch v. Schneider Specialized 
Carriers, Inc., 700 N.W.2d 328, 332 (Iowa 2005).  In the latter, “[t]he controlling 
legal standards are those set out in the workers’ compensation statutes and in this 

 
12 
court’s opinions, not in prior agency decisions.”  Id.  The agency followed the 
statute in denying Denemark’s application for alternate care, and Denemark has 
failed to show the agency decision here conflicts with the precedent he cites. 
 
IV. Conclusion. 
 
The district court properly applied the law on judicial review of the agency 
action.  Because we reach the same conclusions as the district court, we affirm. 
 
AFFIRMED. 
 
 
 
