Case Number: 24004114.01
Case Title:  HALL, NICHOLAS V. HUSSMAN TAYLOR INDUSTRIES
Doc Type:    Decision - Alternate Medical Care
Source:      Hall Nicholas-24004114.01m.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
NICHOLAS DOUGLAS HALL, 
No. 24004114.01 
 
Claimant, 
vs. 
 
 
HUSSMAN TAYLOR INDUSTRIES, 
ALTERNATE CARE DECISION 
 
Employer, 
TOKIO MARINE AMERICA C/O 
GALLAGHER BASSETT SERVICES, 
INC., 
Headnotes: 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
 
Defendants. 
I.  
STATEMEN T OF TH E C AS E. 
On July 11, 2024, Nicholas Douglas Hall applied for alternate care under Iowa 
Code section 85.27 and Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.48. The defendants, 
employer Hussman Taylor Industries (Hussman) and insurance carrier Tokio Marine 
America c/o Gallagher Bassett Services, Inc. (Gallagher Bassett), filed their answer on 
July 22, 2024. The defendants accepted liability for the back injury alleged by Hall. 
The undersigned presided over a telephone alternate care hearing on July 23, 
2024, which was recorded. The audio recording constitutes the official record of the 
proceeding under Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.48(12). Hall participated 
personally and through attorney Nicholas Cooling1. The defendants participated through 
attorney Lee P. Hook.  
II.  
ISSU E . 
The issue in this case is whether Hall is entitled to alternate care in the form of 
care by an orthopedic specialist—specifically, Dr. Chris Nelson at Des Moines 
Orthopedic Surgeons (DMOS). 
                                                 
1 Adam Bates is claimant's attorney, but he had a scheduling conflict and could not attend the 
hearing; Nicholas Cooling represented the claimant in the hearing in his stead. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Jul-24  09:57:18     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HALL V. HUSSMAN TAYLOR INDUSTRIES 
Page 2 
 
III .  
FIN D IN GS OF FAC T . 
The evidentiary record consists of: 
 Claimant’s Exhibits A through B;  
 Defendants’ Exhibits A through D; and 
 Hearing testimony by Hall and Cynthia Peterson, a risk manager at 
Hussmann who primarily handles workers’ compensation. 
After careful consideration of the evidence the undersigned enters the following findings 
of fact. 
Hall sustained an injury arising out of and in the course of his employment with 
Hussman on March 22, 2024. The defendants admitted such in their answer while 
maintaining that the nature and extent of that injury remains unknown. This question is 
at the center of Hall’s request for alternate care. 
After the injury, the defendants authorized care with Katie Swift, A.R.N.P., a 
nurse practitioner at UnityPoint. Swift prescribed conservative care in the form of 
physical therapy and medication. The conservative care failed to alleviate Hall’s 
symptoms and he told Swift as much on June 20, 2024, and requested magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) of his back. Nonetheless, Swift informed Hall that an MRI was 
not in his treatment plan and released him to return to work without accommodation 
despite his ongoing symptoms. (Cl. Ex. A; Testimony) 
At all times material to this alternate care case, Peterson was Hall’s contact for 
workers’ compensation with Hussman. On June 20 or 21, 2024, Hall informed Peterson 
via email that he wanted to see his personal physician because Swift had released him 
from care despite his ongoing complaints. Peterson responded by telling Hall that they 
would not authorize an appointment with his personal physician and would arrange care 
with another provider for his back. Peterson spoke with Swift about continuing care, 
Swift voiced her preference for transferring care with a medical doctor, and suggested 
Jon Yankey, M.D., an occupational medicine doctor at UnityPoint. (Testimony) 
Through claimant’s counsel, Hall informed Gallagher Bassett resolution associate 
Matthew Matias that he was dissatisfied with care. In an email dated June 20, 2024, 
claimant’s counsel informed Matias that physical therapy and medication had failed to 
resolve Hall’s symptoms and Dr. Swift was unwilling to get an MRI or provide additional 
care. Claimant’s counsel “request[ed] referral to a different Occupational Medicine 
Physician for further evaluation and treatment” and suggested two potential choices. As 
well, claimant’s counsel stated, “However, given Mr. Hall’s lack of progress with PT and 
pain medications it would likely be of more benefit to the treatment of Mr. Halls’ [sic] 
condition to refer him to an orthopedic or neurosurgeon for further evaluation and 
treatment.” He suggested Chris Nelson, D.O., at Des Moines Orthopaedic Surgeons 
(DMOS) as an option. (Cl. Ex. A) 

HALL V. HUSSMAN TAYLOR INDUSTRIES 
Page 3 
 
Matias replied via email on June 24, 2024, stating, “Very sorry to hear Mr. Halls 
[sic] recovery is not going well. I authorize the switch to Dr. Chris Nelson at DMOS.” Hall 
attempted to schedule an appointment with Dr. Nelson but was unsuccessful because 
DMOS requires the insurance carrier or, as in the current case, third party administrator 
to do so. This prompted claimant’s counsel to follow-up by email with Matias on June 
25, 2024, asking him to schedule the authorized appointment with Dr. Nelson. Despite 
Gallagher Bassett giving express authorization for the appointment, the defendants 
never scheduled the authorized appointment with Dr. Nelson at DMOS. (Cl. Ex. B; Def. 
Ex. A; Testimony)  
After claimant’s counsel contacted Gallagher Bassett, Peterson learned that Hall 
had retained an attorney, so she and Gallagher Bassett engaged defense counsel 
about the case. On June 27, 2024, defense counsel emailed claimant’s counsel about 
the case and asked him to contact him regarding care for Hall’s work injury. Hussman 
scheduled an appointment for Hall to see Dr. Yankey, an occupational medicine doctor 
at UnityPoint on July 9, 2024. Hussman telephoned Hall to notify him of the appointment 
but he did not answer the calls and his voicemail was full. Hall did not attend the 
appointment as scheduled. (Cl. Ex. B; Def. Ex. A; Testimony) 
Defense counsel sent a letter dated July 10, 2024, via email to claimant’s 
counsel. In the letter, defense counsel informed claimant’s counsel of the appointment 
scheduled with Dr. Yankey on the day before. He also states that the authorization for 
an appointment with Dr. Nelson at DMOS was rescinded. (Def. Ex. A)   
Defense counsel suggested that the manner to best resolve Hall’s dissatisfaction 
with care was to schedule an appointment with Dr. Yankey “to see what additional 
treatment recommendations he can provide.” (Def. Ex. A) Defense counsel followed up 
with a letter dated July 11, 2024, sent via email to claimant’s counsel, with notice that 
Hussman had scheduled another appointment with Dr. Yankey for July 17, 2024. (Def. 
Ex. B)  
Hall went to the July 17 appointment with Dr. Yankey. Dr. Yankey requested an 
x-ray which showed no acute changes to the lumbar or thoracic spine. He prescribed 
work restrictions, over-the-counter medication in the form of Tylenol or ibuprofen, ice, 
and daily stretching exercises. Dr. Yankey also referred Hall for an MRI of the thoracic 
and lumbar spine with a follow-up appointment set to go over what the MRI shows. (Def. 
Ex. D) 
The defendants chose Swift, a nurse, to treat Hall’s injury. The conservative 
course of care did not alleviate his symptoms. Hall expressed his dissatisfaction with 
Swift’s care directly to Peterson with Hussman and, through counsel, to Gallagher 
Bassett. Peterson informed Hall they would arrange care with another provider. 
Subsequently, Gallagher Bassett informed Hall, through claimant’s counsel, that the 
defendants authorized care with Dr. Nelson. However, the defendants did not schedule 
an appointment with Dr. Nelson; instead, they arranged care with Dr. Yankey, who 
referred him for an MRI and arranged for a follow-up appointment to go over the results. 

HALL V. HUSSMAN TAYLOR INDUSTRIES 
Page 4 
 
Despite the defendants arranging care with Dr. Yankey, who referred Hall for an 
MRI, he remains dissatisfied with care. Hall would prefer care with an orthopedic 
surgeon, who can interpret the MRI and provide any surgical care that his condition 
might require. Hall does not have medical training and did not know at the time of 
hearing if his work injury needed surgical care. 
A contributing factor to the dispute in this case is communication between 
multiple representatives of the parties. Hall communicated directly with Peterson but not 
Gallagher Bassett. Claimant’s counsel communicated with Gallagher Bassett, but not 
Peterson. Gallagher Bassett then responded without communicating with Peterson. This 
dynamic resulted in parallel action by the defendants. 
After Hall emailed Peterson, she consulted with Swift regarding additional care. 
Swift advised a referral to a medical doctor such as Dr. Yankey. Claimant’s counsel 
emailed Matias at Gallagher Bassett, unbeknownst to Peterson, and Matias authorized 
care with Dr. Nelson without consulting with Peterson. When Peterson became aware 
that Hall had retained counsel, she and Gallagher Bassett referred the case to defense 
counsel. 
Once the defendants brought defense counsel in on the case, communication 
ran through him and claimant’s counsel. In defense counsel’s second correspondence 
to claimant’s counsel, he communicated that the authorization of care with Dr. Nelson 
made by Gallagher Bassett was rescinded and authorized care was arranged with Dr. 
Yankey, an occupational medicine doctor. After Hall missed the first scheduled 
appointment with Dr. Yankey, he attended the second a week later at which time Dr. 
Yankey ordered the MRI he desired and scheduled a follow-up to go over the results. 
The MRI ordered by Dr. Yankey will help determine whether Hall needs surgery. 
As an occupational medicine specialist, Dr. Yankey is qualified to read an MRI and 
make a surgical referral, if needed. As of the time of hearing, there was no medical 
evidence showing that Hall was a candidate for surgery. 
The first question is whether the defendants’ decision to rescind authorization of 
care with Dr. Nelson in favor of care with Dr. Yankey is unreasonable. Hall did not 
schedule an appointment with Dr. Nelson let alone establish a doctor-patient 
relationship with him. While the communication and parallel actions are less than ideal, 
the rescission of care before an appointment was scheduled paired with the prompt 
arrangement of an alternative appointment is reasonable under the circumstances in 
this case.  
Hall is dissatisfied with the process that led to this point. He wants Dr. Nelson, an 
orthopedic surgeon, to read his MRI and provide any surgical care that it might show is 
needed. But Hall’s position puts the cart before the horse. The MRI will help determine 
whether Hall needs surgical care at this time. Having Dr. Yankey read the MRI and 
make any referral that may be needed due to what the MRI shows is reasonable. 

HALL V. HUSSMAN TAYLOR INDUSTRIES 
Page 5 
 
IV.  
C ON C LU SION S OF LAW. 
Iowa Code section 85.27 requires an employer to furnish care related to an 
employee’s a work injury. Such care “must be offered promptly and be reasonably 
suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the employee.” Iowa Code 
§ 85.27(4). The legislature saw fit to pair this responsibility with the right to choose care. 
Id.; see also Pirelli-Armstrong Tire Co. v. Reynolds, 562 N.W.2d 433, 436 (Iowa 1997). 
“If the employer chooses the care, the employer shall hold the employee harmless for 
the cost of care until the employer notifies the employee that the employer is no longer 
authorizing all or any part of the care and the reason for the change in authorization.” 
Id.; Ramirez-Trujillo v. Quality Egg, L.L.C., 878 N.W.2d 759, 771 (Iowa 2016). 
However, an employer’s right to choose care is not absolute under the statute. 
See id.; Ramirez-Trujillo, 878 N.W.2d at 769. An employee dissatisfied with employer-
furnished care (or lack thereof) has the right to seek an alternative. See id.; see also 
Iowa Admin. Code r. 876—4.48. A dissatisfied employee must first share the 
employee’s discontent with the employer. Id.; Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. 
Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 204 (Iowa 2010). If the parties cannot reach an agreement on 
care, the employee may apply to the commissioner for alternate care. Id.; see also Iowa 
Admin. Code r. 876—4.48. And after an informal hearing, “the commissioner may, upon 
. . . reasonable proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care.” Id. 
The dispositive question in an alternate care case is whether the employer-
furnished care is reasonable. Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 124 (Iowa 
1995). “Reasonableness, of course, is a question of fact.” Reynolds, 562 at 436 (citing 
Long, 528 N.W.2d at 123). As the party seeking relief in the form of alternate care, the 
employee bears the burden of proving that the authorized care in question is 
unreasonable. Id. Because “the employer’s obligation under the statute turns on the 
question of reasonable necessity, not desirability,” an injured employee’s dissatisfaction 
with employer-provided care, standing alone, is not enough to satisfy the employee’s 
burden of proof. Long, 528 N.W.2d at 124.  
Hall is dissatisfied with the process by which the defendants have provided care. 
He believes that the rescission of the authorization Gallagher Bassett gave for him to 
obtain care with Dr. Nelson is unreasonable. However, as found above, the rescission 
of authorization for care with Dr. Nelson in favor of care with Dr. Yankey was not 
unreasonable under the circumstances in this case. Further, having Dr. Yankey review 
and interpret the MRI he ordered is reasonable under the facts in this case. The 
evidence does not show that Hall needed care from an orthopedic surgeon as of the 
time of hearing. 
V. 
OR D ER . 
Under the above findings of facts and conclusions of law, it is ordered that the 
application for alternate care is DENIED. 

HALL V. HUSSMAN TAYLOR INDUSTRIES 
Page 6 
 
The Iowa workers’ compensation commissioner issued an order delegating 
authority to deputy workers’ compensation commissioners, such as the undersigned, to 
issue final agency decisions on applications for alternate care. That order is attached to 
the notice of hearing issued in this case. Due to the order of delegation, there is no 
intra-agency appeal of this decision to the commissioner, only judicial review in an 
appropriate district court under the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Iowa Code 
chapter 17A.  
Signed and filed this 24th day of July, 2024. 
 
 
 
BENJAMIN G. HUMPHREY 
Deputy Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
 
Served via the Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES): 
Adam Bates, Attorney for Claimant 
Lee P. Hook, Attorney for Defendants 
Served via email: 
Nicholas Cooling, Attorney for Claimant (Nick.Cooling@iowalawyers.com) 
 
 
 
