Case Number: 20011906.01
Case Title:  WOLDETENSAY, ZENBEBECH V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Woldetensay Zenbebech-20011906.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ZENBEBECH WOLDETENSAY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
               File No. 20011906.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                          
SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC,   : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                        
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                            
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INS. CO. OF N. AMERICA,   : 
 
 
  : 
         Insurance Carrier, 
   
 
:           Head Notes: 1402.40; 1402.60; 1803 
 
Defendants. 
  :                  
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
 
Claimant Zenbebech Woldetensay filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against Seaboard Triumph Foods, Inc., employer, and Indemnity 
Insurance Company of North America, insurer, for a stipulated work injury date of 
October 1, 2020. The case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on 
August 10, 2023. Pursuant to an order of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation 
Commissioner, this case proceeded to a live video hearing via Zoom, with all parties 
and the court reporter appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded without significant 
difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 8, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 8, and Defendants’ Exhibits A through E.  
 
Claimant testified on her own behalf through interpreter Genet Daniels. Hanna 
Cherenet Kinfemkaef also testified on behalf of claimant. The evidentiary record closed 
at the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on August 10, 2023. The parties submitted 
post-hearing briefs on September 8, 2023, and the case was considered fully submitted 
on that date. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-May-13  14:35:30     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

WOLDETENSAY V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
The nature and extent of permanent disability; 
2. 
The proper date for commencement of permanent disability benefits; 
3. 
Payment of certain medical expenses; and 
4. 
Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
her demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt her 
veracity. Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 53-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
16) She was born in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. She does not speak or understand English. 
(Tr., p. 21) Claimant is a high school graduate. She came to the United States in August 
of 2010. She then worked for Tyson, and described her job there as using a knife in a 
cold room. She worked for Tyson for about six and a half years, and was then hired at 
Seaboard in August of 2017. (Tr., pp. 16-17) She testified that she left Tyson for 
Seaboard for better pay and a more desirable schedule. (Tr., p. 17) Claimant left 
Seaboard for about four months in 2019 when her mother fell ill. When she returned, 
she moved from a job in “cutting” to a job in packaging. (Tr., pp. 17-18)  
 
Claimant was injured while working on October 1, 2020. (Tr., p. 19) Claimant 
testified that she was in a crowded area, with two machines next to her. (Tr., p. 20) She 
fell, and testified that she injured her back and her hips.  
 
Medical records indicate that claimant presented to the emergency department 
on October 1, 2020, for right hip pain after tripping and falling at work. (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 
1) She denied any other injuries at that time. X-ray showed a right femoral neck 
fracture, and claimant was admitted to the hospital. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 2) Joshua Hockett, 
D.O., was brought in for consultation, and the decision was made to proceed with 
surgery. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 4-5) Dr. Hockett performed open reduction internal fixation of the 
right femoral neck on October 2, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 1) Claimant remained in the hospital 
following surgery.  
 
Claimant was discharged to inpatient rehab on October 7, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 7) 
She was seen and examined the morning of October 8, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 8) That 
morning, her primary complaint was pain localized to the right thigh on the anterior and 
lateral side. She described it as an intermittent pain that increased with activity and 
toward the evening. She was admitted in order to address deficits and decreased 
activities of daily living, as well as her right hip pain. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 9) She was to see the 
therapist on a daily basis for 180 minutes per day, five days per week, and work to 

WOLDETENSAY V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC 
Page 3 
 
advance her activities of daily living to prepare for independence upon discharge. She 
was also categorized as having a “fragility fracture” due to her injury from a standing 
height, and it was recommended that she see internal medicine to investigate for any 
causes of osteoporosis. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 9-10)    
 
Claimant was discharged from inpatient rehab on October 14, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 
12) The discharge summary notes that her rehab course was fairly uneventful, and she 
was able to participate in her daily therapy and make appropriate progress. It was again 
noted that due to the mechanism of her fracture from a standing height, she should 
follow up to rule out osteoporosis, and a DEXA scan was recommended. It was also 
recommended that she continue with a low impact form of exercise and with 
physiotherapy to strengthen her lower extremity. (Jt. Ex. 1, pp. 12-13) With respect to 
work, it was recommended that she return to work on a progressive basis based on her 
tolerance. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 13) 
 
Claimant followed up with Elizabeth Frank, P.A.-C., with Dr. Hockett’s office on 
October 15, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 3) At that time she reported minimal pain overall. She 
was scheduled to attend outpatient physical therapy once or twice per week. On 
examination, she had some mild discomfort to palpation in the lateral and anterior thigh. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 4) She was able to rise easily from a seated position, and was able to 
ambulate down the hall with a walker and no additional assistance. She was to attend 
outpatient physical therapy as scheduled, and she was to remain off work due to her 
inability to drive at that time.  
 
On October 20, 2020, claimant saw Shannon Stewart, ARNP, at Siouxland 
Community Health Center, in order to establish care and obtain a DEXA scan. (Jt. Ex. 5, 
pp. 1-3) The scan took place on November 3, 2020, and the bone density report 
indicated claimant had low bone mass, classified as osteopenia. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 4)  
 
Claimant’s next follow up was with Dr. Hockett at CNOS on November 16, 2020. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 5) She reported working with physical therapy on gait training. She was 
able to walk without her walker inside her home, but still used it when outside of her 
home. She reported mild to moderate right hip pain at that time, and denied any 
radiating pains or any other complaints or concerns. Dr. Hockett told her to continue to 
weight bear on the right leg and progress activities as tolerated while continuing with 
physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 6) She was also released to return to seated work only, if 
available.  
 
Claimant next saw Anne Jeneary, P.A.-C., at CNOS, on December 28, 2020. (Jt. 
Ex. 2, p. 9) At that time she reported making progress with therapy, as she was able to 
ambulate without any type of assistive device. She felt as though she still had a little 
limp, however. She reported continued discomfort over the anterior and lateral thigh, as 
well as posteriorly into the buttock. The pain traveled down the leg slightly but did not go 
past the knee. She reported the pain was improving slowly. She was only taking Tylenol 
for pain at that point, and had not returned to work. She had no other specific concerns. 
On examination, she was observed to ambulate with a mildly antalgic gait. X-ray 

WOLDETENSAY V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC 
Page 4 
 
showed that the hardware was intact, and she had healed with excellent alignment with 
the fracture line no longer visible. There was no evidence of AVN (avascular necrosis) 
or other concerning findings. Claimant was to continue with physical therapy, being 
more aggressive with strengthening and work hardening. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 10) She was 
released to work seated duty only, starting with 4 hours per day, if available.  
 
Claimant saw Dr. Hockett again on January 25, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 12) At that 
time she had been making good progress with physical therapy. She noted some mild 
lateral hip pain and mild groin pain. She denied any new injury, radiating pain, 
numbness, or tingling. Overall she felt she was improving. On examination, she had a 
“rather normal-appearing gait pattern with very minimal antalgic gait symptoms.” (Jt. Ex. 
2, p. 13) She was to continue physical therapy and was kept on the same work 
restrictions. Her next follow up was March 31, 2021, at which time she saw P.A.-C. 
Jeneary again. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 15) She continued to report improvement, but still had some 
pain along the lateral side into the buttock. On examination, she was noted to have 
tenderness to palpation over the lateral hip and into the groin, which was “certainly out 
of proportion to her clinical exam findings.” She was reassured that she was healing 
appropriately, and allowed to return to work with restricted duties on a progressive 
basis. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 16) She was also prescribed additional physical therapy to help with 
work hardening. 
 
At physical therapy on April 14, 2021, claimant reported she was back to work for 
four hour days, which would increase to five hours later that week. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 13) She 
reported no increase in her pain while working or after work. She reported at that time 
the pain was more in the back/sacral area. On April 28, 2021, she again reported 
back/sacral pain, and said it had increased since working six-hour days. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
16) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Hockett on May 5, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 18) At that time, 
she reported some occasional pain in her right buttock and occasionally the lateral 
aspect of her right thigh. She had returned to work, and reported that she was nearly up 
to full shifts. She said that the cold temperatures in the refrigeration section at work 
made her pain a little worse, as did standing for long periods. She continued to make 
good progress in physical therapy. Dr. Hockett felt she was recovering “very nicely,” and 
prescribed four additional weeks of physical therapy, followed by four weeks of work 
conditioning/work hardening, and then a functional capacity evaluation (FCE). (Jt. Ex. 2, 
pp. 19-20) 
 
Claimant continued with physical therapy, and on May 12, 2021 she again 
reported her pain was more in the back/sacral area. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 19) On May 17, 2021, 
she reported to Siouxland Community Health Center, hoping to see her primary care 
provider, who was out of town. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 6) She reported her pain had become more 
bothersome recently, and she was prescribed an anti-inflammatory. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 6-7) 
 
 She continued with physical therapy until June 18, 2021, at which time she was 
discharged with “maximal therapeutic benefit reached.” (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 27) The discharge 

WOLDETENSAY V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC 
Page 5 
 
report indicates that all functional goals were achieved during the course of care, and 
that claimant recovered in full, with no remaining deficits. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 28) Claimant saw 
ARNP Stewart on June 21, 2021, and reported ongoing back pain since falling in 
October 2020 and fracturing her hip. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 8-9) She reported having completed 
seven months of physical therapy for her hip, but her back was still aching, more so 
when standing in the same spot for a long period of time. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 9) X-rays showed 
some degenerative changes in her low back, and ARNP Stewart prescribed an anti-
inflammatory and recommended physical therapy. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 10-11)  
 
Claimant had an FCE on July 6, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 6) The results were found to be 
invalid due to inconsistent performance during a repeated measures protocol. (Jt. Ex. 6, 
p. 1) The report states that there was an absence of correlation between lifts of 
unmarked steel bars and the corresponding lifts on the XRTS Lever Arm. However, 
claimant did demonstrate the ability to meet material handling demands for the medium 
work category. As such, while claimant provided an invalid effort, the functional abilities 
documented during the FCE met the demands of her job. (Jt. Ex. 6, p. 4; Jt. Ex. 8, pp. 1-
2) 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Hockett on August 4, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 21) Dr. Hockett 
noted claimant’s complaints of pain radiating from her back to her posterior lateral 
aspect of her right thigh, extending down past her right knee. He stated that claimant felt 
this was aggravated at work from her sitting position. She denied any groin pain or any 
significant pain while walking. Dr. Hockett noted the invalid FCE results, which also 
showed her capable of meeting the demands of a medium level job. On physical 
examination, he noted 5 out of 5 motor strength in her bilateral lower extremities. (Jt. 
Ex. 2, p. 22) He noted mild/questionably positive straight leg raise maneuver on the 
right lower extremity with some pain in the posterior buttock/low back that radiated down 
the posterior lateral aspect of her right thigh. He also noted very mild lumbar spine 
tenderness mostly over the midline lumbar spine region.  
 
Dr. Hockett concluded that claimant showed excellent healing both clinically and 
radiographically. He stated that she “may be having some evidence of the radicular type 
symptoms, which could be a separate issue that was discussed with her today in the 
right lower extremity.” She was not having any significant symptoms clinically with her 
right hip. He again noted the invalid FCE, but reiterated that she demonstrated the 
ability to work in the medium demand category, which her job fell within. As such, he 
placed her at maximum medical improvement (MMI), and released her to full duty work 
“with any restrictions per the FCE, which I do not expect to have any significant 
restrictions.” She was told to follow up as needed. 
 
On August 26, 2021, Dr. Hockett issued a letter indicating that claimant had a 
zero percent impairment of the hip/body as a whole based on the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 23) 
 
Claimant attended an independent medical evaluation (IME) with Sunil Bansal, 
M.D., on October 1, 2021. (Claimant’s Exhibit 4) Dr. Bansal’s report is dated November 

WOLDETENSAY V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC 
Page 6 
 
2, 2021. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 9) At the time of the IME, claimant reported continued pain in her 
right hip and lower back, and said she was unable to sleep on her right side. (Cl. Ex. 4, 
p. 6) She reported being unable to sit or stand for long periods of time, and trouble 
going up and down stairs and with squatting. She described her job as standing at a 
conveyor line and shaving animals’ bodies as they come down the line. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 7) 
No lifting is required for her job. On physical examination, Dr. Bansal noted tenderness 
to palpation over the hip and mid-upper leg, as well as over the sacroiliac joint. She also 
showed some deficits in range of motion of the right hip, and had positive impingement 
testing. 
 
Based on his examination and review of the medical records, Dr. Bansal issued a 
6 percent permanent impairment rating to the body as a whole based on deficits in 
claimant’s range of motion of the right hip. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 9) Dr. Bansal used Table 17-9 
of the AMA Guides for his rating. He also noted that under table 17-33, claimant 
qualified for a 37 percent loss of range of motion deficit for her right femoral neck 
fracture, status post-surgical fixation. However, he did not include that in his total rating. 
Additionally, when reviewing the Guides, it appears the 37 percent rating Dr. Bansal 
references for a femoral neck fracture only applies in cases of nonunion, which was not 
present in claimant’s case.  
 
Dr. Bansal also recommended an MRI of the right hip to evaluate for a labral 
tear, due to claimant’s positive impingement testing. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 8) In the absence of 
further treatment, he agreed with Dr. Hockett that claimant reached MMI on August 4, 
2021. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 9) He recommended restrictions of no frequent squatting, avoiding 
multiple stairs, no lifting more the 40 pounds occasionally or 20 pounds frequently, and 
avoiding prolonged walking more than 30 minutes at a time. 
 
Claimant testified that after she was released from Dr. Hockett’s care, she 
continued to have pain, and her pain medications were no longer helping. (Tr., pp. 22-
23) She testified that Dr. Hockett always prescribed the same medication that did not 
help any longer, so she decided to go to a different place. (Tr., p. 24) As such, she 
decided to seek additional treatment and get the MRI that Dr. Bansal recommended. On 
December 8, 2021, Dr. Bansal authored a letter requesting a right hip MRI without 
contrast for a potential labral tear. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 10) 
 
Claimant saw ARNP Stewart on January 31, 2022.  (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 12) The record 
states claimant wanted to get an MRI of the right hip due to pain for more than one year. 
(Jt. Ex. 5, p. 14) It is noted that claimant presented with “letters from an attorney as well 
as an orthopedic surgeon from Ankeny.” It is presumed the “orthopedic surgeon” 
referenced was actually Dr. Bansal. The record states that claimant continued to have 
aching pain in the hip, especially when standing for long periods, and she denied any 
other problems or concerns. Claimant was referred for an MRI. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 15) 
 
The MRI took place on February 16, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 16) The MRI showed 
flattening and avascular necrosis (AVN) of the posterior right femoral head, extending 

WOLDETENSAY V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC 
Page 7 
 
over two centimeters in diameter. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 17) Claimant returned to see ARNP 
Stewart on February 23, 2022, who referred her to CNOS. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 19) 
 
Claimant returned to CNOS on February 24, 2022, and saw Justin Deans, D.O. 
(Jt. Ex. 2, p. 24) Dr. Deans noted claimant’s prior treatment history since the work injury. 
Her complaints at that time included pain in the hip when rising from a seated position 
or walking for an extended period of time. Dr. Deans reviewed the MRI, and noted mild 
flattening and AVN in the posterior right femoral head. He stated that a significant 
amount of her discomfort seemed to be coming from the musculature around the hip 
and not from within the hip joint itself. He recommended additional physical therapy and 
prescribed Meloxicam for pain. He also stated an intra-articular hip injection could be 
considered in the future, and if her AVN condition continued to progress with collapse, 
she could consider a total hip arthroplasty in the future. She was to follow up in six 
weeks and remain on light duty at work until that time. 
 
Claimant’s attorney wrote to Dr. Deans on May 20, 2022, seeking his opinion as 
to whether a future total hip arthroplasty would be related to the work injury on October 
1, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 26) Dr. Deans replied with a handwritten note stating “yes/risk 
factor for 10/1/20 date injury/fracture.” He also noted, parenthetically, that Dr. Hockett 
agreed. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 27)  
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Deans on June 27, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 28) She 
continued to complain of pain at the lateral aspect of the hip, consistent with her 
previous soft tissue muscle discomfort near the area of the incision. On physical 
examination, he noted her right hip range of motion was fluid in all directions with no 
tightness. His measurements that day were much improved from those taken by Dr. 
Bansal during claimant’s IME. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 28; Cl. Ex. 4, p. 9) Dr. Deans recommended 
continuing with conservative treatment. Claimant advised she had not attended physical 
therapy because she could not afford it, and Dr. Deans recommended at least 
continuing a home exercise program of stretching and strengthening. He also 
proceeded with a right hip greater trochanteric bursitis injection to see if it might help her 
pain. 
 
On July 11, 2022, Dr. Deans authored a letter to claimant’s attorney, in which he 
stated that claimant’s previous fall at work on October 1, 2020, which resulted in a 
femoral neck fracture, was likely the cause of claimant’s AVN. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 30) He also 
stated that if claimant needed further surgical intervention, whether a decompression 
procedure versus a total hip arthroplasty, it would be causally related to the initial slip 
and fall injury that occurred on the job on October 1, 2020. 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Deans on September 19, 2022. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 31) The 
record states that overall, claimant continued to do well, with no interval change in 
symptoms. She still had not attended physical therapy as she stated she could not 
afford it. She requested another injection, as she stated that it helped in the past, which 
was provided. Dr. Deans recommended injections no more than every six months, and 
advised claimant to follow up in three months for a repeat clinical evaluation.  

WOLDETENSAY V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC 
Page 8 
 
 
Claimant saw Dr. Hockett on January 18, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 33) He reviewed 
claimant’s treatment history with himself and Dr. Deans. He noted claimant continued to 
complain of some vague pain mostly over the anterior and posterior aspects of her right 
hip, as well as some referred pain in her right groin and right SI joint. On physical 
examination, Dr. Hockett noted 5 out of 5 motor strength in the right lower extremity, as 
well as “rather well-preserved” range of motion of the right hip. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 34) She did 
report increased pain in both the groin and posterior pelvis, located to the right SI joint, 
with certain movements. Dr. Hockett felt that the posterior pelvic pain and posterior hip 
pain was referred to the right SI joint, which is not associated with any hip joint 
pathology. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 35) He stated that the groin pain could be related to the injury 
and the small area of AVN on the femoral head. He stated that the AVN could be 
causing some occasional soreness and discomfort, but given the small areas and no 
evidence of collapse, he did not feel there was any treatment indicated. However, he 
recommended a repeat MRI, in order to reevaluate the AVN. He stated that if it was 
largely unchanged from the previous MRI, he would consider her at MMI and would not 
recommend any treatment other than symptomatic care. However, if the MRI showed 
worsening AVN, a larger area, and/or some collapse of the femoral head, he would 
likely make a referral for additional treatment, including a potential right total hip 
arthroplasty. Dr. Hockett stated that it is well known that AVN of the femoral head is a 
risk of claimant’s previous injury, consisting of right femoral neck fracture. However, 
without any appreciated collapse on MRI, the condition is typically treated 
symptomatically.  
 
Claimant had the repeat MRI on January 23, 2023. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 36) The MRI 
showed a small region of AVN in the superolateral aspect of the right femoral head. On 
March 15, 2023, Dr. Hockett authored a letter in response to a request for an updated 
impairment rating. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 37) He stated that claimant was placed at MMI and 
released to full duty on January 23, 2023. Future treatment included anti-inflammatories 
as needed. With respect to a rating, using table 17-9 he opined claimant had a five 
percent permanent impairment of the right hip, which is equal to two percent of the 
whole person. The parties stipulated that claimant was paid ten weeks of compensation 
prior to hearing, at the stipulated rate of $595.07 per week. (Hearing Report) 
 
I agree with Dr. Hockett’s opinion that claimant reached MMI on January 23, 
2023. After his initial declaration of MMI on August 4, 2021, claimant began to 
experience increased pain, and Dr. Bansal found signs of impingement during his IME 
on October 1, 2021. As a result, claimant had an MRI that showed AVN of the femoral 
head. After that finding, claimant sought additional treatment with Dr. Deans, which 
improved her condition. On January 18, 2023, Dr. Hockett ordered a repeat MRI to see 
if the AVN had progressed. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 35) As it had not progressed, and claimant’s 
range of motion had improved since her examination with Dr. Bansal, Dr. Hockett 
placed claimant at MMI on January 23, 2023. 
 
 
The January 23, 2023 date for MMI is also supported by Dr. Bansal’s report. Dr. 
Bansal specifically stated that he agreed with the initial date of August 4, 2021, in the 

WOLDETENSAY V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC 
Page 9 
 
absence of further treatment. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 9) (emphasis added) Claimant did have 
additional treatment, however, and that treatment improved her condition. Nothing in the 
record suggests claimant returned to Dr. Bansal for reevaluation after her additional 
treatment, nor that he reviewed updated medical records to provide an updated opinion. 
As such, I find that Dr. Hockett’s opinions are the most reliable as they are based on the 
most recent evaluations of claimant’s condition.  
 
I also find Dr. Hockett’s impairment rating to be a more accurate representation 
of claimant’s functional loss at the time of hearing. Dr. Hockett’s rating was issued more 
recently than Dr. Bansal’s, and was based on an examination that took place after 
claimant had additional treatment, including injections. Claimant’s range of motion had 
improved since Dr. Bansal’s examination, upon which his rating was based. 
Additionally, having found claimant did not reach MMI until January 23, 2023, Dr. 
Hockett’s rating is the only one that took place after that date. Therefore, I find claimant 
sustained permanent impairment equal to two percent of the body as a whole, 
consistent with Dr. Hockett’s January 23, 2023 impairment rating. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant testified that she continues to have difficulties. 
She testified that she has trouble sleeping, and cannot sleep fully on her left side. (Tr., 
p. 26) She cannot stand or sit for a long time. She has trouble going up stairs, but is fine 
going down. Bending is difficult. She also testified that she wears a “protective” belt 
while at work, which holds her waist and hips. She testified that she continues to have 
pain in her back, both sides, and her hips. (Tr., p. 27) Before the injury, she used to go 
out with her family and friends and regularly attend church. However, she does not do 
those things anymore, and just stays home. She testified that by the time she gets 
home from work, she is so tired she goes straight to bed with pain. (Tr., p. 28) On cross-
examination she testified that she still goes to church once in a while, but not always 
like she used to. (Tr., p. 34) Currently she goes every Sunday unless she works on 
Saturday, because then she is too tired. (Tr., pp. 34-35) 
 
Hanna Cherenet Kinfemkaef testified on behalf of claimant. (Tr., p. 8) Hanna’s 
testimony was clear and consistent, and her demeanor at the time of hearing gave the 
undersigned no reason to doubt her veracity. Hanna is found credible. Hanna testified 
that she has known claimant since 2015, and often acted as an interpreter for her 
throughout her workers’ compensation proceedings. (Tr., p. 9) Hanna testified that since 
the work injury and surgery, she has noticed that claimant does not act the same as 
before. (Tr., p. 10) She said she does not help people like she used to. She described 
that claimant used to be the first one in the community to help people and “fix everything 
for you in the background,” but she is not doing all of those things anymore. She also 
does not go shopping as often or participate with church activities as often. Hanna 
testified that claimant helped build a new church, but can no longer come in to build the 
church. She has noticed claimant is weaker than she used to be, and is not able to eat 
like she used to. (Tr., p. 11) She also said claimant is not sleeping as much. She has 
also noticed problems with claimant’s hip, back, and legs. She said if claimant bends, 
she does not get up like she used to, and she has to work to stand up. She does not 

WOLDETENSAY V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC 
Page 10 
 
climb stairs like she used to, “she has to walk slow like a baby.” She also does not carry 
anything from shopping, and has Hanna or another friend help her.  
 
Claimant’s current job at Seaboard is shaver. (Tr., pp. 26-27) She described her 
job as shaving the hair under the animals’ ears with a blade or knife. (Tr., p. 27) The 
functional job analysis provided by Seaboard states that her job is to “remove hair from 
shoulder area on carcass” and “remove toenails low.” (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 1) The 
tools/equipment for the job are a shaving knife and toenail remover. The physical 
demand summary indicates the job demands constant balance, constant grip up to five 
pounds, constant lift of two pounds from waist to shoulder, constant neck flexion, 
constant horizontal push up to ten pounds, constant reach, constant stand, and 
constant wrist posture. (Jt. Ex. 8, p. 2) The job is in the medium demand category based 
on frequency.  
 
Claimant works 50 to 60 hours per week, depending on whether she works on 
Saturday. (Tr., p. 27) She currently earns $21.65 per hour. At the time of her injury, she 
testified she was making around $20.00 per hour, but her earning records indicate she 
was making $16.50 per hour. (Tr., pp. 40-41; Defendants’ Exhibit D, p. 19) She testified 
that her current job is the easiest job, and it helps her. (Tr., p. 43) She is able to do her 
job very well with her belt, and expressed appreciation and gratitude for Seaboard 
allowing her to do the easier job. Based on claimant’s testimony and the earning 
records in evidence, I find that claimant’s earnings at the time of hearing were greater 
than her earnings at the time of injury. As such, claimant is only entitled to be 
compensated based on her functional impairment rating from the injury, and not in 
relation to her earning capacity. Claimant is entitled to two percent of the body as a 
whole which is equal to 10 weeks of benefits, at the stipulated rate of $595.07. As 
defendants paid this amount prior to hearing, claimant is not entitled to additional 
permanent partial disability benefits at this time.  
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
Claimant sustained a stipulated injury to her right hip while working at Seaboard 
on October 1, 2020. Claimant argues that the correct date of MMI is August 4, 2021, 
while defendants argues MMI occurred on January 23, 2023. Claimant also seeks an 
award of industrial disability, while defendants contend her award is limited to the 
functional impairment rating pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). Specifically, 
defendants argue that Dr. Hockett’s two percent impairment rating should apply. Finally, 
claimant seeks payment of certain medical bills, discussed in more detail below, as well 
as an assessment of costs. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is 
based. A cause is proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it 
need not be the only cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal 

WOLDETENSAY V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC 
Page 11 
 
connection is probable rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 
569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa 
App. 1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  
With respect to the proper date of MMI, I agreed with Dr. Hockett’s opinion that 
claimant reached MMI on January 23, 2023. MMI refers to stabilization of the workers’ 
condition or a finding that the condition is not likely to abate in the future despite medical 
treatment. Dunlap v. Action Warehouse, 824 N.W.2d 545, 557 (Iowa App. 2012) 
Stabilization of the employee’s condition is the event that allows a physician to make the 
determination that a particular medical condition is permanent. Id. at 556 (quoting Bell 
Bros. Heating and Air Conditioning. v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 200 (Iowa 2010))  
The Iowa Supreme Court clarified the issue of maximum medical improvement, 
or medically indicated significant improvement, in Pitzer v. Rowley Interstate, 507 
N.W.2d 389, 391-392 (Iowa 1993). The Court held:   
[T]he stability of condition referred to in Larson’s treatise is a stability in 
industrial disability. Consequently, an anticipated improvement in 
continuing pain or depression, if medically indicated, may extend the 
length of the healing period if a substantial change in industrial disability is 
also expected to result. If, however, it is not likely that further treatment of 
continuing pain, however soothing to the claimant, will decrease the extent 
of permanent industrial disability, then continued pain management should 
not prolong the healing period. 
 
 
In this case, when Dr. Hockett initially placed claimant at MMI on August 4, 2021, 
she was not reporting any significant symptoms in her hip. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 22) Her fracture 
was healed, and Dr. Hockett assigned zero impairment based on his clinical 
examination. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 23) However, during her IME with Dr. Bansal, she exhibited 
signs of impingement, and he measured diminished range of motion. He recommended 
an MRI to rule out a labral tear, and opined that in the absence of further treatment, he 
agreed with Dr. Hockett’s date for MMI. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 9) (emphasis added) However, 
after obtaining an MRI on her own, claimant sought treatment with Dr. Deans due to 
AVN of the femoral head. After additional treatment, claimant returned to Dr. Hockett in 
January 2023, who ordered a repeat MRI to see if the AVN had progressed. It had not 

WOLDETENSAY V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC 
Page 12 
 
progressed, but had stabilized. Additionally, claimant’s range of motion was worse than 
it was when she was initially placed at MMI on August 4, 2021, but had improved since 
her IME with Dr. Bansal. It was at that point that Dr. Hockett again placed claimant at 
MMI, and updated his prior zero percent impairment rating to two percent of the body as 
a whole. Because claimant’s condition had improved and stabilized with the additional 
treatment, the proper date of MMI is January 23, 2023. 
 
With respect to permanent partial disability, I found Dr. Hockett’s impairment 
rating to be the most accurate representation of claimant’s permanent functional 
disability at the time of hearing. Dr. Hockett’s rating was issued more recently than Dr. 
Bansal’s, and was based on an examination that took place after claimant had the 
additional treatment that improved and stabilized her condition. Claimant’s range of 
motion had improved since Dr. Bansal’s examination, upon which his rating was based. 
Additionally, having found claimant did not reach MMI until January 23, 2023, Dr. 
Hockett’s rating is the only one that took place after that date. 
 
The Iowa Supreme Court has stated: 
 
. . . [A] fundamental component of a permanent impairment is stabilization 
of the condition or at least a finding that the condition is “not likely to remit 
in the future despite medical treatment.” American Medical Association, 
Guides to Evaluation of Permanent Impairment 27 (6th ed. 2008). In other 
words, stabilization is the event that allows a physician to make the 
determination that a particular medical condition is permanent. 
Municipality of Anchorage v. Leigh, 823 P.2d 1241, 1242 n. 3 (Alaska 
1992) (“‘A physician can determine ... whether or not a particular medical 
condition has become permanent because it is static or well-stabilized.’” 
(quoting American Medical Association, Guides to Evaluation *201 of 
Permanent Impairment, Preface at x (2d ed. 1984))). 
 
The symmetry of the process reveals that a claim for permanent disability 
benefits is not ripe until maximum medical improvement has been 
achieved. See 4 Larson § 80.03D[3] n. 10, at D80–43 to D80–48.2 
(recognizing cases generally holding it is premature to award permanent 
impairment benefits when medical stabilization has not yet been reached). 
Until that time, only temporary benefits are available. A finding by the 
commissioner that the injuries sustained by a worker produced a 
permanent impairment is only relevant in determining an award for 
permanent disability benefits. Thus, it is only necessary for the 
commissioner to determine the existence of a permanent impairment once 
a claim for permanent disability benefits is ripe. 
 
Bell Bros. Heating & Air Conditioning v. Gwinn, 779 N.W.2d 193, 200–01 (Iowa 2010). 
 
Because Dr. Hockett’s impairment rating is the only one that took place after 
claimant reached MMI, it must be adopted. Therefore, I find claimant sustained 

WOLDETENSAY V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC 
Page 13 
 
permanent impairment equal to two percent of the body as a whole, consistent with Dr. 
Hockett’s January 23, 2023 impairment rating. 
 
Claimant has alleged she is entitled to industrial disability benefits, while 
defendants argue her recovery is limited to the functional impairment rating under Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(v). Section 85.34(2)(v) provides: 
If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph 
returns to work or is offered work for which the employee receives or 
would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the 
employee received at the time of the injury, the employee shall be 
compensated based only upon the employee’s functional impairment 
rating from the injury, and not in relation to the employee’s earning 
capacity.  Notwithstanding section 85.26, subsection 2, if an employee 
who is eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work with 
the same employer and is compensated based only upon the employee’s 
functional impairment resulting from the injury as provided in this 
paragraph and is terminated from employment by that employer, the 
award or agreement for settlement for benefits under this chapter shall be 
reviewed upon commencement of reopening proceedings by the 
employee for a determination of any reduction in the employee’s earning 
capacity caused by the employee’s permanent partial disability. 
In this case, claimant returned to work at Seaboard at the same or higher wages 
following her injury. At the time of injury, claimant was earning $16.50 per hour, and had 
a stipulated average weekly wage of $902.00. (Def. Ex. D, pp. 6-19; Hearing Report) At 
the time of hearing, she was working 50 to 60 hours per week, making $21.65 per hour. 
(Def. Ex. E, pp. 20-48; Tr., p. 27) The earning records in evidence show that claimant 
has consistently earned more than her pre-injury average weekly wage since her return 
to work. (Def. Ex. E, pp. 20-48) As such, section 85.34(2)(v) requires that claimant’s 
compensation be based only upon her functional impairment rating, and not her earning 
capacity. I adopted Dr. Hockett’s two percent whole body rating. As such, claimant is 
entitled to ten weeks of benefits, at the stipulated weekly rate of $595.07. The parties 
stipulated that defendants paid claimant ten weeks of benefits at the stipulated rate prior 
to hearing. As such, claimant is not entitled to any additional permanent partial disability 
benefits at this time. 
 
Claimant also seeks payment of certain medical expenses, detailed in claimant’s 
exhibits 5 through 8. An employer is required to furnish reasonable medical expenses to 
treat a work injury. Iowa Code section 85.27. With respect to the claimed medical 
expenses, defendants dispute whether the treatment was reasonable and necessary, 
whether the listed expenses are causally connected to the work injury, whether the 
expenses are at least causally connected to the medical condition upon which the claim 
of injury is based, and whether the expenses were authorized by defendants. (Hearing 
Report) The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e)-
(f). Therefore, claimant bears the burden of proof to establish that the charges claimed 

WOLDETENSAY V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC 
Page 14 
 
were related to treatment that was reasonable, necessary, and causally related to the 
work injury.    
 
Claimant’s exhibit 5 includes expenses for visits with ARNP Stewart, in order to 
establish care and obtain a DEXA scan. (Cl. Ex. 5, pp. 1-6) There are also charges 
related to claimant’s appointment with ARNP Stewart on January 31, 2022, when she 
ordered a right hip MRI, which will be discussed further below. (Cl. Ex. 5, p. 5) The scan 
took place on November 3, 2020, and the bone density report indicated claimant had 
low bone mass, classified as osteopenia. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 4) There is nothing in the record 
to suggest that the need for the bone scan or the diagnosis of osteopenia was causally 
related to claimant’s work injury, and defendants have represented that these visits 
were not authorized as part of claimant’s workers’ compensation claim. As such, I find 
defendants are not responsible for medical expenses found in claimant’s exhibit 5. 
 
Claimant’s exhibit 6 is a statement from Renal Associates, with charges incurred 
between October 8, 2020 and October 13, 2020. (Cl. Ex. 6, pp. 1-2) There are no 
associated medical record in evidence from Renal Associates. When asked about 
Renal Associates during hearing, claimant testified, “I don’t know anything about Renal 
Associates,” on two separate occasions. (Tr., pp. 23, 37) Claimant has not presented 
any evidence to indicate the treatment received from Renal Associates was reasonable, 
necessary, and/or causally related to the work injury. Therefore, I find defendants are 
not responsible for medical expenses found in claimant’s exhibit 6.  
 
Claimant’s exhibit 7 is a bill for the right hip MRI that took place on February 16, 
2022. (Cl. Ex. 7, p. 1) Defendants argue they are not responsible for this bill, nor the 
appointment with ARNP Stewart on January 31, 2022, because claimant did not first 
seek authorization before the MRI actually took place. Rather, claimant sought 
reimbursement for the MRI and related office visits seven months later, on September 
19, 2022. (Def. Ex. A, p. 2)  
 
The Commissioner has consistently held that defendants are not responsible for 
unauthorized treatment when a claimant fails to give defendants the opportunity to 
authorize the care first. See Jimmerson v. Ultimate Automotive Service Center, Inc., File 
No. 5052541 (App. Feb. 22, 2018); Miller v. Lennox International, Inc., File No. 5044858  
(App. April 5, 2019); Getiso v. Tyson Fresh Meats, File No. 20004806.01 (App. April 20, 
2023). The proper course would have been for claimant to notify defendants that she 
wished to obtain the MRI Dr. Bansal recommended, and request an appointment be 
authorized. She would have then had the option of initiating an alternate medical care 
proceeding if the request was denied. To hold defendants responsible for these 
unauthorized expenses would circumvent defendants’ right to direct medical care under 
Iowa Code section 85.27. As such, I find defendants are not responsible for the medical 
expenses found in claimant’s exhibit 7. 
With respect to claimant’s exhibit 8, it is identified on claimant’s exhibit list as a 
Blue Cross lien. However, in reviewing the document, it does not appear to be a lien. 
Rather, is a statement of benefits paid by Blue Cross between October 2, 2020 and 

WOLDETENSAY V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC 
Page 15 
 
November 3, 2020. (Cl. Ex. 8, p. 3) The letter accompanying the statement of benefits 
appears to be a notice to claimant that Blue Cross would be denying coverage under 
her health insurance for medical bills related to her work injury, and requesting refunds 
from providers for claims already paid. (Cl. Ex. 8, pp. 1-2) There is no lien amount 
specified, nor any request for payment or reimbursement. That being said, to the extent 
Blue Cross has paid for any medical treatment deemed related to the work injury, 
defendants are responsible for any Blue Cross lien that might exist. However, as stated 
above, defendants are not responsible for reimbursement for treatment at Siouxland 
Community Health on October 20, 2020 or November 3, 2020, nor for treatment 
provided by Renal Associates. 
Finally, claimant has requested a taxation of costs, reflected in claimant’s exhibits 
1 through 3. Assessment of costs is a discretionary function of this agency. Iowa Code § 
10A.328. Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the deputy commissioner or 
workers’ compensation commissioner hearing the case. 876 IAC 4.33. 
Claimant was not successful in proving entitlement to any additional benefits or 
medical expenses. As such, I use my discretion and decline to assess costs against 
defendants under Rule 4.33. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Claimant shall take nothing further at this time. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
The parties shall bear their own costs. 
Signed and filed this __13TH ____ day of May, 2024. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Greg Ebgers (via WCES) 
Stephen Brown (via WCES) 

WOLDETENSAY V. SEABOARD TRIUMPH FOODS, LLC 
Page 16 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
 
