Case Number: 21010196.02
Case Title:  STEVENS, AMY V. HEALTH CAROUSEL, LLC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Stevens Amy-21010196.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
AMY STEVENS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
             File No.  21010196.02 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
     
 
 
  : 
 
    
vs. 
 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                 
HEALTH CAROUSEL, L.L.C., 
  : 
           
 
 
  :                  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
Head Note Nos.:   1402.40, 1802, 2502, 
QBE NORTH AMERICA, 
  : 
 
 
        2701, 2907, 3001,  
 
 
  : 
 
 
        4000.2 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Amy Stevens, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against Health Carousel, 
L.L.C., as the employer and QBE North America, as the insurance carrier. This case 
came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on January 17, 2024.  
  
 
Pursuant to an order from the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this 
case was heard via Zoom videoconference. All participants, including the court reporter, 
appeared remotely for the hearing. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations 
were accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be 
made or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 8, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 10, as well as Defendants Exhibits A, C, E, and F. All exhibits were received 
without objection.  
  
Claimant testified on her own behalf.  No other witnesses testified live at the 
hearing. The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the arbitration hearing.  
 
However, counsel for the parties requested an opportunity to file post-hearing 
briefs. This request was granted, and both parties filed briefs simultaneously on March 
15, 20241. The case was considered fully submitted to the undersigned on that date. 
                                                 
1 Due to a technical glitch on the agency’s side, defendants were not able to electronically file 
their post-hearing brief on March 15, 2024. However, defendants forwarded a copy of that brief to the 
undersigned and opposing counsel via e-mail with an explanation of the technical difficulties on March 15, 
2024. The undersigned accepted the defendants’ brief and considers it timely “filed” as of that date. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-May-16  12:02:51     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

STEVENS V. HEALTH CAROUSEL, L.L.C. 
Page 2 
 
ISSUES 
 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
 
1. 
Whether claimant is entitled to a running healing period from July 22, 2021 
through the date of hearing. 
 
2. 
Whether claimant is entitled to an award of permanent partial disability 
benefits and, if so, the extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial 
disability benefits. 
 
3. 
The proper commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any. 
 
4. 
The claimant’s gross weekly earnings at the time of the work injury and 
corresponding weekly rate. 
 
5. 
Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of medical mileage for past 
medical treatment. 
 
6. 
Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of charges for an 
independent medical evaluation pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.39. 
 
7. 
Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care, including an order 
authorizing a lumbar fusion surgery. 
 
8. 
Whether penalty benefits should be assessed against defendants for an 
unreasonable underpayment of the weekly rate and/or for an 
unreasonable delay in payment of temporary disability benefits. 
 
9. 
Whether costs should be assessed against either party and, if so, in what 
amount. 
 
In her post-hearing brief, claimant acknowledged payment for past medical 
mileage and withdrew her claim for past medical mileage. This issue is considered 
resolved. No findings of fact or conclusions will be entered pertaining to the medical 
mileage issue. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant, Amy Stevens, sustained an admitted work injury on July 21, 2021. Ms. 
Stevens worked as a traveling nurse for the employer, Health Carousel, L.L.C., on the 
date of injury. In fact, Ms. Stevens has worked as a labor and delivery nurse since 1989, 
except for years when she stayed home to raise her children. 
   

STEVENS V. HEALTH CAROUSEL, L.L.C. 
Page 3 
 
Since 2012, claimant has worked as a traveling labor and delivery nurse. She 
typically worked traveling assignments based on a 13-week contract. Health Carousel is 
an agency through whom claimant obtained her traveling nurse assignments.  
 
On the date of her injury, Ms. Stevens was working for Health Carousel as labor 
and delivery nurse at Mercy Hospital in Iowa City. She was assisting an expectant 
mother during the delivery process and attempting to reposition the patient when she 
sustained a low back injury. Claimant was unable to continue her duties. She remained 
on her shift but was not required to perform additional physical duties on the date of 
injury. Ms. Stevens sought care in the emergency room after her shift ended on the 
morning of July 22, 2021. Defendants stipulate that claimant sustained a low back injury 
on July 21, 2021. 
 
The emergency room physician recommended claimant obtain follow-up care for 
her back.  Claimant followed up with her primary care physician on July 26, 2021. At 
that appointment, Ms. Stevens reported low back pain with radiating pain down her left 
leg and also reported urinary incontinence.  Claimant’s primary care physician sent 
claimant to the emergency room, where she received an MRI of her low back. 
 
Claimant was referred to an orthopaedic surgeon, Zachary Ries, M.D., who 
evaluated claimant on August 11, 2021. Dr. Ries opined that claimant’s work incident 
likely aggravated her MRI findings and diagnosis. Claimant proceeded with physical 
therapy. Dr. Ries also recommended evaluation with a pain specialist. 
 
Defendants referred claimant to an occupational medicine clinic for evaluation. A 
physician assistant at the occupational medicine clinic recommended an epidural 
steroid injection for claimant’s low back and imposed work restrictions. Defendants also 
authorized treatment with a pain specialist, J. Wesley Rayburn, M.D. 
 
Dr. Rayburn evaluated claimant on December 20, 2021. He recommended 
medial branch blocks, an epidural steroid injection, as well as continuing physical 
therapy and work restrictions. The recommended conservative treatment continued 
under Dr. Rayburn’s direction until November 7, 2022. At that point, Dr. Rayburn placed 
claimant at maximum medical improvement from a pain control standpoint but continued 
to recommend work restrictions.   
 
Ms. Stevens returned for further evaluation with Dr. Ries on January 24, 2023.  
Dr. Ries noted continued radicular pain down claimant’s legs. Dr. Ries recommended a 
repeat MRI and x-rays. Dr. Ries also imposed restrictions, including the need to change 
positions or rest as needed, no lifting over 15 pounds, no repetitive bending, twisting, 
pushing, or pulling. 
 
Claimant submitted to a repeat lumbar MRI on February 20, 2023. Dr. Ries re-
evaluated claimant on February 23, 2023. Following the repeat MRI and evaluation, Dr. 
Ries recommended an L5-S1 anterior lumbar interbody fusion. Claimant desired to 
proceed with the surgery. However, defendants denied liability and declined to authorize 
the recommended surgery. 
 

STEVENS V. HEALTH CAROUSEL, L.L.C. 
Page 4 
 
Defendants sought and obtained a medical opinion from R. L. Broghammer, M.D.  
Dr. Broghammer performed a record review and offered a report dated March 27, 2023.  
Dr. Broghammer opined that claimant sustained a temporary aggravation of an 
underlying low back condition as a result of the work injury. Dr. Broghammer further 
opined that claimant’s need for treatment “would be done for the exacerbation of the 
chronic preexisting condition” on November 7, 2022. (Defendants’ Ex. E, p. 41) Dr. 
Broghammer further opined that clamant achieved maximum medical improvement on 
November 7, 2022 and that she does not qualify for any permanent impairment related 
to the work injury at Mercy Hospital. (Def. Ex. E, p. 42) Dr. Broghammer further opines 
that the lumbar fusion recommended by Dr. Ries is neither reasonable nor necessary to 
treat the work injury. Instead, he opines, “[a]ny surgery that Dr. Ries proposed is due to 
the chronic preexisting condition of the worker’s lumbar spine and not due to the acute 
lumbar strain that occurred on July 21, 2021.” (Def. Ex. E, p. 41) 
 
Claimant responded to this opinion by obtaining an independent medical 
evaluation performed by Sunil Bansal, M.D. on June 21, 2023. Dr. Bansal opines that 
claimant’s nursing activities attempting to turn a patient on the date of injury “directly 
precipitated and significantly aggravated her lumbar conditions.” (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 
28) Dr. Bansal further opined that the “delay in comprehensive treatment due to external 
constraints has likely contributed to the chronic nature of her condition.” (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 
28) He further recommended that claimant proceed with the lumbar surgery 
recommended by Dr. Ries and that claimant is not at maximum medical improvement if 
she pursues that further treatment. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 29) In the alternative, if determined to 
be at maximum medical improvement, Dr. Bansal opines claimant sustained a 13 
percent permanent impairment of the whole person as a result of the work injury. (Cl. 
Ex. 2, p. 29) 
 
I find that Dr. Ries was an authorized surgeon until defendants denied liability.  I 
find the opinions of Dr. Ries to be the most credible and convincing in this case and 
similarly find the opinions of Dr. Bansal to be convincing to the extent they corroborate 
or support the opinions of Dr. Ries. Specifically, I find Dr. Ries’ recommendation for a 
lumbar fusion to be a reasonable and necessary medical recommendation given 
claimant’s ongoing symptoms and restrictions.   
 
I find claimant’s desire to undergo the lumbar fusion is reasonable. I also find that 
claimant gave notice of her dissatisfaction and request for authorization of the 
recommended surgery. In fact, claimant attempted to pursue alternate medical care via 
an expedited process. Defendants denied liability but were clearly on notice of the 
request for alternate medical care prior to this arbitration hearing. 
 
I find that claimant has been under work restrictions since July 22, 2021. I find 
that claimant continued to be under work restrictions from Dr. Ries at the time of the 
arbitration hearing. I find that claimant has not yet achieved maximum medical 
improvement and that an additional reasonable treatment option exists to treat 
claimant’s condition. Specifically, I find that the lumbar fusion surgery recommended by 
Dr. Ries is reasonable and necessary medical care that is likely to improve claimant’s 
condition and symptoms. I similarly find that claimant has not returned to work since 

STEVENS V. HEALTH CAROUSEL, L.L.C. 
Page 5 
 
July 22, 2021 and that she has not been capable of returning to substantially similar 
work as a traveling labor and delivery nurse since the July 21, 2021 work injury. 
 
The parties also dispute the claimant’s applicable weekly workers’ compensation 
rate. Specifically, the parties dispute claimant’s average gross weekly wages at the time 
of the work injury. Neither party has provided significant analysis of the weekly rate 
issue in their post-hearing brief. 
 
Claimant argues, “The parties have stipulated to an average weekly wage 
(“AWW”) of $1,186.00, married status and two exemptions.” (Claimant’s Post-Hearing 
Brief, p. 12) Defendants urge, “In reliance on wage documentation set forth in 
Defendants’ Exhibit A, Defendants have calculated a weekly benefit rate in this matter 
at $761.58.” (Defendants’ Post-Hearing Brief, p. 21) 
 
The undersigned did not make a note that there was a stipulation reached at the 
time of trial regarding the weekly rate. The hearing report demonstrates that the 
claimant’s gross weekly earnings were disputed. On the other hand, defendants 
apparently provided an Answer to Interrogatory in which they assert claimant’s average 
weekly wage was $1,186.28, that claimant was married and entitled to two exemptions. 
Defendants’ Answer to Interrogatory No. 20 further asserts that the applicable weekly 
rate should be $767.04. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 47) Defendants do not provide their current 
calculation of the average weekly wage, demonstrate a supplement to their answer to 
interrogatory, or explain how their calculations changed. However, defendants now 
contend that the applicable rate should be $761.58. 
 
I find that defendants’ answer to interrogatory is an admission against interest. I 
find that claimant’s gross average weekly wages on the date of injury were $1,186.28 
per defendants’ admission. (Cl. Ex. 6, p. 47) Claimant was married and entitled to two 
exemptions. (Hearing Report) 
 
Ms. Stevens also seeks an award of penalty benefits for the underpayment of 
weekly rate as well as late payment of benefits. Claimant asserts three bases for 
penalty benefits. The first is for underpayment of the weekly rate.  Claimant contends 
that the applicable weekly rate is $767.04 but defendants paid 73.286 weeks of healing 
period benefits at the rate of $761.58. Claimant contends that defendants underpaid 
benefits by a total of $414.14 and request award of 50 percent penalty on this 
underpayment. 
 
Claimant’s second basis for award of a penalty benefit is for late payment, or 
underpayment, of the initial seven weeks of healing period benefits. Claimant points out 
that defendants paid the first seven weeks of benefits at the rate of $374.85 per week. 
Claimant contends this underpayment was not made up until April 1, 2022, 
approximately eight months late. Claimant contends the amount of benefits delayed or 
denied totals $2,937.41, asserts the delay or denial was unreasonable, and requests an 
award of penalty benefits totaling 50 percent. 
 
 

STEVENS V. HEALTH CAROUSEL, L.L.C. 
Page 6 
 
Claimant’s final argument for assessment of penalty benefits is that benefits were 
stopped between March 8, 2022 and April 3, 2022. Claimant contends this represents 
delay or denial of benefits totaling $2,835.28 and, again, seeks assessment of a 50 
percent penalty. 
 
Defendants’ focus on the penalty benefit issue is on their denial of permanent 
disability. Defendants argue past claimant and address an issue for which claimant 
does not seek an assessment of penalty benefits. However, defendants do not address 
the delays or denials of benefits urged by claimant as the bases for penalty benefits. 
 
Ultimately, I find claimant proved a delay or denial of healing period benefits 
during the first seven weeks after this injury totaling $414.14. I find that claimant proved 
a delay or denial of additional benefits during the initial seven weeks of healing period.  
Specifically, I find claimant proved defendants paid benefits at the rate of $374.85 while 
benefits were due at the rate of $767.04. The total underpayment during this period of 
time is $2,937.41. I also find that claimant proved a delay or denial of weekly benefits 
between March 8, 2022 and April 3, 2022. The total amount of benefits delayed or 
denied during this period of time was $2,835.28. In total, claimant proved a delay or 
denial of benefits totaling $6,186.83. 
 
Defendants did not demonstrate or prove that a contemporaneous investigation 
occurred on these delays or denials. Defendants did not prove a reasonable basis for 
the delay or denial of the aforementioned weekly benefits. Nor did defendants prove 
they contemporaneously conveyed the basis(es) for their denial of the foregoing 
benefits to claimant. 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
In this case, claimant seeks an award of alternate medical care and claims 
entitlement to a running healing period. Defendants challenge whether any current 
complaints or need for treatment are causally related to the work injury. Therefore, the 
first issue to be decided in this case is whether claimant’s ongoing complaints and 
request for additional medical care are causally related to the July 21, 2021 work injury. 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause. A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an expert 
opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy of the 

STEVENS V. HEALTH CAROUSEL, L.L.C. 
Page 7 
 
facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The expert 
opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 
N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); Dunlavey v. 
Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, 
Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical testimony cannot be 
summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 
1994). 
 
In this case, claimant presents the medical opinion of Dr. Ries, recommending a 
lumbar fusion. Claimant also presents the opinions of Dr. Bansal in support of that 
recommendation. Both Dr. Ries and Dr. Bansal causally connect the recommended low 
back surgery to the work injury in July 2021. Defendants countered with the opinion of 
Dr. Broghammer, who opined that claimant’s work injury was only a temporary 
aggravation of an underlying condition and that claimant’s current condition, including 
the recommended low back surgery, are not related to the work injury.   
 
Claimant bears the burden to establish this causal connection between her 
current condition, request for additional medical care, and the July 2021 work injury.  
Ultimately, I found the opinions of Dr. Ries and Dr. Bansal to be most convincing and 
credible. Therefore, I also found that claimant proved her current condition, including the 
recommended low back surgery, are causally related to the initial work injury. 
 
Ms. Stevens requests that I award alternate medical care, specifically the low 
back surgery recommended by Dr. Ries.   
Iowa Code section 85.27(4) provides, in relevant part: 
For purposes of this section, the employer is obliged to furnish reasonable 
services and supplies to treat an injured employee, and has the right to 
choose the care. . . .  The treatment must be offered promptly and be 
reasonably suited to treat the injury without undue inconvenience to the 
employee.  If the employee has reason to be dissatisfied with the care 
offered, the employee should communicate the basis of such 
dissatisfaction to the employer, in writing if requested, following which the 
employer and the employee may agree to alternate care reasonably suited 
to treat the injury.  If the employer and employee cannot agree on such 
alternate care, the commissioner may, upon application and reasonable 
proofs of the necessity therefor, allow and order other care. 
 
An application for alternate medical care is not automatically sustained because 
claimant is dissatisfied with the care he has been receiving. Mere dissatisfaction with 
the medical care is not ample grounds for granting an application for alternate medical 
care. Rather, the claimant must show that the care was not offered promptly, was not 
reasonably suited to treat the injury, or that the care was unduly inconvenient for the 
claimant. Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122 (Iowa 1995). 
 
 
 

STEVENS V. HEALTH CAROUSEL, L.L.C. 
Page 8 
 
“Determining what care is reasonable under the statute is a question of fact.”  
Long v. Roberts Dairy Co., 528 N.W.2d 122, 123 (Iowa 1995). 
 
In this case, I found that the lumbar surgery recommended by Dr. Ries is 
causally related, medically reasonable and necessary to treat claimant’s work injury, 
and that defendants have not offered that care promptly. I conclude that claimant has 
proven entitlement to alternate medical care and specifically to an award of the surgical 
intervention recommended by and through Dr. Ries. I conclude that Dr. Ries shall be 
declared an authorized medical provider and that defendants shall be responsible for 
payment of treatment recommended by Dr. Ries for claimant’s work injury. 
 
The next claim to be considered is the request for a running healing period.  
Claimant asserts that she has not returned to work, has not been medically capable of 
performing substantially similar employment, and that she has not yet achieved 
maximum medical improvement since her work injury in July 2021. Again, claimant 
relies upon the medical opinions of Dr. Ries, Dr. Rayburn, and Dr. Bansal to establish 
that she has ongoing medical restrictions. Dr. Rayburn concluded claimant was at 
maximum medical improvement from a pain treatment perspective. However, Dr. Ries 
has obtained a repeat MRI and recommended surgical intervention for the work injury.  
Dr. Bansal concurs that the recommended surgery is reasonable and necessary. 
 
As noted above, I also found that additional treatment, including the 
recommended low back surgery, is reasonable and necessary to treat claimant’s work 
injury. Therefore, I conclude claimant has proven she did not return to work, that she 
has ongoing medical restrictions that preclude her from returning to substantially similar 
employment, and that she has not yet achieved maximum medical improvement. 
 
Healing period compensation describes temporary workers’ compensation 
weekly benefits that precede an allowance of permanent partial disability benefits.  
Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440 (Iowa 1999). Section 85.34(1) provides 
that healing period benefits are payable to an injured worker who has suffered 
permanent partial disability until the first to occur of three events. These are:  (1) the 
worker has returned to work; (2) the worker medically is capable of returning to 
substantially similar employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical 
recovery.  Maximum medical recovery is achieved when healing is complete and the 
extent of permanent disability can be determined. Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 
Iowa App., 312 N.W.2d 60 (Iowa 1981). Neither maintenance medical care nor an 
employee's continuing to have pain or other symptoms necessarily prolongs the healing 
period. 
 
Having found that claimant is not at maximum medical improvement, has not 
returned to work, and that she is not medically capable of returning to substantially 
similar work, I conclude claimant has proven she remains in a healing period. Iowa 
Code section 85.34(1). Therefore, I conclude claimant is entitled to healing period 
benefits from the date of injury through the date of the arbitration hearing and continuing 
into the future until the first criteria of Iowa Code section 85.34(1) is met. 
 

STEVENS V. HEALTH CAROUSEL, L.L.C. 
Page 9 
 
Claimant asserts a claim for permanent partial disability benefits. I conclude that 
a claim for permanent partial disability benefits is not yet ripe for determination. 
Claimant remains in a healing period and determination of permanent disability cannot 
be determined until claimant achieves maximum medical improvement. Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2). 
 
The parties also disputed the proper weekly rate at which benefits should be 
paid. Having found that the claimant was married, entitled to two exemptions, and that 
her average gross weekly earnings were $1,186.28, I consult the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Rate Tables2 for the period between July 1, 2021 and June 30, 2022, 
and conclude that claimant’s applicable weekly workers' compensation rate is $767.04. 
 
Ms. Stevens also asserts a claim for penalty benefits pursuant to Iowa Code 
section 10A.315(4). 3  Indeed, all weekly benefits that are underpaid as well as late-paid 
benefits are subject to penalties, unless the employer establishes reasonable and 
probable cause or excuse. Robbennolt v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229, 237 
(Iowa 1996).   
 
Iowa Code section 10A.315(4) provides: 
 
a. If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs without 
reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or insurance carrier at 
the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits, the workers' 
compensation commissioner shall award benefits in addition to those benefits payable 
under this subchapter, or chapter 85, 85A, or 85B, up to fifty percent of the amount of 
benefits that were denied, delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause 
or excuse. 
 
b. The workers' compensation commissioner shall award benefits under this 
subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following facts: 
(1) The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in payment, or 
termination in benefits. 
(2) The employer has failed to prove a reasonable or probable cause or 
excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits. 
 
c. In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or excuse under 
paragraph “b,” an excuse shall satisfy all of the following criteria: 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable investigation and evaluation 
by the employer or insurance carrier into whether benefits were owed to the 
employee. 
                                                 
2  https://www.iowaworkcomp.gov/sites/authoring.iowadivisionofworkcomp.gov/files/Ratebook% 
20--%202021%E2%80%932022%20--%20Spreadsheet.xlsx 
3 Although Iowa Code § 86.13 was in effect on the date of this injury, the Iowa Code editor moved 
this statutory section to Iowa Code § 10A.315 effective July 1, 2023. No substantive modifications were 
made to the statute by the legislature.   

STEVENS V. HEALTH CAROUSEL, L.L.C. 
Page 10 
 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and evaluation were the 
actual basis upon which the employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously 
relied to deny, delay payment of, or terminate benefits. 
(3) The employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously conveyed the 
basis for the denial, delay in payment, or termination of benefits to the employee 
at the time of the denial, delay, or termination of benefits. 
 
In Pettengill v. American Blue Ribbon Holdings, L.L,C., 875 N.W.2d 740, 747 
(Iowa App. 2015), the Iowa Court of Appeals held that Iowa Code section 10A.315(4) 
“creates a mandatory timeline for the employer to follow in showing it had a ‘reasonable 
or probable cause or excuse’ for the termination of benefits.” The Pettengill Court 
explained that timeline: 
 
First, the employer's excuse for the termination must have 
been preceded by an investigation. Id.; § 86.13(4)(c)(1). Second, the 
results of the investigation were “the actual basis ... contemporaneously ” 
relied on by the employer in terminating the benefits. Third, the employer 
“contemporaneously conveyed the basis for the ... termination of benefits 
to the employee at the time of the ... termination.” Id. § 86.13(4)(c)(3) 
Pettengill, 875 N.W.2d at 747. 
 
“Defendant has the burden to show compliance with this statutory provision in 
order to avoid the mandatory assessment of a penalty.” Id. at 745. To carry defendants’ 
burden of proof: 
 
The law requires proof of a prompt investigation and that factual basis be 
provided to the injured worker at the time of the denial, delay, or 
termination of benefits.  Herein, defendant must show a timely 
investigation, and that there was a timely communication to claimant of the 
reasons for the denial. 
 
Id. “In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or excuse under 
paragraph ‘b,’ an excuse shall satisfy the three criteria listed in paragraph ‘c.’” Id. at 747. 
 
Ms. Stevens alleges three separate bases for penalty benefits. She asserts an 
underpayment of the weekly rate for a period of 73.286 weeks for a total underpayment 
of $414.74. I found that claimant proved this underpayment and delay or denial of 
benefits. I similarly found that defendants did not prove a reasonable investigation or 
basis for the delay or denial. I also found that defendants failed to prove they 
contemporaneously conveyed their basis for delay or denial to claimant. Therefore, I 
conclude claimant is entitled to an award of penalty benefits for this delay or denial in 
some amount. 
 
Claimant also asserts an unreasonable delay or denial of benefits during the first 
seven weeks of her entitlement to benefits due to an underpayment of benefits. I found 
that claimant proved a delay in payment of these benefits for a period of approximately 
eight months. The total benefits delayed or denied during this period was $2,937.41.  
Again, I found that defendants failed to prove a reasonable investigation or a 

STEVENS V. HEALTH CAROUSEL, L.L.C. 
Page 11 
 
reasonable basis for the denial of these benefits. Defendants also failed to prove the 
basis for their denial was contemporaneously conveyed to claimant for these delayed or 
denied benefits. Once again, I conclude a penalty in some amount is required. 
 
The third basis for award of penalty asserted by claimant is for delay or denial of 
benefits between March 8, 2022 and April 3, 2022. Once again, I found that claimant 
proved this delay or denial of benefits occurred. Defendants failed to prove a 
reasonable investigation or basis for the delay or denial of these benefits. Defendants 
also failed to prove they contemporaneously conveyed the basis for the delay or denial 
of these benefits. Claimant has established entitlement to an award of penalty benefits 
for this third period as well. 
 
In total, claimant proved an unreasonable delay or denial in benefits totaling 
$6,186.83. In determining the amount of penalty, the commissioner is to consider 
factors such as the length of the delay, the number of delays, the information available 
to the employer regarding the employee’s injury and wages, and the employer’s past 
record of penalties. Robbennolt v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 555 N.W.2d 229, 238 (Iowa 
1996). The purpose of Iowa Code section 10A.315(4) is both punishment for 
unreasonable conduct but also deterrence for future cases. Id. at 237. Considering the 
factors outlined by the Iowa Supreme Court as well as the purposes of the penalty 
benefit statute, I conclude a penalty totaling $2,000 is appropriate under the facts and 
circumstances of this case. A penalty in this amount is sufficient to serve as a 
punishment for defendants’ actions and to serve as a deterrent in future cases. 
 
Ms. Stevens also seeks reimbursement of the independent medical evaluation 
charges from Dr. Bansal. Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for 
subsequent examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-
retained physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee 
believes that the initial evaluation is too low. The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination. Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination. See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991). Claimant need not 
ultimately prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify for 
reimbursement under section 85.39. See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008). 
 
Iowa Code section 85.39(2) provides: 
 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall … be reimbursed by the employer the 
reasonable fee for a subsequent examination by a physician of the 
employee’s own choice, and reasonably necessary transportation 
expenses incurred for the examination. 

STEVENS V. HEALTH CAROUSEL, L.L.C. 
Page 12 
 
 
In this case, defendants obtained an evaluation of permanent disability 
performed by Dr. Broghammer. Thereafter, claimant sought an evaluation of permanent 
disability performed by Dr. Bansal. Claimant has proven the injury is compensable.  
Defendants did not specifically address this issue in their post-hearing brief and have 
not challenged the reasonableness of Dr. Bansal’s fees. Therefore, I conclude claimant 
is entitled to reimbursement of Dr. Bansal’s charges. Iowa Code section 85.39(2); Mid 
American Construction, L.L.C. v. Sandlin, 2 N.W.3d 838 (Iowa 2024) P. M. Lattner 
Manufacturing Co. v. Rife, 2 N.W.3d 859 (Iowa 2024); Des Moines Area Regional 
Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 843 (Iowa 2015). 
 
The final disputed issue is whether costs should be assessed against either 
party. Costs are assessed at the discretion of the agency. Iowa Code section 86.40.  
Claimant seeks assessment of filing fees. I find assessment of a filing fee totaling 
$103.00 is reasonable. 876 IAC 4.33(7).   
 
Ms. Stevens also seeks assessment of the cost of a functional capacity 
evaluation. In this case, I did not find the functional capacity evaluation submitted by 
claimant to be terribly enlightening or helpful. I decline to award this as a cost.  
  
Claimant also seeks the award of her deposition costs. I did not find the 
deposition of Ms. Stevens to be terribly helpful.  In fact, the deposition is likely 
duplicative evidence that probably should have been excluded under Iowa Code section 
17A.14(1). Nevertheless, defendants offered this deposition as an exhibit. Therefore, I 
find claimant’s request for assessment of this transcript to be reasonable and assess 
claimant’s cost totaling $620.75. 876 IAC 4.33(2). In total, I conclude that claimant’s 
costs in the amount of $723.75 should be assessed. 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant temporary total disability, or healing period, 
benefits from July 22, 2021 through the date of the arbitration hearing and continuing 
into the future until the first factor of Iowa Code section 85.34(1) is satisfied to terminate 
healing period benefits. 
 
All weekly benefits shall be payable at the rate of seven hundred sixty-seven and 
04/100 dollars ($767.04) per week. 
 
Defendants are entitled to credit for all benefits paid to date. 
 
Interest shall be payable on any past due weekly benefits at an annual rate equal 
to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by the federal reserve in the most 
recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus two percent. See Gamble v. AG 
Leader Technology File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 2018). 
 

STEVENS V. HEALTH CAROUSEL, L.L.C. 
Page 13 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant penalty benefits totaling two thousand and 00/100 
dollars ($2,000.00). 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s independent medical evaluation fees 
totaling three thousand seven hundred ninety-four and 00/100 dollars ($3,794.00). 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the amount of seven hundred 
twenty-three and 75/100 dollars ($723.75). 
 
Defendants shall immediately authorize and pay for causally related future 
medical treatment recommended by Dr. Ries, including but not limited to the currently 
recommended low back surgery. 
 
Dr. Ries shall be deemed an authorized medical provider moving forward. 
 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this    16th    day of May, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Thomas Palmer (via WCES) 
 
Kathryn Johnson (via WCES) 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
