Case Number: 1639478.01
Case Title:  STARRY, ERIC V. GENERAL MILLS INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Starry Eric-1639478.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
ERIC STARRY, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
File Nos. 23700327.01 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
    1639478.01 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
GENERAL MILLS, INC., 
  : 
         ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                           
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
OLD REPUBLIC INS. CO., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
   Head Note Nos.:  1108; 1802; 1803; 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
          1806 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Eric Starry, filed petitions in arbitration seeking workers’ compensation 
benefits from General Mills, Inc., employer, and Old Republic Insurance Company, 
insurance carrier, both as defendants, as a result of stipulated injuries sustained on 
August 12, 2017 and July 23, 2021.  This matter came on for hearing before Deputy 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner Erica J. Fitch, via videoconference, using Zoom.  
The record in this case consists of joint exhibits 1 through 16, claimant’s exhibits 1 
through 6, defendants’ exhibits A through N, and the testimony of the claimant and 
Michael Helverson.   
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
 
File No. 1639478.01 (August 12, 2017 date of injury): 
 
1. Whether the surgery performed by Dr. Joshua Barber on September 11, 
2023 is causally related to the stipulated work injury; 
 
2. Whether the injury is a cause of temporary disability;  
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Feb-28  12:44:51     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 2 
 
3. Nature and extent of permanent disability sustained by claimant1; 
 
4. Whether defendants are responsible for claimed medical expenses in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 6; 
 
5. Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement of an independent medical 
examination under Iowa Code section 85.39; and  
 
6. Specific taxation of costs2. 
 
File No. 23700327.01 (July 23, 2021 date of injury): 
 
1. Whether the surgery performed by Dr. Joshua Barber on September 11, 
2023 is causally related to the stipulated work injury; 
 
2. Whether the injury is a cause of temporary disability;  
 
3. Whether the injury is a cause of permanent disability;  
 
4. Nature and extent of permanent disability sustained by claimant3; 
 
5. The proper commencement date for any permanent disability benefits, if 
ordered; 
 
6. Whether defendants are responsible for claimed medical expenses in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 6;  
 
7. Whether claimant is entitlement to reimbursement of an independent 
medical examination under section 85.394; and 
 
8. Specific taxation of costs5. 
                                                 
1 By post-hearing brief, claimant concedes he is entitled to permanent disability compensation 
based upon his unscheduled functional impairment and not as an industrial disability, under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(v). 
2 While a specific taxation of costs was sought in the hearing report, the evidentiary record does 
not contain an itemized listing of expenses. Therefore, no specific order of taxation can be made and 
instead, a general order will be made. 
3 By post-hearing brief, claimant concedes he is entitled to permanent disability compensation 
based upon his unscheduled functional impairment and not as an industrial disability, under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(v). 
4 While entitlement to reimbursement for an independent medical examination was listed as an 
issue in the hearing report, claimant submitted only the invoice incurred for Dr. Segal’s independent 
medical examination. Dr. Segal’s examination was conducted in connection with the August 12, 2017 
injury and thus, will be addressed in connection with File No. 1639478.01.  
5 While a specific taxation of costs was sought in the hearing report, the evidentiary record does 
not contain an itemized listing of expenses. Therefore, no specific order of taxation can be made and 
instead, a general order will be made. 

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 3 
 
The parties filed hearing reports at the commencement of the arbitration hearing.  
On the hearing reports, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of those 
stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration decision and 
no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised or discussed 
in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant’s testimony was clear, knowledgeable, and consistent as compared to 
the evidentiary record and his deposition testimony. His demeanor at the time of 
evidentiary hearing was excellent and gave the undersigned no reason to doubt 
claimant’s veracity.  Claimant is found credible. 
Claimant was 58 years of age on the date of evidentiary hearing. (Hearing 
Transcript page 10) Claimant graduated high school in 1984. He subsequently earned 
an associates degree in applied science from Des Moines Area Community College, 
with a major in high tech robotics. (Hrg. Tr. p. 10; Defendants’ Exhibit G, pages 77-78) 
Claimant began work at defendant-employer in August 1991 as a maintenance 
mechanic. (Hrg. Tr. p. 11; DEL, p. 175) Claimant testified that as a maintenance 
mechanic, he is expected to lift 75 pounds and work in awkward positions. (Hrg. Tr. p. 
14) The job description for the position of maintenance mechanic includes physical 
demands of crawling, working at heights, work overhead and above shoulder height, 
and the ability to lift 50 pounds or less on a regular basis. (DEH, p. 79) Additional duties 
include required bending, stooping, squatting, twisting, climbing, work below knee level, 
lifting up to 70 pounds. (DEH, pp. 80, 84) 
Claimant testified that before his stipulated work injuries, he did not suffer with 
any back pain, nor numbness or tingling of any part of his body. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 14-15) 
While at work on August 12, 2017, claimant climbed a ladder to inspect and 
lubricate a piece of equipment. The task required him to contort and twist his body into 
an awkward position. While he did not immediately suffer with pain, he woke the next 
morning with back complaints. Specifically, he experienced a very stiff lower back and 
had difficulty moving. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 16-18) Thereafter, he reported the injury to his 
supervisor and an incident report was completed. (Hrg. Tr. p. 18; DEI, p. 90)  
Claimant was referred to the plant physical therapist. He was provided with 
exercises to perform, but he believed the exercises worsened his complaints. (Hrg. Tr. 
pp. 18-19) 
At defendants’ referral, on October 18, 2017, claimant presented to Jeffrey 
Westpheling, M.D. Claimant described symptoms of stiffness and left low back pain. 
Claimant explained the symptoms began the morning after twisting into an awkward 

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 4 
 
position at work. He denied radiation into the lower extremities. Dr. Westpheling 
assessed left-sided low back pain without sciatica. He ordered a course of physical 
therapy and prescribed Flexeril for nighttime use. Dr. Westpheling imposed a 20-pound 
lifting restriction, with only rare overhead reaching and lifting. (Joint Exhibit 1, pages 1-
2) 
Claimant presented to physical therapy on October 25, 2017. The therapist 
opined claimant would benefit from additional services; however, only a single visit had 
been authorized by the insurance carrier. (JE2, pp. 49-50) 
Claimant continued to follow up with Dr. Westpheling. Following an appointment 
with claimant, on November 1, 2017, Dr. Westpheling recommended a course of 
physical therapy. (JE1, pp. 6-7) Dr. Westpheling opined claimant’s low back complaints 
and condition were causally related to claimant’s work injury on August 12, 2017. (JE1, 
p. 9)  
Claimant commenced physical therapy on November 14, 2017. (JE2, p. 52) At a 
session prior to the Thanksgiving holiday, claimant testified he was uncomfortable and 
felt a pop while performing an exercise. The next morning, he had become curled into a 
fetal position and was unable to move. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 20-21) On November 24, 2017, 
claimant telephoned the therapist, noting increased back and hip pain; a session was 
scheduled for that same date. (JE2, p. 56) At a session on November 28, 2017, 
claimant mentioned he had been suffering with some radiation into his right lateral 
buttock since physical therapy treatment the prior week. (JE2, p. 57) On November 30, 
2017, claimant reported slight improvement to the therapist, but continued right-sided 
low back pain into the leg, as well as left-sided low back pain. (JE2, p. 60) 
On December 1, 2017, claimant presented to Dr. Westpheling. He reported 
developing a popping sensation with performance of a particular right hip exercise 
during physical therapy. At the time, he noted some increase in low back pain; however, 
the therapist advised him to continue. Due to increased pain, the therapist had 
recommended a prescription strength anti-inflammatory. Thereafter, claimant 
experienced increased discomfort of the right hip and leg, but denied symptoms below 
the right knee level. On the date of examination, claimant reported tightness across the 
low back but no current right lower extremity symptoms. (JE1, p. 12) Dr. Westpheling 
recommended monitoring of the right-sided symptoms and continued physical therapy. 
He prescribed Naprosyn to use as needed and Flexeril at bedtime. Work restrictions 
remained in place. (JE1, p. 13) 
That same date, December 1, 2017, claimant presented to his personal medical 
provider, Philly Wall, PA-C, for evaluation of a skin lesion. While at the appointment, 
claimant informed PA-C Wall of his ongoing back troubles. Specifically, claimant 
indicated he had injured his back at work and was diagnosed with SI joint dysfunction. 
Pain had been located in the left low back until an exercise caused right-sided low back 
symptoms. PA-C Wall noted that right-sided pain had resolved, leaving claimant with 
only left-sided symptoms. (JE4, p. 97)    

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 5 
 
On December 8, 2017, claimant underwent lumbosacral x-rays at the order of Dr. 
Westpheling. The radiologist read the results as demonstrating a straightening of the 
normal cervical lordosis and scattered mild degenerative changes. (JE1, p. 14) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Westpheling on December 21, 2017, accompanied by a 
nurse case manager. Claimant reported improvement, but one episode of right thigh 
numbness. He described experiencing mild discomfort of the left low back with bending 
and twisting. Dr. Westpheling ordered continued physical therapy and a home exercise 
program, with medication use on an as-needed basis. He lessened claimant’s work 
restrictions.  (JE1, pp. 15-16) 
At an appointment with Dr. Westpheling on January 4, 2018, claimant reported a 
continued dull ache of the left-sided low back, without radicular symptoms. Symptoms 
were aggravated by activities such as scooping snow. He denied any right thigh 
episodes and had not been using medication. Due to the ongoing nature of the 
symptoms, Dr. Westpheling ordered an MRI of claimant’s low back. (JE1, pp. 17-18) 
Claimant underwent the ordered lumbar spine MRI on January 11, 2018. The 
radiologist opined the results revealed: diffuse disc bulging with a right paracentral disc 
protrusion at the L2-L3 level, resulting in moderate central canal stenosis and 
contributing to mild right neural foraminal narrowing; mild central canal stenosis at L3-L4 
and mild right-sided neural foraminal narrowing; and discogenic vertebral bone marrow 
changes at L3 and L4 as a consequence of disc degeneration, also with a Schmorl’s 
node in the posterior aspect of the superior endplate of L4, suggesting a potential acute 
abnormality. (JE5, pp. 114-115) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Westpheling on January 16, 2018. Dr. Westpheling 
advised claimant his MRI findings indicated degenerative disease and appeared non-
surgical. A program of work hardening was ordered. (JE1, p. 21) 
On January 19, 2018, claimant presented to PA-C Wall for follow up of his 
chronic low back pain. Given claimant’s MRI findings, PA-C Wall opined claimant was 
non-surgical. She suggested consultation with a pain specialist. Claimant indicated he 
would discuss potential referrals to a pain specialist or chiropractor with Dr. 
Westpheling. (JE4, p. 102) 
On January 30, 2018, claimant returned to Dr. Westpheling and indicated he had 
not begun work conditioning, as insurance approval had not yet been obtained. Dr. 
Westpheling continued to recommend a work hardening program. He decreased 
claimant’s restrictions slightly to allow lifting up to 50 pounds, but no lifting of more than 
15 pounds overhead. (JE1, p. 25) 
Defendants referred claimant to board certified physical medicine and 
rehabilitation physician Robert Rondinelli, M.D., for an independent medical 
examination (IME) on March 13, 2018. (DEE, pp. 41, 57) Dr. Rondinelli performed a 
history, records review, and examination. (DEE, pp. 41-45) Dr. Rondinelli assessed a 
history of strain type injury to the low back, resulting in centralized, non-radicular low 

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 6 
 
back pain, primarily in the left sacroiliac joint region, representing probable sacroiliac 
joint dysfunction. Dr. Rondinelli opined his condition was causally related to the work 
injury on August 12, 2017. He also assessed degenerative disc disease causing mild 
central canal stenosis and mild right foraminal narrowing at L2-L3 and L3-L4 levels, with 
no evidence of radicular encroachment radiographically and no evidence of 
radiculopathy on physical examination. He opined this condition was non-work related. 
Additionally, Dr. Rondinelli noted claimant presented with a Schmorl’s node at the 
superior endplate of L4, for which acute trauma related changes had not been entirely 
ruled out. (DEE, p. 45) Dr. Rondinelli recommended a bone scan of the lumbo-pelvic 
region to rule out acute changes. He also recommended work hardening. Pending 
completion of these items, Dr. Rondinelli declined to place claimant at maximum 
medical improvement (MMI) or opine as to permanent impairment. (DEE, p. 46) 
Claimant underwent a bone scan on April 20, 2018. The radiologist read the 
results as revealing: findings consistent with nondisplaced insufficiency fracture 
involving the right aspect of the mid and lower sacrum, possibly subacute; degenerative 
disc disease along the left aspect of L3 to L4; and other regions of degenerative 
changes. (JE6, pp. 116-117) 
The bone scan results were provided to Dr. Rondinelli for review. By a letter 
dated April 24, 2018, Dr. Rondinelli opined sacral insufficiency fractures most commonly 
occurred as a result of osteoporosis and he was not aware of claimant having this 
condition. He opined it was “certainly possible” that the condition represented a hairline 
undisplaced fracture related to the work injury. As such, Dr. Rondinelli opined it would 
entitle claimant to a permanent impairment rating once MMI was achieved. (DEE, p. 48) 
He recommended further evaluation by Dr. Westpheling of this condition. (DEE, p. 49) 
Dr. Rondinelli subsequently offered further explanation of his April 24, 2018 
opinions. (DEE, p. 50) Dr. Rondinelli indicated a sacral insufficiency fracture could be 
related to trauma suffered in the work injury, yet opined this would not be a “typical 
trauma” expected with his mechanism of injury. He further opined this pathology had a 
“high probability of explaining at least a portion of [claimant’s] residual sacroiliac pain” 
and he attributed this pain to the work injury. (DEE, p. 51) As he was not the treating 
physician, he recommended further evaluation by Dr. Westpheling of this potentially 
missed diagnosis. (DEE, pp. 51, 53) With respect to causation, Dr. Rondinelli 
elaborated: 
[Claimant] developed a low back strain type injury which within medical 
probability is associated with his activities on the job… The fact that he 
now has a sacral insufficiency fracture would suggest that this was 
present all along and somehow associated with his trauma on the date of 
injury as he has no prior history of work-related or nonwork-related trauma 
to his spine and no prior history of back pain or sacroiliac pain prior to his 
injury on August 12, 2017. 
(DEE, p. 52)    

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 7 
 
At the referral of defendants, claimant appeared to Chad Abernathey, M.D., for 
neurosurgical evaluation on August 3, 2018. Dr. Abernathey reviewed claimant’s 
diagnostic testing. He opined claimant’s MRI revealed mild degenerative changes 
consistent with age and without significant neural compromise. He identified a small 
right L2-L3 subscapular disc extrusion, but noted that claimant’s symptoms were 
primarily left-sided. With respect to the bone scan, Dr. Abernathey disagreed with the 
radiologist’s interpretation of a possible sacral insufficiency fracture. He found no 
evidence of a “significant” sacral fracture. (JE7, p. 118) 
Dr. Abernathey opined claimant presented with a work-related chronic 
lumbosacral strain. He found a small right-sided L2-L3 subscapular disc extrusion; 
however, he found well-compressed neural elements and noted claimant’s symptoms 
were left-sided. Dr. Abernathey also indicated he was “skeptical that there is any 
significant evidence of a sacral fracture” and he considered the finding to be a 
“radiologist observation.” He did not recommend surgical intervention, but rather, 
favored conservative care. Specifically, he recommended pain clinic evaluation and 
potential epidural steroid injection. (JE7, p. 119) He opined the need for pain clinic 
evaluation was work-related. (DED, p. 30) 
Under separate cover dated August 3, 2018, Dr. Abernathey responded to 
questions raised by defendants’ counsel. He assessed chronic subjective lumbosacral 
strain, without significant objective findings to readily explain claimant’s 
symptomatology. He related the diagnosis and symptoms to the work injury on August 
12, 2017. Dr. Abernathey expressed skepticism of the sacral insufficiency fracture. Dr. 
Abernathey opined claimant would have achieved MMI from the aggravation six months’ 
post-injury, or February 17, 2018. He did not recommend any permanent restrictions 
from a neurosurgical standpoint. (DED, p. 28)  
On September 19, 2018, claimant underwent an L3-L4 interlaminar epidural 
steroid injection, performed by Mark Kline, M.D. (JE8, pp. 120-122)  
On October 3, 2018, claimant returned to Dr. Westpheling along with his nurse 
case manager for reevaluation. Dr. Westpheling noted that claimant had undergone a 
bone scan, which revealed degenerative joint disease at left L3-L4, as well as a 
possible nondisplaced insufficiency fracture of the right mid- and lower sacrum. Dr. 
Westpheling noted Dr. Abernathey disagreed with the radiologist interpretation of a 
sacral fracture, but had recommended pain clinic evaluation. Claimant reported he 
continued to experience minimal low back discomfort, which increased with activity, as 
well as occasional numbness and tingling of the right lateral thigh. (JE1, p. 27) Dr. 
Westpheling placed claimant at MMI, without a need for further care. Dr. Westpheling 
assigned permanent restrictions of: no lifting, carrying, pushing, or pulling greater than 
50 pounds and no lifting more than 15 pounds overhead. He assigned no permanent 
impairment. (JE1, p. 28) 
On December 28, 2018, at the referral of claimant’s counsel, claimant presented 
to board certified neurosurgeon, David Segal, M.D., for an independent medical 
examination (IME). (Claimant’s Exhibit 1, p. 1) Dr. Segal authored a report containing 

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 8 
 
his findings and opinions dated January 16, 2019. He took a history and performed a 
physical examination. (CE1, pp. 12-16) Dr. Segal completed a records review. (CE1, pp. 
1-11) Following review of claimant’s bone scan, Dr. Segal opined: 
There is intense isotope uptake in the sacrum, most pronounced in the 
mid-right body and SI joint. There is also increased uptake on the left in 
the SI joint. This increased uptake is a fact, not an opinion. Opinions can 
possibly vary as to the significance or diagnosis. This increased uptake is 
present and significant to the point where it would most probably have 
clinical correlation, either acute or subacute. Increased uptake on bone 
scan represents increased osteoblastic activity and increased blood flow. 
This finding may be caused by fracture, synovitis, infection, or tumor. This 
would not be considered a normal finding or normal variant.  
In this case, my diagnoses and mechanism of injury as described below 
correlate to this finding. It is not reasonable to opine that this finding does 
not exist, or for a doctor to simply say that they do not agree with the 
radiologist, without explaining this factual finding on this imaging study. 
This is also intense uptake in the facet region of L3-L4 on the left, 
correlating to disc, Schmorl’s nodule (endplate fracture), and facet injury.  
(CE1, p. 12) 
 
Dr. Segal opined claimant’s left-sided symptoms began at the time of injury and 
continued to the date of evaluation. The right-sided symptoms, specifically the 
radiculopathy and bone scan findings, were “probably” the result of the injury sustained 
in physical therapy. (CE1, p. 16) Dr. Segal opined claimant’s bone scan findings were 
consistent with his continued symptoms from the time of the physical therapy injury to 
date. He noted the bone scan findings were read as consistent with an insufficiency 
fracture. In the case of an individual with claimant’s age and onset of sacral pain with 
active exercise, Dr. Segal opined the injury would be more consistent with a stress 
fracture. He explained that the two conditions were similar, but involved different 
mechanisms of injury. Given claimant sustained the injury in physical therapy for the 
work-related injury, Dr. Segal opined claimant’s right-sided symptoms were causally 
related to the work injury. (CE1, p. 17) 
 
Following history, records review, and examination, Dr. Segal assessed the 
following diagnoses: traumatic lumbar facet arthropathy on the left, L4-L5 and L5-S1; 
traumatic SI joint arthropathy on the left; lumbar disc herniation at L2-L3 and L3-L4; 
right lumbar radiculopathy with an L3 nerve root signature; Schmorl’s nodule, L4 
endplate; and stress fracture of the right mid to lower sacrum. (CE1, p. 21) Dr. Segal 
opined all of the diagnoses were either directly or indirectly caused by claimant’s August 
12, 2017 work injury. He found the facet arthropathy, Schmorl’s nodule, and left 
sacroiliac arthropathy were directly related to the twisting injury. He opined the disc 
herniation and right-sided radiculopathy were caused by an injury during physical 
therapy. While possible the herniation preexisted the injury, he opined the physical 
therapy injury represented a permanent aggravation. He also opined the stress fracture 

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 9 
 
of the right sacrum was also caused by the physical therapy injury, thus making the 
condition work-related. (CE1, p. 21)  
Dr. Segal expressly disagreed with Dr. Abernathey’s diagnosis of lumbosacral 
strain, arguing that a strain would not persist for a year to the degree suffered by 
claimant. He opined there were MRI and bone scan findings which provided diagnoses 
which explained claimant’s symptomatology. (CE1, p. 19) Dr. Segal also opined 
claimant presented with objective changes which correlated to his complaints. (CE1, p. 
20) 
Dr. Segal opined claimant achieved MMI six months after the onset of right 
radicular symptomatology, or May 1, 2018. (CE1, p. 20) He opined claimant sustained 
permanent impairment as a result of the injury. Specifically, he opined claimant fell 
within DRE lumbar category III, warranting a rating of 10 percent whole person for 
lumbar disc herniation with radiculopathy. (CE1, p. 21) Dr. Segal opined the left-sided 
arthropathy with SI joint arthropathy represented a pain syndrome not accounted for in 
the DRE tables. He, therefore, assigned a permanent impairment of 3 percent whole 
person under the pain syndrome guidelines. For the lumbar injury, he found a total 13 
percent whole person impairment. For the right sacral fracture, Dr. Segal assigned a 5 
percent whole person rating under guidance for rating pelvic disorders. In total, he found 
a permanent combined impairment of 18 percent whole person. (CE1, p. 22)    
Defendants introduced evidence of a May 2015 board of medicine charge 
against Dr. Segal. Specifically, an allegation was made that Dr. Segal failed to provide 
appropriate neurosurgical care. (DEN, p. 206) Allegations included: inappropriate use of 
epidural blood patches; excessive infections following neurostimulator placement; and 
failure to establish coverage arrangements. It was also alleged that Dr. Segal 
maintained pre-signed prescriptions that were intended to be completed and issued at 
later dates. (DEN, p. 211) Dr. Segal denied the allegations. (DEN, p. 214) The charge 
was resolved by settlement agreement in December 2016 wherein the board issued a 
citation and warning, ordered a $5,000 civil penalty, and required a professional ethics 
program. Dr. Segal also agreed he would not engage in the practice of surgery, 
consistent with his May 2016 decision to forego performance of surgery due to his 
health condition of Parkinsonism. (DEN, pp. 206, 215-216) 
Defendants’ counsel requested Dr. Abernathey review and respond to Dr. 
Segal’s report. Dr. Abernathey did so via letter dated February 15, 2019. Dr. Abernathey 
opined the diagnosis of sacral insufficiency fracture was not consistent with claimant’s 
work injury, as such a fracture typically required significant impact at claimant’s age. He 
further opined claimant’s bone scan was of extremely poor quality. Dr. Abernathey 
opined claimant’s CT and MRI studies demonstrated degenerative changes, with uptake 
consistent with age-related degenerative changes and without evidence of an acute 
injury. (DED, p. 31) Dr. Abernathey considered claimant’s work-related diagnosis to be 
a chronic subjective lumbosacral strain. He did not recommend surgical intervention, but 
rather, additional conservative management such as pain clinic evaluation. (DED, p. 32) 

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 10 
 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Westpheling on March 20, 2019. Claimant described 
increased numbness and tingling of the right lateral thigh, particularly with prolonged 
ambulation. He also relayed development of pain of the medial aspect of the left knee. 
Claimant explained that his natural gait resulted in the toe pointing more outwards and 
resulted in increased low back pain. As a result, the physical therapist advised claimant 
to attempt to rotate his foot more inwards. Claimant inquired whether the knee pain 
could be a result of this internal rotation of the left foot. (JE1, p. 29)  
Dr. Westpheling indicated claimant was not a candidate for further physical 
therapy or injection therapies, due to his lack of lasting response to prior care. Claimant 
asked about the possibility of chiropractic or osteopathic manipulation. Dr. Westpheling 
indicated he would discuss the possibility of an osteopathic manipulation referral with 
the workers’ compensation insurance carrier. Dr. Westpheling opined the left knee 
symptoms were likely referable to a degenerative medial meniscus condition and were 
not “directly related” to his back injury. (JE1, p. 30) 
Defendants’ counsel requested Dr. Westpheling review Dr. Segal’s IME report. 
Dr. Westpheling authored a responsive letter dated March 27, 2019. In response to Dr. 
Segal’s opinions, Dr. Westpheling opined claimant’s testing revealed facet arthropathy, 
but the condition was preexisting and was not exacerbated or aggravated by the work 
injury, given claimant did not present with pain over the midline of the low back. He 
similarly opined the diagnosis of SI joint arthropathy was possible, but would not have 
been caused or aggravated by the work injury. He opined claimant did present with a 
lumbar disc herniation at right L2-L3, but he did not believe it was caused by the work 
injury, as claimant did not have right-sided symptoms. Dr. Westpheling acknowledged it 
was possible that the herniation was exacerbated by the physical therapy which caused 
right hip and thigh symptoms. He opined claimant did present with a Schmorl’s nodule 
on MRI, but opined such a finding was common in patients without symptomatology and 
likely was degenerative and predated the injury. He disagreed with Dr. Segal’s 
diagnosis of a stress fracture of the right mid to lower sacrum, stating a bone scan had 
low specificity for such an injury. Dr. Westpheling opined claimant’s right-sided 
symptoms were most likely related to the disc herniation rather than a sacral 
abnormality. (DEB, p. 21) 
Dr. Westpheling assessed a chronic left low back strain and right L3 
radiculopathy. Dr. Westpheling agreed with Dr. Segal’s rating of 10 percent whole 
person, due to disc herniation with right lumbar radiculopathy and opined the condition 
was likely aggravated by the physical therapy incident. He disagreed with Dr. Segal’s 
additional rating for left facet arthropathy with SI joint arthropathy. He did not believe the 
condition qualified as a ratable pain syndrome. Dr. Westpheling explained he also did 
not believe claimant suffered from symptoms of left-sided facet arthropathy and SI joint 
arthropathy given the location of symptoms at his last evaluation. Finally, he did not 
agree with a rating for a sacral fracture. (DEB, pp. 21-22)    
Claimant began a course of OMT with Jaclyn Price, D.O., on April 23, 2019. 
(JE9, 123) Claimant underwent weekly sessions through the end of May 29, 2019. (JE9, 
pp. 128-153) 

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 11 
 
On July 23, 2021, claimant suffered an injury at work when he slipped in green 
algae on the roof. Claimant testified he twisted to catch himself and felt a burst of pain 
about his right SI joint and down his right thigh. (Hrg. Tr. pp. 28-29) 
On July 29, 2021, claimant presented to Dr. Westpheling for evaluation of right 
low back pain with radiation into the right thigh following the work injury on July 23, 
2021. (JE1, p. 32) Dr. Westpheling assessed a lumbar strain and ordered a course of 
physical therapy. He also added a work restriction of no ladder climbing. (JE1, p. 33) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Westpheling on September 10, 2021. At that time, 
claimant reported continued mild numbness and tingling of the right thigh. He also 
reported a recent aggravation of left low back symptoms, caused by physical therapy. 
Claimant explained that he performed calf stretching in physical therapy and it was 
noted that he was unable to dorsiflex the left foot and ankle. Claimant indicated he had 
not noticed this symptom in the past. Dr. Westpheling reviewed claimant’s prior MRI and 
saw no anatomic findings suggestive of compression of the left L5 nerve root. (JE1, p. 
39) 
Following examination, Dr. Westpheling assessed a lumbar strain, left leg 
weakness, and numbness of the right anterior thigh. He opined the right-sided 
symptoms were suggestive of meralgia paresthetica. He also noted claimant lacked 
dorsiflexion of the left foot in a standing position, which he opined was concerning for an 
injury to the left L5 nerve root. Due to lack of explanation on MRI, Dr. Westpheling 
ordered EMGs of the bilateral lower extremities. In the interim, claimant was permitted 
to return to work under his prior permanent restrictions and to continue physical therapy. 
(JE1, p. 40) 
On September 28, 2021, claimant underwent EMG/nerve conduction studies with 
Sunny Kim, M.D. Dr. Kim found evidence of a severe chronic L5 radiculopathy on the 
left and possible chronic right L4 radiculopathy. Dr. Kim recommended correlation with 
MRI and consideration of surgical decompression. (JE10, pp. 154-155) 
Following electrodiagnostic studies, claimant presented to Dr. Westpheling on 
September 30, 2021. He indicated the study report revealed a chronic left L5 
radiculopathy and possible right L4 radiculopathy. Claimant reported continued 
intermittent numbness and tingling of the right thigh and difficulty with dorsiflexion of the 
left foot. Dr. Westpheling ordered a repeat MRI of the lumbosacral spine to evaluate a 
potential discogenic cause of the EMG findings. (JE1, p. 43)      
Claimant underwent a repeat lumbar spine MRI on October 12, 2021. The 
radiologist found T11-T12 disc osteophyte complex with central protrusion causing 
moderate to severe canal stenosis, with the protruding component abutting the cord 
with increased STIR signal, as well as other mild to moderate degenerative changes. 
(JE11, p. 160)  
On October 14, 2021, claimant returned to Dr. Westpheling to discuss the MRI 
results. Dr. Westpheling indicated that per the report, results revealed a mild broad-

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 12 
 
based disc bulge at L4-L5 with mild central canal stenosis, but no mention of left 
foraminal stenosis or contact with the descending left L5 nerve root, which he opined 
would be explanatory of his chronic left lower extremity radiculopathy. The report also 
found a central protrusion at T11-T12, but he opined this finding would not explain the 
left L5 radiculopathy. (JE1, p. 47) As a result, Dr. Westpheling issued a neurologist 
referral. (JE1, p. 48) Dr. Westpheling later clarified he sought neurologist evaluation to 
determine the cause of claimant’s left foot drop, as it could be work or non-work related. 
He opined claimant achieved MMI for the July 23, 2021 injury as of October 14, 2021. 
(DEB, p. 23) 
On November 18, 2021, claimant presented for neurological consultation with 
board certified neurological surgeon, Darin Smith, M.D. (JE1, p. 158, DEC, p. 27) 
Claimant reported experiencing low back pain, with radiating pain to his left leg and foot, 
as well as associated numbness and tingling to his right thigh and left leg. Claimant also 
indicated he was unable to dorsiflex his left foot. (JE11, p. 158) Dr. Smith assessed: 
lumbar disc disease with radiculopathy; chronic left-sided low back pain without sciatica; 
lumbar spondylosis; meralgia paresthetica of the right side; and sacroiliac joint pain. Dr. 
Smith opined claimant presented with chronic left foot drop with EMG suggestions of L5 
etiology, but the MRI revealed no nerve compression, so he found claimant non-
surgical. Dr. Smith offered claimant a left SI joint injection for claimant’s left SI joint pain. 
(JE11, p. 161) 
On March 7, 2023, claimant sought care with Joshua Barber, M.D. for evaluation 
of back pain and left leg symptoms. Claimant described his history of symptoms and 
injuries at work. Following x-rays and MRI review, Dr. Barber assessed left lumbar 
radiculopathy, left foot drop, and lumbar degenerative disc disease. He opined claimant 
presented with left L5-S1 radiculopathy with objective chronic left foot drop consistent 
with left L5 weakness. Dr. Barber recommended initiation of care, including physical 
therapy, Meloxicam, Gabapentin, and an AFO brace. He also ordered electrodiagnostic 
studies and a lumbar spine MRI. (JE15, p. 173)  
At the referral of Dr. Barber, claimant was evaluated for AFO brace options. 
(JE16, p. 215) 
On April 17, 2023, claimant underwent a repeat lumbar spine MRI. The 
radiologist found: T11-T12 moderate to severe spinal canal stenosis and mild right-
sided neuroforaminal narrowing; subtle abnormal STIR signal in the distal thoracic 
spinal cord at the T11-T12 level, concerning for cord edema or myelomalacia; and 
multilevel mild degenerative changes throughout the lumbar spine. (JE12, pp. 162-163)  
On April 20, 2023, claimant underwent repeat EMG/nerve conduction studies. 
Shereen Chang, M.D. opined the findings suggested chronic L5 radiculopathy. (JE13, p. 
165) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Barber on April 25, 2023. Dr. Barber opined claimant’s 
testing revealed a chronic L5 radiculopathy. (JE15, p. 178) He recommended a 

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 13 
 
diagnostic and therapeutic left L4-L5 transforaminal epidural steroid injection. (JE15, p. 
179) 
On May 4, 2023, claimant underwent a left L4-L5 transforaminal epidural steroid 
injection. (JE14, p. 169) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Barber on May 17, 2023. He found notable benefit in 
claimant’s left leg radicular symptoms following the May 4, 2023 injection, but a steady 
return of pre-injection symptoms. (JE15, p. 181) Dr. Barber opined claimant’s 
radiographic findings were consistent with his clinical pathology, and claimant received 
a positive diagnostic response with steroid injection. Dr. Barber recommended 
proceeding with an open L4 laminectomy, but cautioned it was unlikely surgery would 
improve the chronic weakness of claimant’s left leg. (JE15, p. 182) 
On June 12, 2023, claimant presented to Sarah Pudenz, ARNP, with complaints 
of left heel pain. Nurse Pudenz assessed left foot pain, plantar fasciitis of the left foot, 
and acquired left foot drop. To address the plantar fasciitis, she recommended calf 
stretches, athletic taping, power step inserts, and performed a depo medrol injection of 
the left heel. For the left foot drop, she recommended claimant obtain a long-term AFO 
brace following back surgery. (JE15, pp. 185-187)  
Claimant underwent open L4 laminectomy, medial facetectomy, and 
foraminotomy with Dr. Barber on September 11, 2023. (JE15, p. 199) 
On September 26, 2023, claimant returned to Dr. Barber. Claimant reported he 
felt “‘great’ overall” and his radicular symptoms had resolved. Claimant reported noticing 
the foot drop less than pre-surgery. The two discussed restrictions and a plan for 
returning to work. (JE15, pp. 203-204) Claimant was released to return to work without 
restrictions effective November 6, 2023. (JE15, p. 212) 
Claimant received his custom AFO brace on October 27, 2023. (JE16, p. 217) 
Claimant presented to Dr. Barber on December 12, 2023 and expressed 
pleasure with the results of surgery. (JE15, p. 210) Dr. Barber indicated claimant was 
doing well clinically. He opined claimant could gradually return to all activities as 
tolerated, without restrictions. (JE15, p. 211)  
Claimant testified he and Dr. Barber discussed permanent work restrictions and 
claimant’s understanding that defendant-employer would not accept restrictions 
authored by a personal physician. Claimant informed Dr. Barber of his permanent 
restrictions as imposed by Dr. Westpheling and Dr. Barber was satisfied with the 
existing restrictions. (DEL, p. 199) 
On December 27, 2023, Dr. Smith expressed agreement with statements written 
by defendants’ counsel following a prior conversation. Thereby, he agreed that claimant 
had a degenerative condition of his lumbar spine and left foot drop, which were not 
causally related to either of claimant’s work injuries. He further opined the surgery 

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 14 
 
performed by Dr. Barber was related to the degenerative lumbar spine condition and not 
attributable to either work injury. (DEC, pp. 25-26)  
At the referral of claimant’s counsel, claimant underwent an independent medical 
examination with board certified orthopedic surgeon, Brian Crites, M.D. Following 
records review, interview, and examination, Dr. Crites issued a report containing his 
findings and opinions dated February 12, 2024. (CE4, p. 1) Dr. Crites assessed: chronic 
low back pain, stable; left lumbar radiculopathy, improved with surgery; lumbar lateral 
recess stenosis, improved with surgery; chronic left foot drop, improved with surgery; 
and left foot plantar fasciitis, improved but mildly symptomatic. (CE4, p. 7) 
Dr. Crites opined these diagnoses were causally related to claimant’s work injury 
of July 23, 2021. He opined that Dr. Barber’s successful surgery confirmed the facet 
arthropathy with lateral recess compression resulted in the left L5 radiculopathy and foot 
drop. Dr. Crites opined the facet arthropathy was a degenerative condition and more 
likely than not, preexisted claimant’s injuries. However, he believed both of claimant’s 
work injuries caused material aggravations of the condition. Dr. Crites reasoned that 
claimant was asymptomatic prior to the August 12, 2017 injury and claimant developed 
the left foot drop thereafter, with the condition noted after his July 23, 2021 work injury. 
He opined claimant suffered a material aggravation of his spinal condition on July 23, 
2021 and this aggravation resulted in left foot drop. Dr. Crites also opined claimant’s 
spinal condition with left L5 radiculopathy and need for surgery were work related and a 
result of a material aggravation caused by the work injury of July 23, 2021. Dr. Crites 
further opined that the lack of treatment for the chronic L5 radiculopathy and foot drop 
resulted in tightness of the muscles of the posterior compartment of claimant’s lower 
leg. He indicated heel cord tightness or contracture is a known contributing factor to 
development of plantar fasciitis. Accordingly, he opined claimant’s plantar fasciitis was a 
result of the untreated left L5 radiculopathy and thus, causally related to his work injury. 
(CE4, pp. 7-8)  
Dr. Crites opined claimant achieved MMI for his low back, spine, and 
radiculopathy on December 12, 2023, the date he was released by Dr. Barber. Relative 
to claimant’s plantar fasciitis, Dr. Crites assigned an MMI date of December 31, 2023, 
the approximate date claimant received his beneficial inserts. Dr. Crites assigned a 
permanent impairment rating of 13 percent whole person, based upon DRE lumbar 
category III, due to delayed treatment and chronic symptoms. Dr. Crites also assigned a 
3 percent whole person or 7 percent lower extremity impairment for loss of left ankle 
range of motion. He attributed the impairment to the untreated chronic left L5 
radiculopathy, but also opined it contributed to claimant’s plantar fasciitis condition, thus 
warranting additional impairment beyond the DRE category. (CE4, p. 8) In total, Dr. 
Crites found a 16 percent whole person impairment as a result of the work injury of July 
23, 2021. He opined claimant would require future medical care, including physical 
therapy, potential injection therapy, shoe inserts, and AFO brace. Dr. Crites 
recommended permanent restrictions of: no lifting greater than 45 pounds; no climbing; 
no prolonged sitting; and no bending, twisting, or stooping. (CE4, p. 9) 

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 15 
 
Defendants retained Jonathon Fields, M.D. to perform a medical records review. 
Defendants requested the report on February 20, 2024 and Dr. Fields issued his report 
on March 1, 2024. (DEA, p. 10) With respect to the August 12, 2017 injury, Dr. Fields 
agreed with the 10 percent whole person rating, utilizing DRE lumbar category III. He 
found no basis for any additional impairment. (DEA, p. 11) With respect to the July 23, 
2021 injury, Dr. Fields opined claimant’s left foot drop was a result of a degenerative 
spinal condition and not related to a work injury. (DEA, p. 13) In terms of permanent 
impairment and notwithstanding his opinions on causation, Dr. Fields agreed with the 13 
percent whole person rating, utilizing DRE lumbar category III. He found no basis for 
additional impairment, specifically opining the DRE rating adequately incorporated 
radicular symptomatology which produced loss of left ankle range of motion. (DEA, pp. 
12-13) Dr. Fields opined both of the DRE impairments were evaluating essentially the 
same medical condition, specifically the chronic, degenerative low back condition. He 
found no acute pathophysiological change in the low back attributed to the July 23, 
2021 injury. (DEA, p. 13) Accordingly, he opined claimant’s 13 percent rating should be 
reduced by the prior 10 percent rating, producing a 3 percent impairment attributable to 
the July 23, 2021 injury. (DEA, p. 14) 
Claimant testified he continues to experience left foot drop, as well as numbness 
of the right thigh. (Hrg. Tr. p. 36) He continues to use ice and Advil on occasion. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 67) Claimant continues to work at defendant-employer and enjoys his work. (Hrg. 
Tr. p. 14) He has not conducted any form of job search, nor does he have immediate 
intent to retire. (Hrg. Tr. p. 45) Due to his seniority level, claimant is able to pass on 
overtime hours, particularly 12-hour days. Claimant indicated he does not prefer to work 
greater than 8 hours, as his back and foot begin to hurt with prolonged standing on 
concrete. (Hrg. Tr. p. 49; DEL, p. 197) At the time of his 2017 injury, claimant earned 
$33.54 per hour. (Hrg. Tr. p. 65; DEL, p. 178) By the date of the 2021 injury, claimant 
earned $35.52 per hour. (Hrg. Tr. p. 65) At the time of evidentiary hearing, claimant 
earned $38.76 per hour. (Hrg. Tr. p. 49; DEL, p. 196) 
Claimant’s supervisor, Michael Halverson, testified at evidentiary hearing. He 
testified that claimant is currently employed at the highest level of maintenance 
mechanic in defendant-employer’s plant. (Hrg. Tr. p. 81) He acknowledged that 
maintenance mechanics have duties which require lifting of more than 15 pounds 
overhead and 50 pounds generally. He testified that in such instances, claimant had the 
freedom to figure out how to perform the task within his restrictions, including asking 
others for help. (Hrg. Tr. p. 86) Mr. Helverson described claimant as a dependable 
employee, whom he trusts to train other employees. (Hrg. Tr. p. 87)  
Mr. Helverson’s testimony was clear and consistent with the evidentiary record. 
His demeanor gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his veracity. Mr. Helverson is 
found credible. 
 
 

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 16 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
File No. 1639478.01 (August 12, 2017 date of injury): 
The first issue for determination is whether the surgery performed by Dr. Joshua 
Barber on September 11, 2023 is causally related to the stipulated work injury. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
Dr. Barber diagnosed L5-S1 radiculopathy with objective chronic left foot drop 
consistent with left L5 weakness. He opined claimant’s radiographic findings were 
consistent with his clinical pathology and positive diagnostic response to epidural 
steroid injection. Dr. Barber recommended surgical intervention, which claimant 
underwent on September 11, 2023. Thereafter, claimant experienced resolution of 
radicular symptoms.  
The evidentiary record is devoid of a medical opinion causally relating claimant’s 
need for surgery to the work injury of August 12, 2017. Dr. Smith specifically opined 
claimant’s need for surgery was not related to the August 12, 2017 injury. Dr. Crites 
causally related the surgery to claimant’s July 23, 2021 injury. As the record lacks the 

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 17 
 
opinion of a medical professional to counter these opinions and support a determination 
that the need for surgery was related to the work injury of August 12, 2017, I am unable 
to find that claimant has met his burden of proof on this issue.  
As claimant failed to establish a causal relationship between the August 12, 2017 
work injury and the surgery performed by Dr. Barber, the injury is not a cause of 
temporary disability and claimant is not entitled to temporary disability benefits from 
September 11, 2023 through November 6, 2023. Defendants are not responsible for 
medical expenses claimed in Claimant’s Exhibit 6, as the care was sought in connection 
with Dr. Barber’s treatment and care recommendations.  
The next issue for determination is the nature and extent of permanent disability 
sustained by claimant. By post-hearing brief, claimant concedes he is entitled to 
permanent disability compensation based upon his unscheduled functional impairment 
and not as an industrial disability, under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent partial disability is 
compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or as an unscheduled injury pursuant to the provisions of section 
85.34(2)(v). The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured 
worker is entitled is determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is 
"limited to the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. 
Fruehauf Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 
312, 320 (Iowa 1998).  
Iowa Code section 85.34(x) states:  
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in 
paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional 
disability and not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage 
of permanent impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides 
to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
medical association, as adopted by the workers' compensation 
commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency 
expertise shall not be utilized in determining loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or 
paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not loss of 
earning capacity.  
 
Dr. Segal opined claimant sustained permanent impairment as a result of the 
work injury of August 12, 2017. He found claimant fell within DRE lumbar category III, 
warranting a rating of 10 percent whole person due to a lumbar disc herniation with 
radiculopathy. Dr. Segal opined claimant sustained an additional 3 percent whole 
person impairment due to considering the present arthropathy as a pain syndrome. 
Finally, Dr. Segal opined claimant sustained a 5 percent whole person impairment due 
to the sacral fracture representing a pelvic disorder. Dr. Segal specifically found each of 
these diagnoses were causally related to claimant’s work injury. 

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 18 
 
 
Although he initially opined claimant did not sustain permanent impairment, 
following review of Dr. Segal’s report, Dr. Westpheling changed his opinion. He agreed 
with Dr. Segal’s rating of 10 percent whole person under DRE lumbar category III, due 
to disc herniation with right lumbar radiculopathy. He disagreed that arthropathy 
qualified as a ratable pain syndrome. He also disagreed that claimant sustained a 
ratable impairment due to sacral fracture, as he believed the bone scan had low 
specificity and claimant’s symptoms were explained by the disc herniation.  
 
Dr. Fields performed a records review and opined claimant sustained a 10 
percent whole person impairment under DRE lumbar category III; he did not find any 
additional ratings were warranted.  
 
All three physicians opined claimant sustained a 10 percent whole person 
impairment under DRE lumbar category III. I, therefore, adopt the 10 percent whole 
person rating. It is necessary to determine whether claimant sustained any additional 
impairment beyond this 10 percent whole person rating. Dr. Segal’s arthropathy rating 
as a pain syndrome is inconsistent with the ratings offered by Drs. Westpheling and 
Fields and specifically rejected by both physicians. It is further inconsistent with the 
DRE rating method utilized by Dr. Crites in evaluation of the July 23, 2021 work injury. 
Absent further explanation as to the appropriateness of his rating methodology, I am 
unable to adopt Dr. Segal’s additional 3 percent whole person rating. 
Dr. Segal also opined claimant sustained a 5 percent whole person impairment 
for a sacral fracture. Dr. Segal opined claimant suffered a sacral fracture as a result of 
the physical therapy incident undergone in treatment of the work injury. Defendants’ 
chosen evaluating physician, Dr. Rondinelli, agreed with this possibility. He further 
stated the sacral fracture had a high probability of explaining at least a portion of 
claimant’s residual sacroiliac pain and he found claimant’s pain was related to the work 
injury. He opined the bone scan finding was suggestive of a work-related connection. 
However, Dr. Rondinelli did not offer a definite opinion, as he believed further evaluation 
by treating physician, Dr. Westpheling, was appropriate.  
Dr. Westpheling specifically disagreed with the diagnosis of sacral fracture, citing 
a bone scan as having low specificity for that type of injury. Rather, he opined claimant’s 
right-sided symptoms were most likely related to the present disc herniation. Dr. 
Abernathey similarly disagreed with the finding of sacral fracture. Dr. Abernathey opined 
such an injury would not be consistent with claimant’s mechanism of injury. He further 
opined the bone scan lacked the quality necessary to confirm such a diagnosis.  
Dr. Westpheling served as claimant’s treating physician for both his 2017 and 
2021 work injuries. He, therefore, had the opportunity to evaluate claimant on multiple 
occasions and oversee his course of treatment. There is no evidence that Dr. 
Westpheling was unwilling or unable to proceed with care he believed was warranted 
and appropriate. Therefore, I award his opinion the greatest weight on the matter of 
whether claimant sustained a sacral fracture as a result of the work injury. His opinion is 
further buttressed by the opinions of Dr. Abernathey, who evaluated claimant as part of 
a treatment regimen. Having awarded the greatest weight to the opinion of Dr. 

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 19 
 
Westpheling, I find claimant has not proven he sustained a ratable sacral fracture as a 
result of the work injury of August 12, 2017.  
I find claimant sustained permanent impairment of 10 percent whole person as a 
result of the work injury of August 12, 2017; claimant is entitled to an award of 50 weeks 
of permanent partial disability benefits (10 percent x 500 weeks = 50 weeks). Such 
benefits shall commence on the stipulated date of October 3, 2018. The parties 
stipulated that at the time of the injury, claimant’s gross earnings were $2,013.54 and he 
was married and entitled to 2 exemptions. The proper rate of compensation is, 
therefore, $1,233.87. 
 
 
The next issue for determination is whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement 
of an independent medical examination under Iowa Code section 85.39; specifically, 
claimant seeks reimbursement for Dr. Segal’s IME in the amount of $2,062.50. (CE3, p. 
1) 
 
Iowa Code section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.   Iowa Code § 85.39(2) (2023).  The section also 
permits reimbursement for reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and 
for any wage loss occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination.  
Iowa Code § 85.39 (1), (2).  
 
Defendants authorized care with Dr. Westpheling. Following an appointment on 
October 3, 2018, Dr. Westpheling opined claimant had achieved MMI, required 
permanent restrictions, and had sustained no ratable permanent impairment. Claimant, 
thereafter, presented to Dr. Segal on December 28, 2018. Dr. Segal charged $2,062.50 
for his independent medical examination, a charge I find reasonable. Claimant is, 
therefore, entitled to reimbursement for Dr. Segal’s independent medical examination, 
as requested.     
 
File No. 23700327.01 (July 23, 2021 date of injury): 
 
The first issue for determination is whether the surgery performed by Dr. Joshua 
Barber on September 11, 2023 is causally related to the stipulated work injury.  
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3)(e). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 20 
 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
Dr. Barber diagnosed L5-S1 radiculopathy with objective chronic left foot drop 
consistent with left L5 weakness. He opined claimant’s radiographic findings were 
consistent with his clinical pathology and positive diagnostic response to an epidural 
steroid injection. Dr. Barber recommended surgical intervention, which claimant 
underwent on September 11, 2023. Thereafter, claimant experienced resolution of 
radicular symptoms. Dr. Barber did not offer an opinion as to whether claimant’s 
condition and need for surgical intervention was caused by the work injury of July 23, 
2021.  
Dr. Smith examined claimant on one occasion in 2021 and opined claimant was 
not a surgical candidate. In December 2023, Dr. Smith opined claimant suffered with a 
degenerative condition of his lumbar spine and left foot drop, neither of which were 
related to either work injury. He thus opined claimant’s surgery with Dr. Barber was not 
work-related. However, Dr. Smith’s opinion does not address the potential of a work-
related aggravation of a preexisting spinal condition. As such, his causation opinion is 
lacking and further, puts him at odds with the opinions of other medical providers.  
Dr. Crites authored a thorough and well-explained report after evaluating 
claimant in 2023. Thereby, Dr. Crites diagnosed left lumbar radiculopathy, lumbar lateral 
recess stenosis, chronic left foot drop, and left foot plantar fasciitis. He opined each 
condition was causally related to the work injury of July 23, 2021. Dr. Crites explained 
that claimant’s successful surgery with Dr. Barber confirmed the etiology of facet 
arthropathy, left lumbosacral radiculopathy, and left foot drop. He opined claimant’s 
surgery was necessary to treat the facet arthropathy, which was materially aggravated 
by the work injury. Dr. Crites further opined the lack of treatment of claimant’s L5 

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 21 
 
radiculopathy and foot drop resulted in development of plantar fasciitis. This opinion is 
unrebutted. 
I award greatest weight to the opinions of Dr. Crites as set forth in his well-
reasoned report, and whose opinions are logical given the timeline of claimant’s 
development of symptoms and success following surgical intervention. Having awarded 
the greatest weight to the opinions of Dr. Crites, I find claimant has established the need 
for the surgery performed by Dr. Barber, and the conditions he therein sought to treat, 
are related to the work injury of July 23, 2021.    
The next issue for determination is whether the injury is a cause of temporary 
disability. If causation is established, the next issue for determination is whether 
claimant is entitled to temporary disability benefits from September 11, 2023 through 
November 6, 2023. These issues will be considered together.  
 
Healing period compensation describes temporary workers’ compensation 
weekly benefits that precede an allowance of permanent partial disability benefits.  
Ellingson v. Fleetguard, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440, 446 (Iowa 1999).  Healing period benefits 
are payable to an injured worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until the 
first to occur of three events.  Iowa Code § 85.34(1) (2015).  These are:  (1) the worker 
has returned to work; (2) the worker medically is capable of returning to substantially 
similar employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  Id.  
Maximum medical recovery is achieved when healing is complete, and the extent of 
permanent disability can be determined.  Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60, 65 (Iowa Ct. App. 1981).  Neither maintenance medical care nor an 
employee's continuing to have pain or other symptoms necessarily prolongs the healing 
period.  Id. 
 
As set forth supra, I find claimant has established his need for surgery was 
causally related to the work injury of July 23, 2021. Surgery occurred on September 11, 
2023. Claimant was not released to return to work until November 6, 2023. As claimant 
was precluded from working due to recovery from surgery for a work-related condition, 
claimant is entitled to temporary disability benefits for the period he was removed from 
work. Accordingly, claimant is entitled to healing period benefits for the period of 
September 11, 2023 through November 6, 2023. The parties stipulated that at the time 
of the work injury, claimant’s gross weekly earnings were $1,747.27 and he was married 
and entitled to 2 exemptions. The proper rate of compensation is, therefore, $1,097.90.  
 
The next issue for determination is whether the injury is a cause of permanent 
disability. If established, determination will be needed as to the nature and extent of 
permanent disability sustained by claimant. In the event permanent disability benefits 
are awarded, the proper commencement date for any permanent disability benefits will 
be required. These issues will be considered together. 
Apportionment of disability between a preexisting condition and an injury is 
proper only when some ascertainable portion of the ultimate industrial disability existed 

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 22 
 
independently before an employment-related aggravation of disability occurred.  Bearce 
v. FMC Corp., 465 N.W.2d 531, 536 (Iowa 1991); Varied Enterprises, Inc. v. Sumner, 
353 N.W.2d 407, 411 (Iowa 1984).  Hence, where employment is maintained and 
earnings are not reduced on account of a preexisting condition, that condition may not 
have produced any apportionable loss of earning capacity.  Bearce, 465 N.W.2d at 531.  
Likewise, to be apportionable, the preexisting disability must not be the result of another 
injury with the same employer for which compensation was not paid.  Tussing v. George 
A. Hormel & Co., 461 N.W.2d 450, 452 (Iowa 1990). 
The burden of showing that disability is attributable to a preexisting condition is 
placed upon the defendant.  Where evidence to establish a proper apportionment is 
absent, the defendant is responsible for the entire disability that exists.  Bearce, 465 
N.W.2d at 536-537; Sumner, 353 N.W.2d at 410-411. 
As set forth supra, the undersigned finds claimant’s work-related injury resulted 
in his need for surgery as performed by Dr. Barber. Two physicians have opined that 
claimant suffered permanent impairment as a result of his conditions; no contrary 
opinions are included in evidence. I therefore find claimant has proven his work injury of 
July 23, 2021 is a cause of permanent disability.  
 
By post-hearing brief, claimant concedes he is entitled to permanent disability 
compensation based upon his unscheduled functional impairment and not as an 
industrial disability, under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
 
Dr. Fields opined claimant’s left foot drop was degenerative in nature and not 
work-related. He opined claimant sustained permanent impairment attributable to his 
lumbar spine condition. He assigned a 13 percent whole person impairment under DRE 
lumbar category III.  
 
Dr. Crites also opined claimant’s lumbar spine condition warranted a 13 percent 
whole person impairment under DRE lumbar category III. In addition, he opined 
claimant sustained an additional 3 percent whole person impairment attributable to loss 
of ankle motion and its contribution to claimant’s plantar fasciitis.  
 
As previously determined, I find claimant’s left foot drop is causally related to the 
work injury of July 23, 2021. I find claimant has also proven his plantar fasciitis is work-
related, as a result of contracture caused by lack of treatment of his radicular condition 
and left foot drop, as opined by Dr. Crites. Dr. Crites’ opinion on causation of plantar 
fasciitis is unrebutted and therefore, adopted.  
 
Dr. Fields opined no additional impairment was warranted beyond that accounted 
for in the DRE rating. Dr. Crites opined additional impairment was warranted, as 
claimant’s ankle motion was limited and contributed to claimant’s plantar fasciitis. I find 
Dr. Crites’ opinion more convincing, as it accounts for the disability experienced by 
claimant outside of the lumbar spine and related radiculopathy. I, therefore, adopt Dr. 
Crites’ opinions as to the nature and extent of claimant’s permanent impairment.  

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 23 
 
 
I find claimant sustained a total of 16 percent whole person impairment 
attributable to the work injury of July 23, 2021. By post-hearing brief, claimant seeks 
permanent partial disability benefits only to the extent the subsequent impairment 
exceeds that for which he was compensated as a result of the August 12, 2017 injury. 
As set forth supra, claimant sustained a 10 percent whole person impairment as a result 
of the work injury of August 12, 2017. Subtracting this prior impairment of 10 percent 
whole person from the subsequent award of 16 percent whole person entitles claimant 
to an additional award of 6 percent whole person as a result of the July 23, 2021 work 
injury. An award of 6 percent whole person entitles claimant to 30 weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits (6 percent x 500 weeks = 30 weeks), commencing at the 
termination of claimant’s healing period, November 7, 2023, and payable at the rate of 
$1,097.90. 
 
The next issue for determination is whether defendants are responsible for 
claimed medical expenses in CE 6. 
The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, osteopathic, 
chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and hospital services 
and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' compensation law.  The 
employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary transportation expenses incurred 
for those services.  The employer has the right to choose the provider of care, except 
where the employer has denied liability for the injury.  Iowa Code section 85.27.  Holbert 
v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial Report of the Industrial 
Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening October 1975). 
 
In the instant matter, claimant sustained a stipulated work related injury on July 
23, 2021. Defendants authorized care, including evaluation with Dr. Westpheling, 
physical therapy, electrodiagnostic studies with Dr. Kim, and neurologist evaluation with 
Dr. Smith. Dr. Kim raised the possibility of surgical decompression; however, Dr. Smith 
opined claimant was not a surgical candidate. Thereafter, claimant did not receive 
notable authorized medical care.  
 
In 2023, claimant sought further evaluation with Dr. Barber. Dr. Barber initiated a 
course of care which culminated in surgical intervention. Claimant testified the surgery 
was beneficial, Dr. Barber noted resolution of claimant’s radicular symptoms, and Dr. 
Crites opined claimant’s lumbar radiculopathy, lumbar lateral recess stenosis, and 
chronic left foot drop all improved post-surgery.  
 
As claimant obtained additional medical care in treatment of a work-related 
condition, at a time when defendants had ceased providing treatment options, and the 
care proved beneficial, the cost of such care should be borne by defendants. I, 
therefore, find defendants are responsible for claimant’s causally related medical 
expenses as set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 6.  
 
 

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 24 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
File No. 1639478.01 (August 12, 2017 date of injury): 
The parties are ordered to comply with all stipulations that have been accepted 
by this agency. 
Defendants shall pay unto claimant fifty (50) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits commencing on the stipulated date of October 3, 2018 at the weekly rate of 
one thousand two hundred thirty-three and 87/100 dollars ($1,233.87).  
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 
2018).  
Defendants shall receive credit for benefits paid. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant for Dr. Segal’s independent medical 
examination in the amount of two thousand sixty-two and 50/100 dollars ($2,062.50). 
Costs are taxed to defendants pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.   
 
File No. 23700327.01 (July 23, 2021 date of injury): 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
The parties are ordered to comply with all stipulations that have been accepted 
by this agency. 
Defendants shall pay unto claimant healing period benefits at the weekly rate of 
one thousand ninety-seven and 90/100 dollars ($1,097.90) for the period of September 
11, 2023 through November 6, 2023. 
Defendants shall pay unto claimant thirty (30) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits commencing November 7, 2023 at the weekly rate of one thousand 
ninety-seven and 90/100 dollars ($1,097.90).  

STARRY V. GENERAL MILLS, INC. 
Page 25 
 
Defendants shall pay claimant’s prior medical expenses submitted by claimant at 
the hearing as set forth in the decision.  
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendants shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
 
Defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent. See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology, File No. 5054686 (App. Apr. 24, 
2018).  
Defendants shall receive credit for benefits paid. 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
Costs are taxed to defendants pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.   
Signed and filed this __28th ___ day of February, 2025. 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 ERICA J. FITCH            
 
 
 
 
 
                       DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
            COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
 
Brian Marty (via WCES) 
 
Peter Thill (via WCES) 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 6200 Park Ave., Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
