Case Number: 5066191
Case Title:  LOGSTON, JESSICA V. CARE INITIATIVES, INC
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Logston Jessica-5066191D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JESSICA LOGSTON, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                          File No. 5066191 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  :                      A R B I T R A T I O N 
 
 
  : 
CARE INITIATIVES d/b/a WEST 
  :                           D E C I S I O N 
RIDGE SPECIALTY CARE, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Self-Insured 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Defendant. 
  :               Head Note Nos.: 1402.30, 2502 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Jessica Logston, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from Care Initiatives d/b/a West Ridge Specialty Care (Care 
Initiatives), self-insured employer.  This matter was heard via CourtCall on July 10, 2020 
with a final submission date of August 7, 2020. 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-9, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-6, 
Defendant’s Exhibits A-L, and the testimony of claimant. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
ISSUES 
Whether claimant sustained an injury that arose out of and in the course of 
employment. 
Whether the injury was the cause of a temporary disability. 
Whether the injury is the cause of a permanent disability; and if so, 
The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Nov-12  11:15:15     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

LOGSTON V. CARE INITIATIVES D/B/A WEST RIDGE SPECIALTY CARE 
Page 2 
 
Whether claimant is entitled to reimbursement for an independent medical 
evaluation (IME) under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant was 39 years old at the time of hearing.  Claimant graduated from high 
school.  Claimant has a CNA certificate. 
Claimant worked in housekeeping and has done laundry at hotels and resorts. 
Clamant began with Care Initiatives as a CNA in May of 2015. 
Claimant’s health history is relevant.  Claimant testified that, prior to the date of 
the alleged injury, she was treated for fibromyalgia.  In September 2017, claimant was 
evaluated at Monroe County Hospitals and Clinics (MCHC) for chronic polyarthralgia 
and myalgias.  Claimant complained of pain throughout her body.  Claimant was 
assessed as having fibromyalgia.  She was prescribed Toradol for pain.  (Exhibit B, 
pages 1-2) 
Claimant returned to MCHC in October of 2017 with continued complaints of full 
body and joint pain.  Claimant complained of a stabbing sensation at the bottom of the 
left foot.  Claimant was assessed as having fibromyalgia.  (Ex. B, pp. 3-4) 
On May 17, 2018, claimant was evaluated at the Iowa Arthritis and Osteoporosis 
Center regarding fibromyalgia management.  Claimant indicated chronic pain for at least 
ten years.  Claimant was not sleeping well due to lower back pain.  Claimant was 
assessed as having fibromyalgia pain, and lower back pain with an L5-S1 degenerative 
disc disease, depression and fatigue.  Land and pool physical therapy was 
recommended.  (Ex. C) 
Claimant treated at MCHC in January of 2018 for widespread pain.  Claimant 
indicated chronic pain for five to eight years.  Claimant again was assessed as having 
fibromyalgia. 
On June 7, 2018, claimant was evaluated at MCHC.  Claimant reported that 
when she got home from work, her pain was “all over” and was “unbearable.”  Claimant 
indicated her fibromyalgia and chronic pain sometimes worsened her depression.  
Claimant was assessed as having fibromyalgia.  Claimant’s medication was increased.  
(Ex. B, pp. 9-11) 
Claimant said that, on June 18, 2018, she was helping a client get off the floor in 
his room.  She said she felt a strain or pull in her lower back.  She said she continued to 
work but felt increased pain. 

LOGSTON V. CARE INITIATIVES D/B/A WEST RIDGE SPECIALTY CARE 
Page 3 
 
Claimant testified she went to Monroe County Hospitals and Clinics.  She said 
she called her supervisor, Connie Grinstead, and gave notice of an injury.  Claimant 
said she was told to come in and complete FMLA paperwork.  Claimant said she did 
this. 
On June 18, 2018, claimant was evaluated at MCHC.  Claimant complained of 
lower back pain that radiated up to her neck when walking.  Claimant said back pain 
began over the weekend a few days prior.  Claimant went to work and her pain 
worsened.  Claimant denied an injury or a workers’ compensation injury.  Claimant was 
assessed as having acute back pain.  Claimant was treated with medication.  (JE1, pp. 
1-2) 
Claimant returned to MCHC on June 20, 2018 with continued complaints of back 
pain.  Claimant indicated she woke up with back pain three days prior and went to work.  
At work, a gentleman fell, which made claimant’s back pain worse.  Claimant reported 
pain in the right low back.  She also had neck pain.  Claimant had a normal gait.  
Claimant was assessed as having a neck strain, flank pain, and fibromyalgia.  (JE 1, pp. 
3-5) 
On August 6, 2018, claimant was evaluated at MCHC.  Claimant had severe 
back pain for one week.  Claimant noted back pain for years.  Claimant had a work 
incident six weeks prior that caused a flare-up of symptoms.  Claimant had pain down 
her right lower extremity.  Claimant was assessed as having degenerative arthritis of the 
lumbar spine.  (JE 1, pp. 6-7) 
Claimant returned to MCHC on August 10, 2018.  Claimant had lower back pain 
shooting down the right leg.  Claimant was assessed as having chronic arthritis, 
fibromyalgia and lumbar degenerative disc disease.  An MRI was recommended.  (JE1, 
pp. 8-12)  The MRI showed a disc protrusion at the L5-S1 levels, causing indentation on 
the thecal sac and slight neural compression.  (JE3) 
On August 23, 2018, claimant reported an injury to her lower back occurring on 
June 18, 2018, while lifting a patient.  (Ex. 3)  Claimant indicated she injured her lower 
back and that she had no prior lower back injuries.  (Ex. F, p. 3) 
On August 23, 2018, claimant was given a warning for failure to report a work 
accident on the day it occurred.  (Ex. J, pp. 9-10) 
Claimant testified on direct examination, she gave her supervisor, Connie 
Grinstead, notice regarding the work injury on the date of injury.  (Transcript p. 32) 
On cross-examination, claimant testified she completed FMLA paperwork with 
her employer but did not report a work-related injury. 
Q.  There’s at least 20 days that you worked that you could have very 
easily walked into the administrator’s office, and said:  

LOGSTON V. CARE INITIATIVES D/B/A WEST RIDGE SPECIALTY CARE 
Page 4 
 
Hey, I got a work-related injury, I need to fill out the work comp paperwork.   
You could have done that any time during those 20 days, couldn’t you? 
A.  I honestly was not aware that I could.  I was under the impression that 
because I had not done so right when it occurred, that I had lost the 
opportunity to do that.   
When I was told to come in and do the FMLA papers, that was what I 
knew to be my best bet, to say, okay, they were going to let me do.   
I really honestly thought that I had screwed up the fact that it really was a 
work comp situation; and I was in too much pain to hang out, to sit down 
and fill out paperwork.   
So I took that as a hit to myself, initially, and wasn’t sure, like, where to 
proceed with that, until they called me. 
(Tr. pp. 93-94) 
In a recorded statement, claimant indicated she did not complete an incident 
report on the date of injury as it was a chaotic morning.  (Ex. G, p. 4) 
Claimant was evaluated by Christopher Stalvey, D.O., at Metro Anesthesia & 
Pain Management on November 27, 2018.  Claimant indicated right hip pain going 
down the right leg.  (Ex. I, p. 26)  Claimant complained of lower back pain radiating to 
the right lower extremity.  Claimant had numbness in three toes on her right foot.  
Dr. Stalvey noted that claimant’s MRI showed herniation at the L5-S1 on the left side 
and yet claimant complained of right-sided pain.  He noted claimant’s right lower 
extremity symptoms were not explained by the lumbar MRI.  Dr. Stalvey recommended 
diagnostic studies of claimant’s right lower extremity.  (JE4, pp. 5-6) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Stalvey on November 15, 2018.  Claimant indicated she 
now had left-sided symptoms caused by her work injury.  Claimant was recommended 
to have EMG testing.  (JE4, pp. 7-8) 
On January 23, 2019, claimant underwent EMGs.  Testing was normal.  (JE5, p. 
1; JE4, p. 10) 
On January 31, 2019, claimant was terminated from employment as she was 
unavailable to work and had exhausted her FMLA benefits.  (Ex. J, p. 22) 
On February 27, 2019, claimant was seen at the Lucas County Health Center 
Emergency Room.  Claimant was lifting a 50-pound bag of dog food and had a flare-up 
of lower back pain.  Claimant was given injections of morphine and Toradol and 
prescribed medications.  (JE6, pp. 1-4) 

LOGSTON V. CARE INITIATIVES D/B/A WEST RIDGE SPECIALTY CARE 
Page 5 
 
Claimant returned to Dr. Stalvey on March 7, 2019.  Claimant indicated pain in 
the lower back radiating into the left lower extremity.  Claimant was given a left L5-S1 
epidural steroid injection (ESI).  (JE4, pp. 11-12) 
On May 2, 2019, claimant was evaluated by Troy Munson, M.D.  Claimant had 
lower back pain radiating down her left leg.  Claimant’s symptoms began on June 18, 
2018, when she lifted a patient as a CNA.  Fairly soon after the injury, claimant 
developed significant left-sided pain.  Claimant denied right-sided leg pain.  Claimant 
was assessed as having lower back pain and lumbar radiculopathy.  A repeat MRI was 
recommended.  (JE7, pp. 1-2) 
A second lumbar MRI was done on May 15, 2019.  Dr. Munson did not believe 
the first and second MRIs were different.  Dr. Munson recommended lower back 
surgery.  (JE7, p. 9) 
On July 19, 2019, claimant underwent an L5-S1 microdiscectomy.  Surgery was 
performed by Dr. Munson.  (Ex. 2; JE7, p. 10) 
On August 7, 2019, claimant saw Dr. Munson in follow-up.  Claimant had some 
lower back pain, but her left leg pain had resolved.  (JE7, p. 10) 
In a September 18, 2019 report, John Kuhnlein, D.O., gave his opinions of 
claimant’s condition following an IME.  Claimant indicated prior back pain, but it was not 
severe enough to require treatment.  (Ex. 1, p. 2) 
Claimant indicated she injured her lower back after transferring a patient off the 
floor to a wheelchair.  Dr. Kuhnlein’s report is notable in that there are approximately six 
footnotes in the report regarding discrepancies between claimant’s self-reported history 
and medical records.  (Ex. 1, pp. 3-5) 
Claimant had intermittent lower back pain.  Claimant no longer had left leg 
symptoms.  Claimant complained of tailbone pain.  (Ex. 1, p. 7) 
Dr. Kuhnlein opined that claimant’s injury of June 18, 2018 aggravated a 
pre-existing lower back condition.  (Ex. 1, p. 10)  Claimant was not yet at maximum 
medical improvement (MMI).  For administrative purposes, Dr. Kuhnlein found that 
claimant had a ten percent permanent impairment to the body as a whole due to her 
lower back injury.  (Ex. 1, pp. 10-11) 
In an October 3, 2019 letter, Derek Burdeny, M.D., a radiologist, gave his 
opinions of claimant’s MRI.  Dr. Burdeny reviewed claimant’s MRIs from August of 2018 
and July of 2019.  He opined neither MRI showed evidence of a right nerve 
impingement.  He opined that any pain that claimant had was a temporary exacerbation 
of a pre-existing condition.  (Ex. D) 

LOGSTON V. CARE INITIATIVES D/B/A WEST RIDGE SPECIALTY CARE 
Page 6 
 
On November 19, 2019, claimant was brought to the emergency room at Lucas 
County Health Center by police.  Claimant was handcuffed.  Claimant acted as if she 
was possessed by demons.  Claimant was intubated.  Claimant and her husband both 
indicated that prior to her hospitalization, both had seen water pouring from the ceiling, 
but the floor not getting wet.  Claimant stated at the hospital that she was a follower of 
Beelzebub.  Claimant changed voices and behaviors.  (JE6, pp. 5-7) 
Hospital notes indicate staff had an eerie feeling in the room.  A sheriff’s deputy 
began violently throwing up.  (JE6, p. 8)  Hospital staff removed claimant and 
transported her to a different facility.  Claimant was transported to Des Moines and kept 
in a coma for four days.  After claimant was extubated, an exorcism was performed.  
(JE6, p. 11) 
On December 17, 2019, claimant was again brought to Lucas County Emergency 
Room service by law enforcement after having a psychotic episode.  Claimant had a 
psychotic breakdown.  Staff was concerned claimant was having a schizophrenic 
episode.  (JE6, p. 12) 
On December 23, 2019, claimant was evaluated at Lucas County Health Center 
for chronic lower back pain.  Claimant was recommended to continue physical therapy.  
(JE8, pp. 21-23) 
In a March 25, 2020 supplemental report, Dr. Kuhnlein gave his opinions of 
claimant’s condition following review of additional records, including claimant’s 
deposition and surgical report.  Dr. Kuhnlein indicated nothing he reviewed changed his 
opinions detailed in the September 18, 2019 IME report.  (Ex. 1, p. 14) 
In a June 23, 2020 letter, written by claimant’s counsel, Dr. Stalvey indicated he 
believed the June 18, 2018 incident was a substantial cause or aggravating factor for 
claimant’s back condition, specifically the left paracentral bulging disc.  (Ex. 4, p. 1)  He 
indicated the surgery performed by Dr. Munson was related to the June 18, 2018 work 
injury.  He also opined that he believed claimant had permanent impairment from this 
incident.  (Ex. 4, p. 2) 
Claimant testified at hearing her back hurts every day.  She said pain from her 
lower back radiates down her leg.  Claimant said surgery helped her symptoms, but 
there is still discomfort.  
At the time of hearing, claimant was employed by Caregivers of Chariton 
(Caregivers).  Claimant began with Caregivers in December of 2019 and works as an 
in-home health aide.  Claimant testified she helps between three to five clients a day 
with activities of daily living and some housework.  (Tr. pp. 19-20)  Claimant said she 
was able to do her job at Caregivers.  She said the job is physically easier than the 
position that she had with Care Initiatives.  Claimant said she could not return to work 
full time as a CNA with Care Initiatives without restrictions. 

LOGSTON V. CARE INITIATIVES D/B/A WEST RIDGE SPECIALTY CARE 
Page 7 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue to be determined is whether claimant sustained an injury that 
arose out of and in the course of employment on June 18, 2018. 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.14(6). 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 

LOGSTON V. CARE INITIATIVES D/B/A WEST RIDGE SPECIALTY CARE 
Page 8 
 
Claimant testified she injured her lower back while assisting a resident off the 
floor.  She said she felt a strain in her lower back.  (Tr. pp. 25-26)  Claimant testified she 
called her supervisor and reported an injury on the date of the injury.  She said she was 
told to come in and complete FMLA paperwork.  (Tr. pp. 20-30)  Claimant completed the 
FMLA paperwork in August of 2018.  Claimant testified at hearing and in deposition that 
her lower back pain caused pain into her left lower extremity.  (Ex. I, Deposition pp 15, 
17, 31; Tr. p. 62) 
On June 18, 2018, claimant was evaluated at MCHC for lower back pain.  
Claimant indicated her back pain began over the weekend.  Claimant denied an injury 
or a workers’ compensation injury.  (JE1, pp. 1-2) 
Two days later, claimant returned to MCHC with continued complaints of lower 
back pain.  She indicated the pain had occurred three days prior, on June 17, 2018, with 
aggravation occurring while picking up the patient off the floor.  Claimant reported pain 
on the right side of the lower back.  (JE1, pp. 3-5) 
On August 6, 2018, claimant returned to MCHC.  Claimant noted back pain for 
years.  She had a work incident that caused a flare-up of back pain.  Claimant 
complained of pain down her right lower extremity.  (JE1, pp. 6-7) 
Claimant returned to MCHC on August 10, 2018, complaining of continued lower 
back pain.  Claimant had shooting pain down the right leg.  (JE1, p. 9) 
Claimant was evaluated on November 27, 2018 by Dr. Stalvey.  Claimant 
complained of right lower leg pain.  An MRI showed herniation at the L5-S1 levels on 
the left.  Dr. Stalvey noted that claimant’s right lower extremity symptoms were not 
explained by the MRI.  (JE4, pp. 5-6) 
On January 15, 2019, claimant returned to Dr. Stalvey.  At this visit, claimant 
reported left-sided symptoms for the first time.  (JE4, pp. 7-8) 
Claimant testified at hearing that she told her supervisor, on the date of injury, 
she had a work injury.  (Tr. pp. 20-30)  Claimant did not complete an injury report until 
August 23, 2018, over two months after the alleged date of injury.  (Ex. F, p. 1) 
Claimant gave different reasons for taking two months to file a work injury report.  
In deposition, it appears, claimant testified that when she returned to work two weeks 
after the injury, she thought it was to report a work injury.  (Ex. I, pp. 4-5, Depo., pp. 12-
14) 
Claimant did complete FMLA paperwork on June 28, 2018.  (Ex. J, pp. 11-14)  
There is no mention in this FMLA paperwork claimant was off work due to a work injury.  
It is unclear why claimant went through the effort to complete FMLA paperwork, 
approximately ten days after the alleged date of injury, but yet did not fill out a work 
injury report until two months after the alleged date of injury. 

LOGSTON V. CARE INITIATIVES D/B/A WEST RIDGE SPECIALTY CARE 
Page 9 
 
Claimant alleges a June 18, 2018 date of injury.  On the same day, claimant went 
to a healthcare provider.  Records from that visit indicate claimant had back pain over 
the weekend and denied an injury or workers’ compensation injury.  Two days later, 
claimant saw another healthcare provider, indicating she had back pain aggravated by a 
work injury.  On at least three occasions, claimant told healthcare providers that she 
had pain in the right leg.  It was not until January 2019, over six months after the alleged 
date of injury, and after claimant was told the MRI suggested left-sided radiculopathy, 
that claimant began complaining of left leg pain.  Claimant testified she reported her 
injury on the date it occurred.  FMLA paperwork, completed approximately ten days 
after the date of injury, makes no reference to a work injury.  Claimant’s explanation 
why she failed to file a report on a work injury until two months after the date of injury 
makes no sense.  Given the totality of these inconsistencies in the record, as detailed 
above, it is found claimant’s testimony regarding an alleged work injury is not credible. 
Two experts have opined that claimant’s lower back injury was caused by the 
June 18, 2018 work incident.  Dr. Kuhnlein opined claimant’s lower back injury of 
June 18, 2018, was superimposed over a pre-existing fibromyalgia related to her work.  
(Ex. 1, p. 10)  There are numerous problems with Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinion.  First, as 
noted, approximately six footnotes in the opinion are required to explain inconsistencies 
between medical records and claimant’s self-reported history.  The footnotes required to 
explain inconsistencies between claimant’s self-reported history and medical records 
are a red flag regarding claimant’s credibility. 
Second, the record does not indicate Dr. Kuhnlein had any medical records prior 
to the alleged date of injury.  Claimant apparently told Dr. Kuhnlein she had occasional 
lower back pain prior to the June of 2018 date of injury, but they were not serious 
enough to require treatment.  (Ex. 1, p. 2)  This is untrue.  Claimant has a history of 
chronic back pain and fibromyalgia for approximately ten years.  (Ex. C)  Claimant 
received treatment from numerous providers for back pain and fibromyalgia.  (Exs. B & 
C)  Claimant received medications for her chronic pain.  (Exs. B & C) 
Based on these problems with Dr. Kuhnlein’s report, it is found his opinion 
regarding causation is not convincing. 
Dr. Stalvey also opined, in a letter written by claimant’s counsel, that claimant’s 
June 18, 2018 incident was a substantial cause or aggravating factor for claimant’s back 
condition.  (Ex. 4, p. 1)  Dr. Stalvey’s opinion letter is problematic for several reasons.  
On page 1 of the letter, claimant’s counsel indicates that claimant had pain in the left leg 
within 15 minutes of the accident.  (Ex. 4, p. 1)  This is untrue.  The record indicates that 
claimant did not indicate left leg pain to providers until approximately 6 months after the 
alleged date of injury.  There is also no evidence in the record Dr. Stalvey reviewed any 
of claimant’s medical records prior to his initial evaluation of claimant.  These records 
indicate claimant had a previous pre-existing back condition and had been taking 
prescription medications for the condition.  The records also indicate that on the date of 
the alleged injury, claimant did not report a work-related injury during her first medical 

LOGSTON V. CARE INITIATIVES D/B/A WEST RIDGE SPECIALTY CARE 
Page 10 
 
visit.  Given these discrepancies, the opinions of Dr. Stalvey regarding causation are 
found not convincing. 
Claimant’s testimony regarding the alleged injury is not credible when compared 
with the medical and personnel records in evidence.  The opinions of Dr. Kuhnlein and 
Dr. Stalvey regarding causation are found not convincing.  Given this record, it is found 
that claimant has failed to carry her burden of proof she sustained an injury that arose 
out of and in the course of her employment on June 18, 2018. 
As claimant has failed to carry her burden of proof she sustained an injury that 
arose out of and in the course of employment, all of the issues, except the issue 
regarding reimbursement of the IME and costs are moot. 
The next issue to be determined is whether claimant is due reimbursement for an 
IME under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
Section 85.39 permits an employee to be reimbursed for subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee's choice where an employer-retained 
physician has previously evaluated “permanent disability” and the employee believes 
that the initial evaluation is too low.  The section also permits reimbursement for 
reasonably necessary transportation expenses incurred and for any wage loss 
occasioned by the employee attending the subsequent examination. 
Defendants are responsible only for reasonable fees associated with claimant's 
independent medical examination.  Claimant has the burden of proving the 
reasonableness of the expenses incurred for the examination.  See Schintgen v. 
Economy Fire & Casualty Co., File No. 855298 (App. April 26, 1991).  Claimant need 
not ultimately prove the injury arose out of and in the course of employment to qualify 
for reimbursement under section 85.39.  See Dodd v. Fleetguard, Inc., 759 N.W.2d 133, 
140 (Iowa App. 2008). 
Regarding the IME, the Iowa Supreme Court provided a literal interpretation of 
the plain-language of Iowa Code section 85.39, stating that section 85.39 only allows 
the employee to obtain an independent medical evaluation at the employer’s expense if 
dissatisfied with the evaluation arranged by the employer.  Des Moines Area Reg’l 
Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 847 (Iowa 2015). 
Under the Young decision, an employee can only obtain an IME at the 
employer’s expense if an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by an 
employer-retained physician. 
Iowa Code section 85.39 limits an injured worker to one IME.  Larson Mfg. Co., 
Inc. v. Thorson, 763 N.W.2d 842 (Iowa 2009). 
The Supreme Court, in Young noted that in cases where Iowa Code section 
85.39 is not triggered to allow for reimbursement of an independent medical 

LOGSTON V. CARE INITIATIVES D/B/A WEST RIDGE SPECIALTY CARE 
Page 11 
 
examination (IME), a claimant can still be reimbursed at hearing the costs associated 
with the preparation of the written report as a cost under rule 876 IAC 4.33.  Young at 
846-847. 
In a September 18, 2019 report, Dr. Kuhnlein, the employee-retained expert, 
gave his opinions regarding claimant’s permanent impairment in an IME.  On October 3, 
2019, Dr. Burdeny, the employer-retained expert, gave his opinions regarding claimant’s 
permanent impairment.  Given the chronology of the reports, claimant is not entitled to 
reimbursement of an IME under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
The final issue to be determined is costs.  Costs are awarded at the discretion of 
the agency.  As claimant failed to prevail on any issue in this matter, costs will not be 
awarded to claimant.  Each party shall pay their own costs. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
That claimant shall take nothing in the way of benefits from this case. 
That each party shall pay their own costs. 
Signed and filed this        12th        day of November, 2020. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Richard R. Schmidt (via WCES) 
Joseph D. Thornton (via WCES) 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party 
appeals within 20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa 
Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic 
System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ 
Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice 
of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  
The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days 
from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be extended to the next business day if the 
last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
JAMES F. CHRISTENSON 
              DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
