Case Number: 5068505
Case Title:  DOUGLAS, DENNIS V. CITY OF CEDAR FALLS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Douglas Dennis-5068505d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
DENNIS DOUGLAS, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  :                       File No. 5068505 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
CITY OF CEDAR FALLS, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  :       Head Note Nos.:  1108, 1402.10, 1704, 
 
Self-Insured, 
  :  
 
 
     1802, 1804, 2209, 2907 
 
Defendant. 
  :  
 
 
     3001 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Dennis Douglas, claimant, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from the City of Cedar Falls, self-insured employer as defendant.  
Hearing was held on June 1, 2020 in Des Moines, Iowa.  This case was scheduled to be 
an in-person hearing occurring in Waterloo.  However, due to the outbreak of a 
pandemic in Iowa, the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner ordered all hearings 
to occur via video means, using CourtCall.  Accordingly, this case proceeded to a live 
video hearing via CourtCall with all parties, witnesses, and the court reporter appearing 
remotely.   
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations.  
Dennis Douglas, Brian Heath, and Colleen Sole all testified live at trial.  The 
evidentiary record also includes joint exhibits JE1-JE3, claimant’s exhibits 1-11, and 
defendant’s exhibits A-I and K-Q.  Defendant’s exhibit J was withdrawn.  All exhibits 
were received without objection.  The evidentiary record closed at the conclusion of the 
arbitration hearing.       
The parties submitted post-hearing briefs on June 26, 2020, at which time the 
case was fully submitted to the undersigned.     
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Jul-21  09:03:14     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

DOUGLAS V. CITY OF CEDAR FALLS 
Page 2 
 
 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for resolution: 
1. Whether claimant sustained an injury which arose out of and in the course of 
his employment. 
2. If so, the correct date of injury. 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary benefits from February 20, 2018 
through March 19, 2018. 
4. Whether claimant sustained any permanent disability to his left upper 
extremity as the result of the work injury. 
5. The appropriate rate of weekly workers’ compensation benefits. 
6. Whether defendant is responsible for past medical expenses. 
7. Whether defendant is entitled to a credit for medical/hospitalization expenses. 
8. Assessment of costs. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant, Dennis Douglas, has worked for the City of Cedar Falls since February 
of 2005.  He is right hand dominant.  He worked as a maintenance worker for the first 
five years and then moved to an equipment operator.  Mr. Douglas was still working as 
an equipment operator at the time of hearing.  (Tr. Pp. 10-12)   
Mr. Douglas’s job included street works and construction.  During the warmer 
months of the year he performed road demolition, construction, and maintenance.  Part 
of claimant’s job duties include concrete work.  Concrete work included removal of 
concrete that needed to be replaced.  In his work duties he used tools that caused his 
hands to vibrate.  These tools include a curb saw, backhoe with a concrete breaker, 
plate tamper, hammer drill, and dowel pack.  (Tr. pp. 10-21 ; Def. Ex. B, p. 4; Def. Ex. D, 
pp. 25-28)      
Defendant’s exhibit I purports to set forth the number of annual man-hours spent 
on street section employees.  Mr. Douglas testified that this does not cover all the 
concrete work that is performed because it only includes street panels, curbs, and 
sidewalks.  Exhibit I does not include other types of concrete work such as box-outs, 
intakes, and CFU.  Mr. Douglas also provided an explanation of his daily assignments 
as set forth in defendant’s exhibit N.  (Tr. pp. 17-29)  I find that Mr. Douglas credibly 
testified about the amount and types of concrete work he performed for the City.    
Mr. Douglas first began to notice symptoms in his left hand in late summer, early 
fall of 2017.  His hand began tingling and falling asleep.  His symptoms were worse by 
the end of the week, but improved over the weekends.  His symptoms continued to 
increase, so he reported his problems to his supervisor.   

DOUGLAS V. CITY OF CEDAR FALLS 
Page 3 
 
 
The City sent him to see David Kirkle, D.O., at Covenant Occupational Health on 
December 27, 2017.  Mr. Douglas reported that his primary problem was numbness and 
pain in his left hand for the past two months.  His symptoms varied depending on his 
activity level.  Dr. Kirkle diagnosed him with carpal tunnel syndrome, left.  Dr. Kirkle 
stated that the injury was not OSHA recordable and not work related.  He referred Mr. 
Douglas to his primary care physician.  Dr. Kirkle stated that the patient’s job “does not 
preclude to CTS and there has been no changes at work to explain recent onset of Sx 
due to work.”  (JE3, p. 18)  
After Mr. Douglas saw Dr. Kirkle, the City denied his workers compensation 
claim.  Mr. Douglas sought treatment on his own with Gary Knudson, M.D., on January 
18, 2018.  He reported left hand numbness and tingling for the past year, the onset was 
gradual.  Dr. Knudson stated: 
Based on the fact that he had no problems with symptoms of carpal tunnel 
syndrome until about a year ago and noticed that he had been doing quite 
a bit more concrete work for his job which she [sic] has been at for now 
over 12 years and started noting seeing the symptoms increasing as he 
did more and more repetitive heavy activities with his left hand would 
suggest that he has a cumulative trauma-type injury at the very least 
significantly exacerbated by the heavy work and repetitive use of his 
hands. 
(JE2, p. 5)   
 
Dr. Knudson diagnosed Mr. Douglas with carpal tunnel syndrome and 
recommended nerve testing.  (JE2, pp. 3-5) This was performed with Sangeeta Shah, 
M.D.  Dr. Shah’s records state that “driving with the left hand for hours to clean the 
snow would cause his hands to get worse.”  (JE2, p. 6) The testing showed carpal 
tunnel syndrome of the left wrist. (JE2, pp. 6-11; Tr. p. 31) 
Dr. Knudson performed left carpal tunnel release on February 20, 2018.  Mr. 
Douglas had restrictions placed on his activities for a couple of weeks following the 
surgery.  The City did not allow him to return to work during this time.  Because his 
workers’ compensation claim had been denied, Mr. Douglas used sick leave during this 
time.  (Tr. p. 32; JE1 & 2)   
Mr. Douglas returned to see Dr. Kirkle on March 19, 2018.  He reported that the 
pain in his left wrist was resolved and his pain level was zero.  Mr. Douglas told the 
doctor that he was attending the appointment so he could return to work.  Dr. Kirkle 
released him to return to full duty.  (JE3, pp. 21-22) 
At the request of his attorney, Mr. Douglas underwent an IME with Farid 
Manshadi, M.D., on September 10, 2018.  Dr. Manshadi felt that Mr. Douglas sustained 
left carpal tunnel syndrome, status post left carpal tunnel release with remaining 
weakness of the left hand grip.  Dr. Manshadi opined that the left hand carpal tunnel 

DOUGLAS V. CITY OF CEDAR FALLS 
Page 4 
 
 
syndrome was the result of his work activities while performing fairly repetitious gripping 
activities for a number of years while working for the City.  He placed Mr. Douglas at 
MMI as of September 10, 2018.  Dr. Manshadi utilized the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, and assigned 2 percent impairment 
of the left upper extremity.  He did not recommend any additional treatment.  (Cl. Ex. 1)  
On November 2, 2018, Dr. Kirkle authored an opinion letter to defendant.  
Defendant asked Dr. Kirkle if he felt that Mr. Douglas’ left carpal tunnel injury was 
related to his job duties with the city.  Dr. Kirkle stated: 
His work is not what I would consider repetitive work by doing different 
jobs during the shift, and he stated to me there have been no changes at 
work to include speed or hours work or change in activities.  I did review 
his supervisor’s job description of the work which tend to corroborate this.  
Also, he is right handed, and there were no injuries.  Recent studies have 
shown that carpal tunnel syndrome tends to be more related to genetics 
and anatomic wrist configuration than repetitiveness.   
(Def. Ex. A, p. 1)   
Dr. Kirkle also opined that Mr. Douglas had no permanent impairment related to 
his carpal tunnel syndrome.  (Def. Ex. A)   
Defendant also took the deposition of Dr. Kirkle on May 11, 2020.  Dr. Kirkle 
testified, “I know he [Mr. Douglas] was an equipment operator or something.  I know 
somewhat what he does at work.”  (Def. Ex. P, Dep. p. 7)  Dr. Kirkle also testified that 
he was not aware of any family history of carpal tunnel in Mr. Douglas’ family.  
Additionally, Dr. Kirkle testified that there was no evidence in this case that genetics 
were a contributing factor.  Dr. Kirkle testified that risk factors for carpal tunnel include 
exposure to vibration.   (Def. Ex. P, Dep. pp. 24-32) 
At the time of hearing, Mr. Douglas continued to have problems with his left 
hand.  His left hand was better, but was still not as strong as it used to be.  (Tr. pp. 32-
33) 
The initial factual dispute for determination is whether claimant has demonstrated 
that his left carpal tunnel syndrome is the result of his work for the defendant.  The City 
relies on the opinion of Dr. Kirkle.  In his November 2018 report, Dr. Kirkle opines that 
Mr. Douglas’ carpal tunnel syndrome is not related to his work.  He indicates that carpal 
tunnel tends to be related to genetics and anatomic wrist configuration.  However, in his 
deposition Dr. Kirkle admits that he was not aware of any family history of carpal tunnel 
and that there was no evidence in this case that genetics were a contributing factor.  
Additionally, based on Dr. Kirkle’s deposition testimony, it is apparent he did not have a 
thorough understanding of Mr. Douglas’ job duties.  Furthermore, Dr. Kirkle admitted 
that exposure to vibration is a risk factor for carpal tunnel syndrome.  I do not find the 
opinions of Dr. Kirkle to be well-reasoned.  Both Dr. Knudson and Dr. Kirkle causally 

DOUGLAS V. CITY OF CEDAR FALLS 
Page 5 
 
 
connected Mr. Douglas’ carpal tunnel syndrome to his work for the City.  I find that 
opinions of Dr. Knudson and Dr. Manshadi to be well-reasoned.  I find the opinions of 
Dr. Knudson and Dr. Manshadi are more persuasive than those of Dr. Kirkle.  I find Mr. 
Douglas’ left carpal tunnel syndrome is related to his work for the City. I further find that 
Mr. Douglas sustained 2 percent impairment of his left upper extremity as the result of 
his work for the City.   
The parties cannot agree on the appropriate date of injury.  Claimant alleges an 
injury date of February 20, 2018, the date when Mr. Douglas first missed work due to 
his injury.  Defendant contends the injury date in this case should be December 27, 
2017, the date that Mr. Douglas reported the injury to his employer and the date he saw 
Dr. Kirkle.  It was at this appointment that Dr. Kirkle determined that Mr. Douglas’ carpal 
tunnel syndrome was not related to his job.  I find that Mr. Douglas’ injury did not 
manifest itself until February 20, 2018, when he first missed time from work due to the 
injury.   
Following surgery Mr. Douglas had restrictions placed on his activities.  The City 
would not allow him to return to work with those restrictions.  Because his workers’ 
compensation claim was denied, he had to use sick leave during this time.  (Tr. p. 32) 
The parties have stipulated that if the defendant is liable for the alleged injury then 
claimant is entitled to benefits for this period of time.     
 
We now turn to the issue of rate.  The parties cannot agree on the number of 
exemptions Mr. Douglas is entitled to claim for rate purposes.  In 2018, Mr. Douglas 
claimed his son, Brayden, on his tax returns.  Brayden was a full-time college student 
and was not living with Mr. Douglas.  Mr. Douglas was providing financial support for his 
son in 2018.  He paid for one-third of his college and also gave him spending money.  
(Tr. pp. 34-35) I find that Mr. Douglas is entitled to claim Brayden as an exemption.  
Thus, for rate purposes, I find Mr. Douglas is single and entitled to two exemptions. 
There is also a dispute surrounding the calculation of his average weekly wage.  
Mr. Douglas is paid on an hourly basis.  According to the union contract, in lieu of paid 
overtime the employee may elect to apply for compensatory time off (“comp. time”).  In 
other words, if Mr. Douglas works overtime he may elect to bank that time and use it as 
time off in the future.  The maximum number of hours he may bank is 240 and any 
unused comp time is paid out when the employment ends.  (Cl. Ex. 7, pp. 31-34) I find 
that the employer and union negotiated benefits, among them was the right to bank time 
off due to overtime.  Mr. Douglas opted to bank time off.  I find that excluding weeks 
wherein Mr. Douglas used banked overtime does not provide an accurate or fair 
representation of claimant's actual earnings.  I find that including both the long and short 
weeks "fairly represents the employee's customary earnings."  I further find that, 
pursuant to the union contract, it was customary to bank comp time.   
 
 

DOUGLAS V. CITY OF CEDAR FALLS 
Page 6 
 
 
Utilizing the wages identified on Claimant’s exhibit 6, pages 24-25, I calculate the 
average gross weekly earnings as follows: 
Check Date 
Gross Pay 
02/16/18 
$2,807.68 
02/02/18 
$2,070.19 
01/19/18 
$2,070.19 
01/05/18 
$2,070.19 
12/22/17 
$2,070.20 
12/08/17 
$2,070.20 
11/22/17 
$2,070.20 
Total: 
$15,228.85 
Mr. Douglas’ total earnings in the fourteen weeks prior to the date of injury were 
$15,228.85.  Dividing the total earnings by 14 weeks, I find that Mr. Douglas had 
average gross weekly earnings of $1,087.78 on the date of injury.   
Defendant asserts a credit in the amount of $493.60 for medical expenses paid 
out of the City’s Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA) account.  Defendant cites 
no legal authority for this position.  Defendant contends that because the HRA is fully 
funded by the City, the City should receive a credit for the benefits paid.  According to 
Colleen Sole, an employee may be reimbursed up to $500.00 of their out-of-pocket 
expense for medical.  The money is kept in a general city fund, not an individual fund.  
Defendant’s exhibit K, page 53 sets forth the payments made from the HRA which total 
$500.00.  The payment of $6.40 was for medical treatment not related to the work 
injury.  (Def. Ex. K, p. 53)     
Claimant argues that the City is not entitled to such a credit because the HRA is 
a fringe benefit and is a property right of the claimant.  Claimant argues that he would 
have been entitled to the entire $500.00 allotment to pay non-occupational medical 
expenses if the City had not denied his claim.  I find claimant’s arguments to be 
persuasive.  I find that the HRA is a fringe benefit and a property right of the claimant.  I 
further find defendant is not entitled to a credit in the amount of $493.60.         
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has 
the burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 
6.14(6)(e). 

DOUGLAS V. CITY OF CEDAR FALLS 
Page 7 
 
 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of the 
employment.  Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996); Miedema v. Dial 
Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309 (Iowa 1996).  The words “arising out of” referred to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place, and 
circumstances of the injury.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124 (Iowa 1995).  
An injury arises out of the employment when a causal relationship exists between the 
injury and the employment.  Miedema, 551 N.W.2d 309.  The injury must be a rational 
consequence of a hazard connected with the employment and not merely incidental to 
the employment.  Koehler Electric v. Wills, 608 N.W.2d 1 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d 309.  An injury occurs “in the course of” employment when it happens within a 
period of employment at a place where the employee reasonably may be when 
performing employment duties and while the employee is fulfilling those duties or doing 
an activity incidental to them.  Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony.  The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hosp. v. 
Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); 
Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995).  Miller v. 
Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical 
testimony cannot be summarily rejected.  Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 
N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 1994). 
When the injury develops gradually over time, the cumulative injury rule applies.  
The date of injury for cumulative injury purposes is the date on which the disability 
manifests.  Manifestation is best characterized as that date on which both the fact of 
injury and the causal relationship of the injury to the claimant’s employment would be 
plainly apparent to a reasonable person.  The date of manifestation inherently is a fact 
based determination.  The fact-finder is entitled to substantial latitude in making this 
determination and may consider a variety of factors, none of which is necessarily 
dispositive in establishing a manifestation date.  Among others, the factors may include 
missing work when the condition prevents performing the job, or receiving significant 

DOUGLAS V. CITY OF CEDAR FALLS 
Page 8 
 
 
medical care for the condition.  For time limitation purposes, the discovery rule then 
becomes pertinent so the statute of limitations does not begin to run until the employee, 
as a reasonable person, knows or should know, that the cumulative injury condition is 
serious enough to have a permanent, adverse impact on his or her employment.  
Herrera v. IBP, Inc., 633 N.W.2d 284 (Iowa 2001); Oscar Mayer Foods Corp. v. Tasler, 
483 N.W.2d 824 (Iowa 1992); McKeever Custom Cabinets v. Smith, 379 N.W.2d 368 
(Iowa 1985). 
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude the opinions of Dr. Knudson and 
Dr. Manshadi carry greater weight than those of Dr. Kirkle.  I conclude Mr. Douglas has 
carried his burden of proof to demonstrate that his left carpal tunnel syndrome is related 
to his work for the City. I further conclude that Mr. Douglas sustained 2 percent 
impairment of his left upper extremity as the result of his work for the City.  I conclude 
Mr. Douglas’ injury did not manifest itself until February 20, 2018, when he first missed 
time from work due to the injury.   
The Iowa legislature has established a 250 week schedule for arm injuries.  Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(m).  Claimant is entitled to an award of permanent partial 
disability benefits equivalent to the proportional loss of his left arm.  Two percent (2%) of 
250 weeks equals 5 weeks.  Thus, claimant is entitled to an award of 5 weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits against the employer. 
Section 85.34(1) provides that healing period benefits are payable to an injured 
worker who has suffered permanent partial disability until (1) the worker has returned to 
work; (2) the worker is medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment; or (3) the worker has achieved maximum medical recovery.  The healing 
period can be considered the period during which there is a reasonable expectation of 
improvement of the disabling condition.  See Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. v. Kubli, 312 
N.W.2d 60 (Iowa App. 1981).  Healing period benefits can be interrupted or intermittent.  
Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W.2d 405 (Iowa 1986). 
 
Claimant is seeking healing period benefits from February 20, 2018 through 
March 19, 2018.  The parties have stipulated that if the defendant is liable for the 
alleged injury then claimant is entitled to benefits for this period of time.  Thus, claimant 
is entitled to healing period benefits from February 20, 2018 through March 19, 2018. 
 
We now turn to the issue of rate.  The initial rate dispute centers on the number 
of exemptions Mr. Douglas is entitled to claim.  The agency has long established 
precedent that the actual exemptions claimed on the income tax return controls when 
determining how many exemptions a claimant is entitled to claim for purposes of the 
weekly compensation rate. Webber v. West Side Transport, Inc., 1278549 (App. 
December 20, 2002); DeRaad v. Fred's Plumbing and Heating, No. 1134532 (App. 
January 16, 2002), Rhoades v. Torgerson Construction Co., No. 1012085 (App. 
January 31, 1995), Keeling v. Cedar Rapids Community Schools, No. 891809 (App. 
February 26, 1993).  Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude Mr. Douglas is 
single and entitled to claim two exemptions. 

DOUGLAS V. CITY OF CEDAR FALLS 
Page 9 
 
 
 
The parties also dispute claimant's average gross weekly wages at the time of 
this work injury. Defendant does not set forth its argument in the post-hearing brief.  
Section 85.36 states the basis of compensation is the weekly earnings of the employee 
at the time of the injury. The section defines weekly earnings as the gross salary, 
wages, or earnings to which an employee would have been entitled had the employee 
worked the customary hours for the full pay period in which the employee was injured 
as the employer regularly required for the work or employment. The various subsections 
of section 85.36 set forth methods of computing weekly earnings depending upon the 
type of earnings and employment.  Because Mr. Douglas is paid on an hourly basis the 
applicable Code section is 85.36(6).   
According to the union contract, in lieu of paid overtime the employee may elect 
to apply for compensatory time off (“comp. time”).  In other words, if Mr. Douglas works 
overtime he may elect to bank that time and use it as time off in the future.  The 
maximum number of hours he may bank is 240 and any unused comp time is paid out 
when the employment ends.  (Cl. Ex. 7, pp. 31-34) Claimant argues that his 
compensatory time is deferred compensation and is includible in the rate calculation 
when it is earned, not when it is paid.  See Area Educ. Agency 7 v. Bauch, 646 N.W.2d 
398, (Iowa 2002).  In the 13-week calculation claimant wants to include the weeks when 
he banked comp time, but exclude the weeks where he used the comp time.  (Ex. 6) 
Iowa Code section 85.36(6) provides, "A week which does not fairly reflect the 
employee's customary earnings shall be replaced by the closest previous week with 
earnings that fairly represent the employee's customary earnings."  I conclude it is not 
representative of his typical earnings to include weeks when claimant banks comp time, 
but then exclude weeks when he uses comp time.  If Mr. Douglas does not take the 
overtime payments, he does not have earnings in the week.  To then exclude the weeks 
when he uses banked comp time would inflate his actual earnings.  Based on the above 
findings of fact, I conclude Mr. Douglas’ average weekly wage on the date of injury is 
$1,087.78.  
The weekly workers’ compensation benefit amount is determined by referring to 
the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Manual in effect on the date of the injury.  Having 
found claimant’s gross average weekly wage was $1,087.78, that claimant was single 
and entitled to two exemptions, and using the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Manual 
with effective dates of July 1, 2017 through June 30, 2018, I determine that the 
applicable weekly rate is $652.30.   
Claimant is seeking payment of past medical expenses as set forth in claimant’s 
exhibits 9 and 10.  The employer shall furnish reasonable surgical, medical, dental, 
osteopathic, chiropractic, podiatric, physical rehabilitation, nursing, ambulance, and 
hospital services and supplies for all conditions compensable under the workers' 
compensation law.  The employer shall also allow reasonable and necessary 
transportation expenses incurred for those services.  The employer has the right to 
choose the provider of care, except where the employer has denied liability for the 

DOUGLAS V. CITY OF CEDAR FALLS 
Page 10 
 
 
injury.  Section 85.27.  Holbert v. Townsend Engineering Co., Thirty-second Biennial 
Report of the Industrial Commissioner 78 (Review-Reopening, October 1975).   
Defendant stipulates that the listed expenses are causally connected to Mr. 
Douglas’ left carpal tunnel syndrome.  Because I found that the left carpal tunnel is 
related to his work with the defendant, it follows that defendant is responsible for the 
expenses in claimant’s exhibits 9 and 10.  
Defendant asserts a credit in the amount of $493.60 for medical expenses paid 
out of the City’s Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA) account.  Defendant cites 
no legal authority for this position.  Claimant argues that the City is not entitled to such a 
credit because the HRA is a fringe benefit and is a property right of the claimant.  See 
King v. Marion Independent School Dist., File No. 5036224 (App. June 10, 2013).  
Claimant also argues that if the City is permitted to credit this amount against its 
statutory obligations under 85.27, then this would be in contravention of Iowa Code 
section 85.18.  Section 85.18 prohibits any type of device that operates to relieve the 
employer from any liability under the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act.   
Based on the above findings of fact, I conclude that defendant has failed to prove 
entitlement to a credit under Iowa Codes section 85.38(2).   
Claimant is seeking an assessment of costs as set forth in claimant’s exhibit 11.  
I conclude that claimant was successful in this claim and that an assessment of costs is 
appropriate under 876 IAC 4.33.  Specifically, claimant is seeking the filing fee in the 
amount of $100.00.  I find this is an appropriate cost under subsection 7.  Claimant is 
seeking costs in the amount of $108.90 for his deposition transcription fee.  (Ex. 11, p. 
44) I find that this is an appropriate cost under subsection 2.  Under subsection 6, 
Claimant is seeking costs in the amount of $100.00 for a doctor’s report dated April 16, 
2020.  (Ex. 11, p. 45) Defendant does not dispute entitlement to these costs.  Thus, 
defendant is assessed costs in the amount of $308.90.     
Defendant is seeking an assessment of costs as set forth in defendant’s exhibit 
O.  I conclude that defendant was not successful in this case and therefore an 
assessment of costs against the claimant is not appropriate.  Claimant is not assessed 
costs.   
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of six hundred fifty-two and 
30/100 dollars ($652.30).   
Defendant shall pay healing period benefits from February 20, 2018 through 
March 19, 2018. 

DOUGLAS V. CITY OF CEDAR FALLS 
Page 11 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
Defendant shall pay five (5) weeks of permanent partial disability benefits 
commencing on the stipulated commencement date of March 20, 2018. 
Defendant shall be responsible for past medical benefits as set forth above. 
Defendant shall reimburse claimant costs as set forth above. 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1 (2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
Signed and filed this __21st ___ day of July, 2020. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Benjamin Roth (via WCES) 
Bruce Gettman (via WCES) 
 
       ERIN Q. PALS 
             DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
   COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
