Case Number: 5063063
Case Title:  CUFUROVIC, MIRZA V. TYSON FOODS INC
Doc Type:    Decision - District Court
Source:      Cufurovic, Mirza-5063063.District Court Decision.pdf
========================================================================

IN THE IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR  BLACK HAWK COUNTY 
 
MIRZA CUFUROVIC, 
 
 
] 
 
 
Petitioner, 
 
 
] 
CASE NO.  CVCV138996 
 
 
 
 
 
 
] 
 
vs. 
 
 
 
 
] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
] 
TYSON FOODS, INC., 
 
 
] 
ORDER 
 
 
Respondent.  
 
] 
 
 
This matter was submitted to the court for review following a determination by the 
Workers Compensation Commission that claimant was ineligible for disability benefits.  
The record was submitted to the court; however, after review the court determined that 
defendant’s exhibit F had not been provided to the court for review.  The parties were 
notified and the parties provided to the court exhibit F. 
 
 
The court has now had an opportunity to review all of the relevant matters and case 
law and hereby FINDS: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 
Claimant was employed by defendant.  Claimant alleged a work-related injury 
causing disability.  Defendant denied that any injury was work-related. 
 
 
Hearing was held on January 9, 2018, before the Honorable William Grell, deputy 
worker compensation commissioner.  An arbitration decision was entered on April 16, 
2018, finding in favor of defendant and that claimant had failed to carry her burden of 
proof.   
 
 
Claimant filed an appeal of this decision.  On November 8, 2019, Joseph S. Cortese, 
II, workers compensation commissioner, affirmed the arbitration decision of April 16, 
2018.  This action followed.   
 
Applicable Law 
 
 
Claimant’s Petition for Judicial Review of Final Workers Compensation Agency 
Decision is based upon the ground for relief stated in Iowa Code Section 17A.19(10).  
Particularly, claimant relies upon the following provisions in support of her Petition for 
Judicial Review: 
 
10. 
The court may affirm an agency action or remand to the agency for 
further proceedings.  The court shall reverse, modify, or grant other 
appropriate relief from agency action, equitable or legal, and including 
declaratory relief, if it determines the substantial rights of the person seeking 
E-FILED  2020 JUL 22 8:17 AM BLACKHAWK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

judicial relief had been prejudiced because the agency action is in any of the 
following: 
 
 
f. 
Based upon a determination of fact clearly vested by the 
provisions of law in the discretion of the agency that is not supported by 
substantial evidence in the record before the court when the record is viewed 
as a whole.  For the purposes of this paragraph, the following terms have the 
following meaning: 
 
 
(1) 
“Substantial evidence” means the quantity and quality of 
evidence that would be deemed sufficient for a neutral, detached and 
reasonable person to establish a fact at issue when the consequences resulting 
from the establishment of that fact are understood to be serious and of great 
importance. 
 
 
(2) 
“Record before the court” means the agency record for judicial 
review, as defined by this chapter, supplemented by any additional evidence 
received by the court under the provisions of this chapter. 
 
 
(3) 
“When the record is viewed as a whole” means the adequacy 
of the evidence in the record before court to support a particular finding of 
fact must be judged in light of all the relevant evidence in the record cited by 
any party that detracts from that finding as well as all the relevant evidence 
in the record cited by any party that supports it, including any determination 
of veracity by the presiding officer who personally observed the demeanor 
of the witnesses and the agency’s explanation of why the relevant evidence 
in the record supports its material finding of fact.  Iowa Code Section 
17A.19(10)(f).  On judicial review, courts are bound by the agency’s fact 
determinations if those determinations of fact are support by the substantial 
evidence in the record as a whole.   
 
 
A claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the 
injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of employment.  
Quaker Oats v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143 (Iowa 1996). 
 
 
A claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that an 
injury is the proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is a 
proximate cause if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the injury and it need not be 
the only cause.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 1997).  The 
question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert testimony.  The 
expert evidence must be considered with all other evidence introduced bearing upon the 
causal connection between the injury and the disability.  An expert opinion may be 
accepted or rejected, in whole or in part.  St. Luke’s Hospital v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646  
(Iowa 2000). 
 
E-FILED  2020 JUL 22 8:17 AM BLACKHAWK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
For a personal injury to be compensated under the Workers Compensation Law, the 
impairment must be resulting from an injury which comes about not through the natural 
build up and tearing down of the human body but because of trauma.  Although many 
injuries have a traumatic onset, there is no requirement for a special incident or an unusual 
occurrence.  Injuries which result from cumulative trauma are compensable.  Ellingson v. 
Fleetwood, Inc., 599 N.W.2d 440 (Iowa 1999). 
 
Statement of Facts 
 
 
Claimant’s work history and medical history are accurately set out in the arbitration 
decision of April 16, 2018.  They need not be repeated here in their entirety. 
 
 
At issue herein is the opinion of three expert witnesses.   
 
 
Claimant was seen by Dr. Robert L. Gordon, M.D.  Although Dr. Gordon was 
unsure of the cause of claimant’s back condition, he opined that claimant’s history and 
medical records did not support a conclusion that the condition was work-related.  In his 
ruling of April 16, 2018, deputy commissioner Grell stated “I have difficulty in accepting 
or finding Dr. Gordon’s opinions entirely convincing given that he is not a back surgeon 
and admits he cannot identify the specific cause of claimant’s condition.”  This court gives 
deference to the determination of deputy commissioner Grell and likewise gives little 
weight to the opinions of Dr. Gordon. 
 
 
Claimant also saw Dr. Trevor R. Schmitz, M.D.  Dr. Schmitz opined that claimant’s 
condition was not work-related. 
 
 
 
Dr. Schmitz’s opinion was based primarily on two beliefs.  First, Dr. Schmitz stated 
that low back injuries are caused by age and genetic factors.  Deputy commissioner Grell 
did not accept this “notion” noting that as an agency, numerous back injuries are seen that 
are caused by lifting and work activity.  This court again gives deference to the findings of 
deputy commissioner Grell in not accepting this premise as a basis for Dr. Schmitz’s 
opinion. 
 
 
Dr. Schmitz also based his opinion that claimant’s condition was not work-related 
on defendant's exhibit F, a video showing the job duties for claimant’s position at Tyson.  
This video shows little, if any, lifting or duties which would result in a low back injury. 
 
 
Claimant also saw Dr. Arnold E. Delbridge, M.D.   Dr. Delbridge opined that 
claimant’s low back condition was related to her employment at Tyson.  Dr. Delbridge 
based his opinion on duties not shown in the work video (exhibit F) but rather duties which 
required much heavier lifting at greater frequency.   
 
 
Deputy commissioner Grell found that the basis for Dr. Delbridge’s opinion was not 
support by the evidence presented. 
 
E-FILED  2020 JUL 22 8:17 AM BLACKHAWK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
In joint exhibit 8 at page 25, Dr. Delbridge describes the work duties of the claimant 
as they were understood by him.  In his description, Dr. Delbridge states that claimant had 
to repetitively lift boxes weighing 10 pounds, sometimes 30 pounds, and sometimes 60 
pounds.  She believed that the heaviest lifting she had to do while performing one job duty 
was 70 pounds.  While doing a job in the bone-in department, Dr. Delbridge believed that 
claimant had to lift up to 100 to 110-pound boxes repeatedly.  Dr. Delbridge further found 
that although the claimant was working in the cold chain department which required lesser 
lifting, she often was working in those departments which required greater lifting.  Further 
in exhibit 8 at page 29, Dr. Delbridge describes claimant’s work duties as having to lift 
repetitively weights up to 100 to 110 pounds and depending on the day, had to do it multiple 
times especially if the line broke down. 
 
 
In a letter dated October 19, 2017, shown in exhibit 8 at page 32, Dr. Delbridge 
stated that it was his conclusion that claimant lifted quite heavy objects on a repetitive basis 
day-after-day.  It was further his conclusion that her spine issues are the result of 
cumulative trauma from heavy lifting over a period of time. 
 
 
It was the findings of deputy commissioner Grell that the job duties set forth by Dr. 
Delbridge were not an accurate description of claimant’s work activities.  This court, 
however, notes that in claimant’s deposition shown as defendant’s exhibit A at page 11, 
claimant states that in working in one department she would be required to lift boxes 
weighing at 10, 30 or even 60 pounds.  At page 15 of that deposition, claimant testified that 
when working in the bone-in department, you might have to end up lifting 100, 110-pound 
boxes.  And on page 16 of that deposition, claimant further testified that in the cold chain 
department you would not have to lift that much weight, maybe 10, 30 or 60 pounds but 
on other lines you would have to lift boxes of 100 to 110 pounds.   
 
 
In claimant’s trial testimony at page 35, claimant discussed lifting boxes of loins 
that weighed 70 pounds.  On page 36 she again talked of lifting boxes which weighed up 
to 70 pounds.  On page 40 of her deposition she talked about lifting boxes when working 
in the bone-in department that weighed anywhere from 40 to 110 pounds.  On page 41 of 
her trial testimony she stated that she was required to lift 75 to 80 boxes in an 8-hour shift 
and on page 42 spoke of working in a department where she was required to lift 70 to 100 
boxes a day. 
 
 
The deposition testimony and trial testimony of the claimant regarding her job duties 
are consistent with each other and are consistent with the job duties stated by Dr. Delbridge 
as the job duties he relied upon in making his determination that the claimant’s condition 
was job related.   
 
 
Further adding to the reliability of the description of claimant’s job duties and 
therefor the opinion of Dr. Delbridge is the testimony of defense witness Enes Kajtecovic 
who at pages 34 and 92 of the trial transcript corroborated the work duties of claimant as 
stated in her trial testimony.  It is also of significance that the job description for the job 
performed by claimant required the ability to lift 100 pounds (page 93, trial transcript).   
E-FILED  2020 JUL 22 8:17 AM BLACKHAWK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

 
 
The opinion of Dr. Schmitz was based upon a job video which was an incomplete 
and inaccurate description of the duties which claimant performed at Tyson.  The opinion 
of Dr. Delbridge was based upon a job description consistent with trial and deposition 
testimony of claimant and corroborated by defendant’s own witness.   
 
 
Although deputy commissioner Grell found the testimony of claimant to not be 
credible, on all material evidence contained in her deposition and trial testimony regarding 
her job duties while working at Tyson, her statements were consistent.  This testimony of 
claimant was consistent with the job description described by Dr. Delbridge in his opinion 
that claimant’s low back condition was job-related.  And claimant’s testimony regarding 
her job duties at Tyson were corroborated by defendant’s own witness. 
 
 
It is the finding of this court that the determination of fact by the Workers 
Compensation Commission is not supported by substantial evidence in the record when the 
record is viewed as a whole.  This court therefore determines that claimant has proven by 
a preponderance of the evidence that her work activities at Tyson were a substantial 
contributing factor to her lower back injury.  The matter must therefore be referred back to 
the Workers Compensation Commission for determination of all other matters which were 
determined moot due to the commission’s previous ruling herein. 
 
 
IT IS THEREFORE HEREBY ORDERED: 
 
 
1. 
That the ruling of the Iowa Workers Compensation commissioner finding 
that claimant failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that her low back injuries 
were work-related and that this matter should be dismissed is hereby REVERSED. 
 
 
2. 
This matter is hereby remanded to the Iowa Workers Compensation 
Commission for further rulings consistent with the court’s finding herein regarding those 
matters determined to be moot based upon the commission’s previous ruling. 
 
 
3. 
Costs herein are taxed to defendant. 
 
 
Clerk to provide copies to counsel of record. 
 
 
E-FILED  2020 JUL 22 8:17 AM BLACKHAWK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT

State of Iowa Courts
Type:
OTHER ORDER
Case Number
Case Title
CVCV138996
M CUFUROVIC VS TYSON FOODS INC
So Ordered
Electronically signed on 2020-07-22 08:17:41     page 6 of 6
E-FILED  2020 JUL 22 8:17 AM BLACKHAWK - CLERK OF DISTRICT COURT
