Case Number: 21700246.01
Case Title:  DUNGAN, TYLER V. DEN HARTOG INDUSTRIES
Doc Type:    Decision - Supreme Court
Source:      Dungan, Tyler-21700246.01.Supreme Court Decision.pdf
========================================================================

In the Iowa Supreme Court 
No. 23–1402 
Submitted September 10, 2025—Filed October 3, 2025 
Den Hartog Industries and West Bend Mutual Insurance Company, 
Appellants, 
vs. 
Tyler Dungan, 
Appellee. 
On review from the Iowa Court of Appeals. 
Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Polk County, Jeanie Vaudt, judge. 
An employer and a carrier seek further review of a court of appeals decision 
affirming the dismissal of their petition for review of a workers’ compensation 
decision awarding partial permanent disability benefits to an employee based on 
lost earning capacity. Decision of Court of Appeals Vacated; District Court 
Judgment Reversed and Case Remanded with Instructions. 
Mansfield, J., delivered the opinion of the court, in which all justices 
joined. 
Lee P. Hook, Michael S. Roling, Christopher S. Spencer, Morgan R. Todd 
Borron, and Jordan R. Reed (until withdrawal) of Peddicord Lillis LLP, West Des 
Moines, for appellants. 
Janece Valentine of Valentine Law Office, P.C., Fort Dodge, for appellee. 

 
2 
 
Mansfield, Justice. 
I. Introduction. 
Read, and declare the meaning. 
William Shakespeare, Cymbeline act V, sc. 5, l. 530. 
These words were addressed to a soothsayer in Shakespeare’s play, but 
today they are addressed to our court. The present case requires us to declare 
the meaning of Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v) (2019), and most particularly its 
third sentence. That sentence provides,  
If an employee who is eligible for compensation under this 
paragraph returns to work or is offered work for which the employee 
receives or would receive the same or greater salary, wages, or 
earnings than the employee received at the time of the injury, the 
employee shall be compensated based only upon the employee’s 
functional impairment resulting from the injury, and not in relation 
to the employee’s earning capacity.  
We interpret those words according to their plain meaning. Thus, we hold 
that an employee eligible for compensation under that paragraph who returns to 
work at the same or greater salary, wages, or earnings should be compensated 
based upon their functional impairment resulting from the injury. We are not 
persuaded by the contrary, nontextual arguments advanced in this litigation. In 
some other cases, references to a “bifurcated litigation process,” to a rule of 
construction that workers’ compensation laws should be interpreted in 
claimants’ favor to effectuate their humanitarian purpose, and to other policy 
arguments might carry the day. But they cannot overcome plain text here. 
Accordingly, we hold that the commissioner erred in awarding permanent 
partial disability benefits based on earning capacity rather than functional 
impairment, and we reverse and remand for further proceedings. 

 
3 
 
II. Facts and Procedural History. 
On July 24, 2019, Tyler Dungan was working as an outdoor loader and 
material handler for Den Hartog Industries in Hospers. Den Hartog 
manufactures plastic tanks of various sizes. One such container was shipped to 
Las Vegas, Nevada, where it was used to make the world’s largest margarita. 
Dungan’s job duties included lifting and carrying loads up to seventy-five 
pounds.  
On the 24th, Dungan was hoisting a seventy-pound hoop as part of a 
loading process. Unexpectedly, the hoop caught on the trailer as Dungan jerked 
it upward. Dungan immediately felt a lightning-like sensation up and down his 
back. Dungan dropped to his knee. Later, he informed his supervisor that he 
might have injured his back. Dungan missed the next three days of work. 
Although Dungan returned to work, his back pain continued. Initially, 
Dungan sought chiropractic care, but in September, he was referred to a medical 
clinic that specialized in neuroscience, orthopedics, and the spine. Dr. Hendrik 
Klopper, a neurosurgeon, became Dungan’s treating physician. He diagnosed 
Dungan with a disc herniation at L4–L5 and an annular tear at L5–S1. Dungan 
received steroid injections. Dungan also underwent physical therapy, which 
provided some relief but didn’t alleviate all symptoms. 
Dungan had been earning $15.16 per hour from Den Hartog at the time of 
his back injury. After his injury, Den Hartog increased Dungan’s pay to $15.50 
per hour, even though Dr. Klopper had placed Dungan on a forty-pound weight 
restriction. Still, the pain caused Dungan to miss “a fair bit of work.” 
In June 2020, Dungan and his fiancée decided to relocate from Sioux 
County. Although Dungan “loved” his job at Den Hartog, the couple had just had 
their first child and wanted to be closer to family. So, Dungan resigned from 

 
4 
 
Den Hartog and went to work at Meridian Manufacturing as a welder. Pay 
increases at Meridian brought Dungan’s wages up to $17.48 per hour.  
Dungan continued to see Dr. Klopper and reported ongoing discomfort. He 
received steroid injections at L4–L5 in June and September.  
By the time of the hearing, Dungan had left his employment with Meridian. 
He was working as a welder at Gomaco in Ida Grove, earning approximately 
$20.15 per hour. When Dungan joined Gomaco, he sought and obtained a 
release from Dr. Klopper as to all work restrictions. Dungan’s welding job at 
Gomaco is less physically demanding than his job as a loader and handler at 
Den Hartog had been. 
On March 12, 2021, Dungan filed a petition for workers’ compensation 
benefits relating to his work injury at Den Hartog.1 Dungan’s treating 
physician—Dr. Klopper—applied the American Medical Association Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment to Dungan’s back injury and assigned a 5% 
impairment to the body as a whole.  
Each side in the proceeding retained a physician to perform an 
independent medical exam (IME). Dr. Sunil Bansal—who had been retained by 
Dungan’s counsel—assigned an 8% impairment to the body as a whole. Another 
physician—retained by Den Hartog’s counsel—concurred in Dr. Klopper’s 5% 
figure. Dr. Bansal’s higher percentage rating was based largely on his 
determination that Dungan was suffering from ongoing radiculopathy. 
Following a hearing, the deputy found Dr. Bansal’s evaluation more 
persuasive. He concluded that Dungan did indeed have ongoing radiculopathy. 
 
1In discussing the workers’ compensation proceeding, we will refer to the employer and 
its workers’ compensation carrier collectively as “Den Hartog.”  

 
5 
 
He therefore determined that Dungan had sustained an impairment of 8% to the 
body due to the July 24, 2019 work injury. 
Yet the deputy also concluded that an unscheduled injury, such as 
Dungan’s back injury, was required to be compensated according to the 
industrial method under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). In other words, the 
ultimate issue was Dungan’s loss of earning capacity, not his functional 
impairment, from the work injury. The deputy noted that Dungan was twenty-six 
years old, had no postsecondary education, and would “more likely than not be 
unable to return to work as physically demanding as his day-to-day duties at 
Den Hartog made that job.” Considering these factors, the deputy found that 
Dungan had sustained a 15% industrial disability and, therefore, awarded 
Dungan seventy-five weeks of permanent partial disability benefits in addition to 
costs and continued medical care.  
Den Hartog sought review by the workers’ compensation commissioner, 
who affirmed the deputy’s decision. Den Hartog then petitioned for judicial 
review, challenging both the use of the industrial method and the commissioner’s 
factual determination that Dungan had sustained a 15% loss of earning capacity.  
The district court entered an order denying the petition for judicial review. 
The district court agreed that section 85.34(2)(v) mandated determination of 
Dungan’s permanent partial disability benefits by the industrial method and 
further held that “substantial evidence supports the commissioner’s finding of 
an industrial loss of 15%.”  
Den Hartog appealed, and we transferred the appeal to the court of 
appeals. In a 2–1 decision, the court of appeals affirmed the district court. The 
majority agreed with the district court that the industrial method applied and 
that substantial evidence supported the finding of a 15% loss of earning capacity. 

 
6 
 
A dissenting judge took the view that section 85.34(2)(v)’s “plain and 
unambiguous text requires Dungan to ‘be compensated based only upon [his] 
functional impairment resulting from the injury, and not in relation to [his] 
earning capacity.’ ” (Alterations in original) (quoting Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v)). 
We granted Den Hartog’s application for further review. 
III. Standard of Review. 
As we have stated before, 
We review the workers’ compensation commissioner’s 
interpretation of Iowa Code chapter 85 for errors at law. Evenson v. 
Winnebago Indus., Inc., 881 N.W.2d 360, 366 (Iowa 2016). “In recent 
years, we have repeatedly declined to give deference to the 
commissioner’s interpretations of various provisions in chapter 85.” 
Iowa Ins. Inst. v. Core Grp. of Iowa Ass’n for Justice, 867 N.W.2d 58, 
65 (Iowa 2015) (citing numerous cases); see also Warren Props. v. 
Stewart, 864 N.W.2d 307, 311 (Iowa 2015) (recognizing that the 
legislature “has not vested the commissioner with the authority to 
interpret Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(u) [now 85.34(2)(v)] and (7)(a)”). 
We do not believe the terms of the workers’ compensation statute at 
issue here are “uniquely within the subject matter expertise of the 
agency.” Renda v. Iowa Civil Rights Comm’n, 784 N.W.2d 8, 14 (Iowa 
2010). 
JBS Swift & Co. v. Ochoa, 888 N.W.2d 887, 892–93 (Iowa 2016).  
“[W]e accept the commissioner’s factual findings when supported by 
substantial evidence.” Gumm v. Easter Seal Soc. of Iowa, Inc., 943 N.W.2d 23, 28 
(Iowa 2020) (alteration in original) (quoting Bluml v. Dee Jay’s Inc., 920 N.W.2d 
82, 84 (Iowa 2018)). 
IV. Legal Analysis. 
Several factual and legal propositions in this case are undisputed. Dungan 
suffered a back injury while working for Den Hartog in 2019. Such an injury is 
deemed an “unscheduled” injury and is compensated under Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(v). See Bridgestone Ams., Inc. v. Anderson, 4 N.W.3d 676, 
685–86 (Iowa 2024) (explaining the types of injuries covered by Iowa Code 

 
7 
 
section 85.34(2)(v)). After Dungan sustained the back injury, he continued to 
work at Den Hartog. His earnings remained the same or increased. In 2020, 
Dungan voluntarily left Den Hartog. 
The first question raised by this case, and as it turns out, the only one we 
need to answer, is whether section 85.34(2)(v) requires the application of the 
industrial method or the functional impairment method to compensate Dungan 
for his workplace injury. Section 85.34(2)(v) contains four sentences and 
provides: 
[1] In all cases of permanent partial disability other than those 
described or referred to in paragraphs “a” through “u”, the 
compensation shall be paid during the number of weeks in relation 
to five hundred weeks as the reduction in the employee’s earning 
capacity caused by the disability bears in relation to the earning 
capacity that the employee possessed when the injury occurred. 
[2] A determination of the reduction in the employee’s earning 
capacity caused by the disability shall take into account the 
permanent partial disability of the employee and the number of 
years in the future it was reasonably anticipated that the employee 
would work at the time of the injury. [3] If an employee who is eligible 
for compensation under this paragraph returns to work or is offered 
work for which the employee receives or would receive the same or 
greater salary, wages, or earnings than the employee received at the 
time of the injury, the employee shall be compensated based only 
upon the employee’s functional impairment resulting from the 
injury, and not in relation to the employee’s earning capacity. 
[4] Notwithstanding section 85.26, subsection 2, if an employee who 
is eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work 
with the same employer and is compensated based only upon the 
employee’s functional impairment resulting from the injury as 
provided in this paragraph and is terminated from employment by 
that employer, the award or agreement for settlement for benefits 
under this chapter shall be reviewed upon commencement of 
reopening proceedings by the employee for a determination of any 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the 
employee’s permanent partial disability. 
Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v). 

 
8 
 
Sentences 2, 3, and 4 are relatively recent additions. The general assembly 
added them in 2017 as part of a series of amendments to the workers’ 
compensation law. See 2017 Iowa Acts ch. 23 § 8. 
We apply section 85.34(2)(v) in a straightforward manner as follows. Under 
sentences 1 and 2, Dungan’s back injury would ordinarily be compensated 
according to the industrial method, based on “the reduction in the employee’s 
earning capacity caused by the disability.” Iowa Code § 85.34(2)(v). However, 
Dungan “return[ed] to work . . . for which [he] receive[d] or would receive the 
same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than [he] received at the time of the 
injury.” Id. Therefore, under sentence 3, he should be compensated “based only 
upon [his] functional impairment resulting from the injury, and not in relation 
to [his] earning capacity.” Id. Finally, Dungan was not “terminated from 
employment” by Den Hartog, so sentence 4 doesn’t apply, and there is no 
review-reopening. Id. In other words, when all is said and done, Dungan should 
be compensated based on functional impairment, as dictated by sentence 3, not 
loss of earning capacity. 
The commissioner found otherwise. He opined that the 2017 amendments 
created a “bifurcated litigation process.” That process applies only when the 
employee returns to employment with the same employer at the same or greater 
earnings and is later terminated. The commissioner’s views are correct insofar 
as they refer to sentence 4: If the employee is terminated, they can pursue a 
second litigation process, i.e., a review-reopening. But the commissioner’s 
reference to a bifurcated litigation process doesn’t address sentence 3 or the 
present case. Sentence 3 still applies even when, as here, sentence 4 doesn’t. If 
the employee returns to work at the same or greater earnings and isn’t 

 
9 
 
terminated, then there is only one litigation process, in which benefits are 
calculated using the functional impairment method. 
The court of appeals majority didn’t seem to be persuaded by the 
commissioner’s reliance on a “bifurcated litigation process.” But it got to the 
same result by a different path. As an initial matter, it found section 85.34(2)(v) 
ambiguous because it doesn’t expressly address what happens when the 
employee returns to work at the same or greater earnings and isn’t terminated. 
And after detecting an ambiguity, it relied on the principle that the workers’ 
compensation law should be interpreted “broadly and liberally in keeping with 
its humanitarian objective: the benefit of the worker and the worker’s 
dependents.” Xenia Rural Water Dist. v. Vegors, 786 N.W.2d 250, 257 (Iowa 
2010). On that basis, it ruled that Dungan’s benefits were properly determined 
using the industrial method. 
We disagree with the court of appeals’ reasoning. Section 85.34(2)(v) isn’t 
ambiguous. Instead, it provides for specific consequences that flow from specific 
events. That is, if an employee with a nonscheduled injury returns to work at the 
same or greater earnings, they get compensated based on their functional 
impairment. But, if they return to the same employer and are later terminated 
by that employer, they can pursue a review-reopening and seek benefits under 
the industrial method. Dungan fits the first circumstance but not the second, so 
his compensation should be based on his functional impairment. 
Assume we have a law. The law provides that if A occurs, X will result, but 
if B occurs, then Y will result. That law isn’t “ambiguous” as to what happens if 
A occurs but B doesn’t. In that event, the result is clearly X. 
The interpretations offered by the commissioner and the court of appeals 
majority end up giving no effect to sentence 3 of section 85.34(2)(v). And their 

 
10 
 
reading of sentence 4 is also unpersuasive. Sentence 4 presumes that but for the 
employee being terminated by their employer and electing to pursue a 
review-reopening, the employee’s benefits would be based on functional 
impairment. It would be illogical to allow review-reopening for the purpose of 
seeking benefits under the industrial method pursuant to sentence 4 if the 
employee were already being compensated on that basis anyway.  
Moreover, our present interpretation of section 85.34(2)(v) is consistent 
with statements we made in Loew v. Menard, Inc., 2 N.W.3d 880 (Iowa 2024). 
Loew also involved an employee who sustained an employment-related back 
injury after the 2017 amendments had gone into effect. Id. at 885. Like Dungan, 
the employee returned to work with his employer at the same or greater 
compensation. Id. at 887.  
In Loew, the deputy determined that this injury caused an 8% functional 
impairment. Id. at 885. This was on top of the employee’s prior 20% functional 
impairment resulting from a pre-2017 back injury at the same workplace, for a 
total functional impairment of 28%. Id. However, the employee had received an 
award for the pre-2017 injury based on the industrial method and a 30% loss of 
earning capacity. Id. Since twenty-eight is less than thirty, the employer argued, 
and the commissioner agreed, that the employee had already been adequately 
compensated and was not entitled to separate compensation for the post-2017 
compensation. Id. at 885–86. Notably, Iowa Code section 85.34(7) (2018) 
provides, “An employer is not liable for compensating an employee’s preexisting 
disability that arose out of and in the course of employment from a prior injury 
with the employer, to the extent that the employee’s preexisting disability has 
already been compensated . . . .” 

 
11 
 
We reversed and remanded. Loew, 2 N.W.3d at 889. We held that under 
section 85.34(2)(v), the employee had to be compensated for the additional 
functional impairment resulting from the post-2017 back injury, and there was 
no basis for offsetting that functional impairment award against a prior earning 
capacity award. Id. The two types of awards were “incommensurable.” Id. 
In the course of our opinion, we said, 
Section 
85.34(2)(v) 
provides 
two 
methods 
for 
calculating 
compensation for a nonscheduled permanent partial disability. 
Compensation shall be paid using the industrial method based on 
“the reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the 
disability.” Id. However, when an employee returns to work at the 
“same or greater salary, wages, or earnings than the employee 
received at the time of the injury,” then “the employee shall be 
compensated 
based 
only 
upon 
the 
employee’s 
functional 
impairment resulting from the injury, and not in relation to the 
employee’s 
earning 
capacity.” 
Id. 
Here, 
Loew 
suffered 
a 
nonscheduled injury to his lower back, and he returned to work at 
the same or greater compensation. Because Loew returned to work 
at the same or greater compensation, he was entitled to 
compensation “based only upon [his] functional impairment 
resulting from the injury.” Id. The commissioner found the 
August 13, 2018 work injury caused an 8% permanent functional 
impairment to his lower back. Pursuant to the plain language of the 
statute, Loew “shall be compensated” for the additional 8% 
functional impairment “resulting from the injury.” Id. That equates 
to forty weeks’ compensation (8% of 500 weeks). 
Id. at 886–87. 
Thus, in Loew, we read section 85.34(2)(v) as requiring functional 
impairment to be utilized as the basis for compensation when the employee 
returned to work at the same or greater compensation. Id. at 887. That was an 
essential point of the reasoning in our opinion. And it’s the same conclusion we 
reach here today. 
Dungan argues that it is better policy to allow someone in his situation to 
be compensated based on the industrial method from the very outset—thereby 

 
12 
 
avoiding the need for a potential review-reopening proceeding down the road. 
Dungan maintains that “carriers want finality, not open files”; that employees 
should not be “incentivized to try and get fired”; and that “[u]nscrupulous 
employers should not be incentivized to offer work at the same or greater wage 
for work which the injured worker cannot realistically perform.” 
These are plausible arguments, but they cannot overcome clear statutory 
language. Furthermore, one can think of counterarguments. For example, one 
might argue that it is sound public policy to incentivize employers to keep 
workers who sustain workplace injuries on the payroll at their prior level of 
compensation. One might also argue that it is fairer to provide workers’ 
compensation benefits to such workers based on functional impairment rather 
than on a lost earning capacity that has not yet materialized in an actual loss of 
earnings. Resolving these competing policy arguments is the legislature’s job; 
our duty is to interpret the text of the statute as written. 
Because we have determined that Dungan’s permanent partial disability 
benefits should have been calculated based on functional impairment, we need 
not address whether substantial evidence supports the commissioner’s factual 
determination that Dungan suffered a 15% reduction in earning capacity. 
V. Conclusion. 
 
For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the judgment of the district court 
and remand this case with directions to the district court to remand this 
proceeding to the workers’ compensation commissioner for calculation of 
benefits based on functional impairment. 
 
Decision of Court of Appeals Vacated; District Court Judgment 
Reversed and Case Remanded with Instructions. 
