Case Number: 1652134.01
Case Title:  HEISTER, KESHIA V. DREAM II HOLDINGS, L.L.C./2ND INJ-FUND
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Heister Keshia-1652134.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
KESHIA HEISTER, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                     File No. 1652134.01 
DREAM II HOLDINGS, LLC., 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                ARBITRATION DECISION 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
THE HARTFORD, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
  
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Keshia Heister, claimant, filed a petition for arbitration against Dream II Holdings, 
LLC, as the employer, and The Hartford, as the insurance carrier.  Claimant also filed a 
claim against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  This case came before the undersigned 
for an arbitration hearing on September 10, 2020, via CourtCall. 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the hearing.  On the 
hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations.  Those stipulations were 
accepted and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made or 
discussed.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 6, Defendants’ Exhibits A through C, and Second Injury Fund Exhibit AA.  All 
exhibits were received without objection. 
Claimant testified on her own behalf.  Claimant called Cory Heister to testify on her 
behalf.  No other witnesses were called to testify.  The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the arbitration hearing. 
All parties served their post-hearing briefs on October 23, 2020, at which time this 
case was deemed fully submitted to the undersigned. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following disputed issues for resolution: 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2021-May-20  16:04:22     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

HEISTER V. DREAM II HOLDINGS, LLC/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
1. Whether the August 1, 2018, work injury caused permanent disability and, if so, 
the extent of claimant's entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits for a 
scheduled member injury to the left arm; 
 
2. Whether claimant sustained a prior qualifying loss to the right upper extremity on 
October 31, 2013, and, if so, the functional loss attributable to the same; 
 
3. Whether claimant proved the August 1, 2018, work injury is a qualifying injury for 
purposes of Second Injury Fund benefits;  
 
4. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to Second Injury Fund benefits, if any; 
 
5. Whether costs should be assessed against any party and, if so, in what amount. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Keshia Heister was born on November 2, 1982, making her 37 years old at the 
time of hearing. (Hearing Transcript, page 21)  She lives on a farm in Maquoketa, Iowa, 
with her husband, Cory Heister. Id.  Mr. and Mrs. Heister have a “hobby farm” where they 
raise cows and chickens. (Hr. Tr., p. 13) 
Claimant graduated from Bellevue High School in 2001. (Hr. Tr., p. 23)  She would 
go on to complete a certified nursing assistant course at Clinton Community College in 
2006. (Hr. Tr., p. 26)  Claimant’s employment history is limited.  Aside from working for 
the defendant employer, claimant’s employment history consists of working as a team 
member at McDonald’s, and as a CNA at Crestridge nursing home in Maquoketa, Iowa. 
(Hr. Tr., p. 25)   
Claimant began working for McDonald’s in 1998, while she was still in high school.  
(Hr. Tr., p. 62)  Her job duties at the time included working the drive-thru window and 
providing assistance in the kitchen. (Hr. Tr., p. 24)  Claimant left McDonald’s in 2005 to 
work for Crestridge. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 25, 63)  Claimant worked at Crestridge for just under 
five years. (Hr. Tr., p. 26)  Claimant lost her CNA license and position with Crestridge 
after she accepted money from a resident in her care. (Hr. Tr., pp. 63-64)  After losing her 
job at Crestridge, claimant returned to work at McDonald’s. (See Hr. Tr., p. 28) 
Claimant began working as a full-time employee for the defendant employer on 
June 26, 2012. (See JE3, p. 40)  Dream II Holdings, LLC manufactures home decoration 
products, including pillows and quilts. (Hr. Tr., p. 29)  Claimant was hired as a sewer. (Hr. 
Tr., p. 30)  On what would be considered a normal day, claimant would sew between 
1,800 and 2,200 pillows. (Hr. Tr., p. 30)  To sew a pillow, claimant would first grab fabric 
off a conveyor belt and use her hands to feed said fabric through a sewing machine. (See 
Hr. Tr., pp. 30-31).  Next, she would put a tag on the pillow, check it for holes, and then 
place it onto a different conveyor belt. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 30-31)  Claimant estimates she 
could sew four pillows per minute, or one every fifteen seconds. (See Hr. Tr., pp. 31-32)   

HEISTER V. DREAM II HOLDINGS, LLC/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
In addition to sewing pillows, claimant would sometimes be required to “pound” or 
“pack” pillows.  Pounding pillows required claimant to hit pillows on a table.  Packing 
pillows required claimant to pack up to ten pillows in a box. (Hr. Tr., p. 34)  Claimant 
asserts she would regularly have to lift boxes of pillows weighing between 20 and 50 
pounds. (Hr. Tr., pp. 35-37)   
Mrs. Heister asserts she began experiencing issues in her hands and wrists on or 
about October 31, 2013. (Hr. Tr., pp. 39-40)  According to claimant, it felt like there was 
a rubber band in her hand that had gotten too tight. (See Hr. Tr., p. 40)  As her symptoms 
progressed, her fingers would go numb and pain would radiate up to her elbow. Id.  
Initially, claimant’s symptoms were confined to her right hand; however, they would 
eventually present in both hands. Id.   
The medical records in evidence actually reflect claimant first reported issues 
within her right hand in September of 2012. (JE1, p. 1)  More specifically, claimant 
reported a sharp pain in the palm of her right ring finger.  According to claimant, her finger 
would, at times, lock at the PIP joint and she would have to manipulate it into extension. 
Id.  Additionally, claimant reported a six-month history of paresthesias in her bilateral 
hands, involving the thumb, index, and long fingers. Id.  She was diagnosed with bilateral 
carpal tunnel syndrome and right ring trigger finger. (JE1, p. 2)  An injection for the right 
trigger finger and carpal tunnel syndrome was administered and EMG studies were 
ordered. Id.  
The injection was beneficial to claimant’s condition.  At her November 9, 2012, 
follow-up appointment, claimant relayed that her right hand was doing much better, with 
the paresthesias and discomfort only occurring on a rare basis. (JE1, p. 8)  Unfortunately, 
claimant’s left hand/wrist was still symptomatic, with constant numbness in the thumb, 
index, and long fingers.  It is noted that the pain kept her awake at night, and caused her 
to drop various items.  Claimant reported stiffness to the point where she could not make 
a fist with her left hand.  An injection for the left trigger finger and carpal tunnel syndrome 
was administered. (JE1, pp. 8-9)   
The EMG revealed bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome with no clear evidence of 
peripheral neuropathy. (See JE1, p. 8) 
Claimant presented to her primary care physician (PCP) throughout August 2013, 
with complaints of bilateral hand pain and swelling. (JE2, pp. 12-17)  Claimant’s PCP 
prescribed two rounds of prednisone and lab work to rule out diabetes and other potential 
causes. (JE2, p. 17)  Unfortunately, it does not appear as though claimant followed 
through with her PCP’s recommendation for lab work.  Raymond Hamilton, D.O. believed 
claimant’s condition was related to her long-standing issues with diabetes and her sodium 
intake.  Claimant appears to have been frustrated by Dr. Hamilton’s conclusion. (See JE2, 
p. 15) 
Claimant began presenting to Medical Associates in Dubuque, Iowa, on October 
4, 2013. (See JE3, p. 18)  According to the medical records, claimant told Crista Weber, 
ARNP, that her symptoms had been present for approximately one year. (JE3, p. 18)  Ms. 
Weber referred claimant to Mark Niemer, M.D. for additional evaluation. (See JE3, p. 20)   
Claimant first presented to Dr. Niemer on October 22, 2013. (JE3, p. 20)  She 

HEISTER V. DREAM II HOLDINGS, LLC/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
reported progressive worsening of her condition. Id.  Claimant’s range of motion was 
normal in both wrists, elbows, and shoulders. (JE3, p. 21)  Dr. Niemer believed claimant’s 
conditions were a combination of early osteoarthritis as well as stiff hands related to her 
diabetes. (JE3, p. 22)  Nevertheless, Dr. Niemer felt claimant might have some carpal 
tunnel symptoms, so he ordered an updated EMG. Id.   
The EMG, dated October 31, 2013, revealed severe bilateral median nerve 
entrapment in claimant’s wrists. (JE3, p. 23)  Based on the EMG results, Dr. Niemer 
referred claimant to Edwin Castaneda, M.D. (See JE3, p. 28)  Dr. Castaneda ultimately 
performed a carpal tunnel release of claimant’s right wrist on August 8, 2014. (JE3, pp. 
31-32)  According to claimant, the procedure resolved the numbness and tingling she was 
experiencing in her right hand and fingers. (JE3, p. 37) 
Claimant presented to Dr. Castaneda’s office for her first post-surgical follow-up 
appointment on August 14, 2014. (JE3, p. 34)  Dr. Castaneda’s post-op diagnoses were 
carpal tunnel syndrome, acquired trigger finger, and synovitis and/or tenosynovitis 
associated with another disease. (JE3, p. 35)  Claimant’s range of motion in the right wrist 
was still poor; however, it was thought to be a significant improvement when compared 
to her pre-op condition.  Dr. Castaneda released claimant on September 8, 2014. (JE3, 
p. 37) 
For her second injury, claimant asserts she experienced a worsening of the 
symptoms in her left wrist and hand in approximately July 2018. (Hr. Tr., p. 44)  Claimant 
asserts that she reported her symptoms to the human resources department on August 
1, 2018.  According to claimant, her symptoms prevented her from sewing pillows. Id.  
Claimant requested, and defendants subsequently authorized, medical treatment. (Hr. 
Tr., p. 45) 
Later that afternoon, claimant presented to Jerald Bybee, M.D. of Maquoketa 
Family Clinic with complaints of left wrist, forearm, and shoulder pain. (JE4, p. 62)  
Claimant told Dr. Bybee she was positive she had carpal tunnel syndrome and the 
condition was work-related. Id.  Dr. Bybee recommended claimant speak to the human 
resources department about scheduling an evaluation with an orthopedic surgeon. Id.   
Claimant returned to Maquoketa Family Clinic on August 7, 2018, requesting a 
note providing she could not work. (JE4, p. 64)  Claimant relayed her opinion that overtime 
work had triggered an increase in her symptoms. Id.  Following her evaluation, Ann 
Patterson, ARNP restricted claimant from utilizing her left hand at work. (JE4, p. 65)   
In an August 13, 2018, medical record, Emily Armstrong, PA-C, of Medical 
Associates opined, “It is with a reasonable degree of medical certainty that this patient 
has work-related carpal tunnel syndrome.” (JE3, p. 41)  Ms. Armstrong subsequently 
ordered EMGs of claimant’s bilateral arms and referred claimant back to Dr. Castaneda. 
Id.   
The updated EMGs, dated August 31, 2018, revealed bilateral median neuropathy 
at the wrist with axon loss. (JE5, p. 70)   
After reviewing claimant’s EMGs, Dr. Castaneda diagnosed claimant with severe 
left carpal tunnel syndrome. (JE3, p. 45)  He subsequently recommended and performed 

HEISTER V. DREAM II HOLDINGS, LLC/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
a carpal tunnel release on claimant’s left wrist on September 28, 2018. (JE3, p. 46)  Like 
with the right carpal tunnel release, claimant’s left carpal tunnel release reduced the 
numbness in her wrist. (Hr. Tr., p. 47)  
Claimant returned to Dr. Castaneda on November 19, 2018. (JE3, p. 51)  Dr. 
Castaneda’s notes provide that claimant’s neurovascular status had returned to normal, 
she had full range of motion, and she no longer had pain with gripping and squeezing. Id.  
Dr. Castaneda estimated that claimant would reach maximum medical improvement 
(MMI) in six to eight weeks. (JE3, p. 52)   
Unfortunately, claimant also reported triggering of the left long finger and 
symptoms consistent with lateral epicondylitis at the November 19, 2018, appointment. 
(JE3, p. 51)  Dr. Castaneda opined the trigger finger and epicondylitis were not related to 
the carpal tunnel release, and would not be considered under claimant’s workers’ 
compensation. (JE3, p. 51)  Dr. Castaneda nevertheless recommended and administered 
an injection to claimant’s left long finger.  The injection was not helpful in alleviating 
claimant’s symptoms. (See Ex. 1, p. 3)  Dr. Castaneda returned claimant to physical 
therapy for her epicondylitis complaints. (JE3, p. 52)   
Claimant’s employment with the defendant employer was terminated in December, 
2018. (Hr. Tr., pp. 33, 72)  There is some dispute as to the circumstances surrounding 
claimant’s termination.   
After Dr. Castaneda released claimant to return to work with a 10-pound lifting 
restriction in November 2018, the defendant employer offered claimant light duty work. 
(Hr. Tr., pp. 71-72)  Claimant refused to show up for work and declined to attempt the 
light duty work that was offered to her. (Hr. Tr., p. 71)  Due to claimant’s failure to show 
up for work, the defendant employer terminated her employment in December, 2018. 
(See Hr. Tr., p. 72) 
According to claimant, the defendant employer could not place her in a position 
that complied with her 10-pound lifting restriction. (Hr. Tr., p. 71)  Claimant testified that 
the position offered to her would have required her to lift over 50 pounds. Id.  Defendants, 
on the other hand, assert they offered claimant a light duty position that met her temporary 
lifting restrictions; however, claimant refused to show up to work and/or attempt to perform 
the light duty position.  At hearing, claimant acknowledged that the defendant employer 
offered to return her to work, and that she did not show up for work. Id.  
Claimant eventually returned to work for McDonald’s as a full-time drive-thru 
worker in June, 2019. (Hr. Tr., pp. 72-73)  Claimant did not conduct a work search 
between January and June 2019. (Hr. Tr., p. 73)  She works approximately 35 to 40 hours 
per week, and makes $10.25 per hour. (Hr. Tr., p. 38)  She is able to handle all of her job 
duties without issue. (Hr. Tr., p. 73)  At the time of hearing, claimant was on a medical 
leave of absence from McDonald’s. (Hr. Tr., p. 73)  She last worked for McDonald’s in 
July 2020. (Hr. Tr., p. 89)  Due to an unrelated health issue, claimant is unable to wear a 
face covering, which is currently required by McDonald’s due to the COVID-19 pandemic. 
(Hr. Tr., p. 73)  Claimant plans to return to McDonald’s in the future. (Hr. Tr., p. 89)    
Claimant last presented to Dr. Castaneda on December 31, 2018. (JE3, p. 53)  At 
that time, claimant was still reporting stiffness in her left hand.  She did not believe she 

HEISTER V. DREAM II HOLDINGS, LLC/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
could lift anything heavier than 10 pounds. Id.  She could not make a tight, compact fist; 
however, she noted good sensation in the fingers of her left hand. (JE3, pp. 53, 55)  She 
continued to experience triggering of her left long finger.  However, Dr. Castaneda again 
emphasized that her trigger finger had nothing to do with her workers’ compensation 
condition. Id.  Dr. Castaneda opined claimant’s recovery was somewhat slower than 
expected but nothing he would consider out of the ordinary.  Following his examination, 
he released claimant from his care. (JE3, p. 55)  He deferred claimant’s restrictions to Tri-
State Occupational Health. Id.   
Erin Kennedy, M.D. examined claimant on February 11, 2019, for purposes of 
restrictions management. (JE3, p. 56)  According to the medical record notes, Dr. 
Castaneda had kept claimant on a 10-pound lifting restriction pending Dr. Kennedy’s 
evaluation. Id.  Claimant reported minor discomfort associated with the scar on her left 
palm.  She denied numbness and tingling. Id.  Claimant told Dr. Kennedy that she had 
been increasing the amount of water/weight she carried in her water pail for farm animals. 
Id.  She reported that the limiting factor in her left hand was actually multiple trigger 
fingers, which Dr. Castaneda opined were not work-related. Id.  Interestingly, Dr. 
Kennedy’s notes provide claimant was able to form a composite fist. (JE3, p. 56)  Dr. 
Kennedy opined claimant had no sensory or motor function loss as a result of the open 
left-sided carpal tunnel release. Id.  Dr. Kennedy placed claimant at MMI and released 
her to full duty work. Id. 
At hearing, claimant testified that defendants sent her to Dr. Kennedy because 
they, “wanted somebody to release me for full duty to come back to work.” (Hr. Tr., pp. 
91-92)  Claimant also testified that Dr. Kennedy continued her 10-pound lifting restriction. 
(Hr. Tr., p. 92)  These assertions are not supported by the evidentiary record. (JE3, p. 56)  
For instance, claimant’s employment relationship with the defendant employer had 
already come to an end by the time she presented to Dr. Kennedy. (Hr. Tr., pp. 70-71)   
Claimant has not presented for additional medical treatment related to her injuries 
since February 11, 2019.  She is on no prescription medications related to her work injury. 
(See Ex. 1, p. 4) 
At hearing, claimant testified she experiences ongoing issues in both hands.  She 
testified her left hand gives her more trouble than the right. (Hr. Tr., pp. 46-47)  Claimant’s 
testimony appears to conflict with the evidentiary record in this regard. (See JE3, p. 56) 
(“She thinks the right hand is weaker than the left […]”)  According to claimant, her left 
hand will go numb most mornings, and she has to physically manipulate it in order for it 
to function. (Hr. Tr., pp. 47, 57)   She further provided that she cannot put pressure on 
the center of her hand, and it is difficult to make a fist. (Hr. Tr., p. 48)  Although unrelated, 
claimant continues to experience issues with her left trigger finger.  Claimant testified her 
finger will still lock up at times, and it does not bend all the way. (Hr. Tr., p. 85)  With 
respect to the right hand, claimant testified it will occasionally go numb; otherwise, it 
always feels tight. (Hr. Tr., p. 56) 
Claimant’s husband, Cory Heister, provided testimony on claimant’s behalf. (See 
Hr. Tr., p. 11)  The majority of Mr. Heister’s testimony centers on claimant’s abilities to 
help out around the house and on the farm.  According to Mr. Heister, claimant no longer 
assists in feeding their cows or chickens (Hr. Tr., p. 15); she is unable to carry buckets of 

HEISTER V. DREAM II HOLDINGS, LLC/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
water (Hr. Tr., p. 18); and she is unable to sleep in bed because of shoulder pain and 
numbness in her hands. (Hr. Tr., p. 16)   
Defendants attack claimant’s credibility.  They assert that claimant has shown 
through her testimony at hearing, her reports to medical professionals, and her criminal 
history that she is not a credible witness.   
Defendants first attempt to discredit claimant by pointing out she inconsistently 
reported the number of pillows she was required to make when speaking to various 
individuals.  Claimant told Ms. Armstrong she made between 2,200 and 2,800 pillows per 
day. (JE3, p. 40)  She told Dr. Taylor that she made between 1,800 and 2,400 pillows per 
day. (Ex. 1, p. 1)  Lastly, claimant testified at the evidentiary hearing that she made 
between 1,800 and 2,200 pillows per day. (Hr. Tr., p. 30)  Defendants assert claimant 
misrepresented the number of pillows she had to sew, knowing that the medical 
professionals would rely on her description of her job duties to formulate their opinions.  
Defendants assert this demonstrates a lack of trustworthiness.  This is an objectively 
ridiculous argument.  The argument assumes claimant definitively knew the correct range 
and consciously inflated her numbers in an attempt to deceive her medical providers.  
There is no evidence showing that the correct range was known by claimant, or that such 
a range is widely known amongst sewers employed by defendants.  It appears claimant 
was merely providing an estimate.  There are some legitimate concerns with respect to 
claimant’s credibility; however, claimant’s inability to consistently report the correct 
number of pillows sewn in a given day is not one of them. 
Defendants next highlight claimant’s criminal history, which involves crimes of 
dishonesty.  Unlike misstating the number of pillows sewn in a day, claimant’s criminal 
history is a legitimate concern.  Mrs. Heister has two prior convictions for Fifth Degree 
Theft. (Ex. A, p. 7)  She has also been convicted of Second Degree Fraudulent Practice. 
(Hr. Tr., pp. 78-81)  Defendants also discuss the circumstances surrounding claimant’s 
termination from Crestridge as further evidence of claimant’s untrustworthiness.  
Defendants assert these actions show claimant is willing to fraudulently seek and accept 
benefits to which she is not entitled.   
Defendants assert that because of her history of dishonesty, claimant’s testimony 
regarding ongoing left wrist pain, impairment, and restrictions from the August 1, 2018, 
injury should be rejected.  I decline defendants’ invitation to summarily reject claimant’s 
testimony solely based upon her past bad acts.  While it is clear claimant has had issues 
with dishonesty in the past, there is little to no evidence of deceit in the matter at hand.  
No physician has expressed a concern for malingering, and defendants offer no specific 
instances of contradiction.  In general, claimant’s complaints were consistent throughout 
the medical records.  With respect to claimant’s testimony regarding her stipulated work 
injury and ongoing symptoms, I find claimant to be generally credible.   
In a January 9, 2020, letter, Dr. Kennedy assigned zero percent impairment for 
claimant’s left carpal tunnel syndrome. (JE3, p. 60)  According to Dr. Kennedy, claimant 
demonstrated full range of motion of the left wrist and all digits, full sensory function 
throughout the hand, and full motor function throughout the hand. Id.  Dr. Kennedy found 
no evidence of vascular compromise. Id.    

HEISTER V. DREAM II HOLDINGS, LLC/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
Claimant’s counsel arranged for claimant to undergo an independent medical 
examination with Mark Taylor, M.D. on March 10, 2020. (See Ex. 1, p. 1)  At the time of 
the IME, claimant was still experiencing stiffness and soreness in her left hand. (Ex. 1, p. 
4)  She also reported an inability to make a fist and decreased sensation over her second, 
third, and fourth digits. Id.  On the right side, she complained of stiffness, soreness, 
decreased sensation in the tips of her fingers, and an inability to make a fist. Id.  Dr. Taylor 
agreed with Ms. Armstrong, and opined claimant’s work activities were a substantial 
contributing factor to the development of her left carpal tunnel syndrome. (Ex. 1, p. 7)  Dr. 
Taylor acknowledged that claimant’s primary non-work-related risk factor is her diabetes; 
however, he opined that even in light of her diabetes, her job was hand-intensive and her 
symptoms worsened with the increase in hours in the timeframe leading up to her 
evaluation in August 2018. Id.  He estimated claimant’s MMI date to be February 11, 
2019, and assigned five percent left upper extremity impairment. Id.   
Dr. Taylor's impairment rating is derived from three possible scenarios, described 
on page 495 of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  
Dr. Taylor justified his impairment rating by noting claimant had altered sensation in the 
left hand, positive Tinel’s test, positive Phalen’s test, and moderate left median 
neuropathy at the wrist according to a NeuroMetrix test conducted for purposes of the 
IME. Id.  This appears to place claimant into scenario two on page 495 of the AMA Guides.   
In terms of restrictions, Dr. Taylor recommended that claimant avoid repetitive and 
forceful gripping, grasping, and pinching.  He provided claimant could handle such 
motions on an occasional basis.  
Dr. Taylor similarly assigned five percent right upper extremity impairment for the 
alleged first qualifying injury to the right wrist. (Ex. 1, p. 8)  He opined the 
recommendations for claimant’s left wrist should also apply on the right.   
Six weeks out from the left carpal tunnel release, claimant’s neurovascular status 
was close to being back to normal, and her grip strength was rapidly improving. (JE3, p. 
48)  On November 19, 2018, it is noted that claimant’s left carpal tunnel syndrome was 
“doing fine” and her neurovascular status had returned to normal.  She had full range of 
motion and no pain with gripping or squeezing. (JE3, p. 51)  The only noteworthy 
symptoms at the time appeared to stem from claimant’s unrelated trigger finger and tennis 
elbow conditions. Id.  Nevertheless, claimant was still experiencing tenderness at the 
incision site, and she could not form a composite fist. Id. 
On December 31, 2018, claimant complained of ongoing stiffness, grip strength 
weakness, an inability to make a tight fist, and expressed her belief she could not lift 
anything over 10 pounds. (JE3, p. 53)  However, her neurovascular status was normal, 
and she continued to demonstrate good sensation in her fingers.  Dr. Castaneda 
acknowledged that claimant’s recovery was going slower than expected, but opined her 
recovery timeline was nothing out of the ordinary. (JE3, p. 55)   
In February, 2019, claimant reported that she did not have much pain remaining. 
(JE3, p. 56)  Dr. Kennedy’s February 11, 2019, medical report provides: 
Today she presents reporting that she doesn’t have much in the way of pain 
remaining. She has some very minor discomfort with pressure to the scar 

HEISTER V. DREAM II HOLDINGS, LLC/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
which is 1/10 and sharp. However, she can push herself up from the ground 
or bathtub with pressure to the palm. She denies n/t at this time. She thinks 
the right hand is weaker than the left but that this is improving with time. 
She notices being able to carry increasing weight with a waterpail to water 
farm animals. Previously she could only lift 1/2 pail. This has increased. She 
reports that the limiting factor with use of this hand is actually trigger fingers 
of multiple digits that are not work-related per Dr. Castaneda. She has had 
these excised in the other hand before. She denies requiring any OTC’s or 
ice/heat. Relies solely on stretches for comfort. 
(JE3, p. 56) 
It is reported that claimant was able to form a composite fist at her February 11, 
2019, medical appointment. Id.  Strength of her digits was 5/5 on opposition and on 
transpalmar opposition. Id.  Dr. Kennedy did not feel as though claimant had any sensory 
or motor function loss as a result of the left carpal tunnel release. Id.   
The above records suggest that claimant was not experiencing significant ongoing 
symptoms between November 2018 and February 2019.  That being said, Dr. Kennedy’s 
examination findings are not entirely in line with the findings made by Dr. Castaneda just 
six weeks prior.  Dr. Kennedy’s examination findings are also not in line with the findings 
of Dr. Taylor.   
Dr. Castaneda is the treating surgeon in this case.  He evaluated claimant on 
multiple occasions.  Unfortunately, Dr. Castaneda did not provide an opinion of claimant’s 
permanent impairment or need for permanent restrictions. 
Dr. Kennedy evaluated Mrs. Heister on one occasion.  Dr. Kennedy’s office note 
reflects that claimant performed grip strength testing at the February 11, 2019, 
appointment. (See JE3, p. 56)  Claimant was able to achieve 50 pounds with the right 
hand, and 40 pounds with the left. (JE3, p. 56)  It does not appear as though Dr. Kennedy 
performed any additional testing on claimant’s left hand.  It is unclear what, if any, medical 
records Dr. Kennedy reviewed prior to evaluating claimant in February 2019.  However, 
it is clear Dr. Kennedy reviewed claimant’s medical records prior to assessing claimant’s 
permanent impairment on January 9, 2020. (See JE3, pp. 57-60) 
Dr. Taylor also evaluated Mrs. Heister on one occasion for purposes of an IME.  At 
the March 10, 2020 appointment, claimant described stiffness and soreness.  She also 
relayed an inability to close her hand.  These complaints are similar to the complaints 
claimant relayed to Dr. Castaneda between November 2018 and December 2018.  Dr. 
Taylor’s sensory examination revealed diminished touch generally in a median 
distribution of the fingertips of both hands.  Pinprick testing was decreased in the left distal 
hand and fingers.  Vibratory sensation was decreased in the fingertips bilaterally, mainly 
in a median distribution.  In other words, claimant’s sensation was essentially normal in 
her small fingers bilaterally, however, the other digits had altered or diminished sensation. 
(Ex. 1, p. 6) 
Dr. Taylor’s examination and report are more thorough than the report of Dr. 
Kennedy.  Unlike Dr. Kennedy, Dr. Taylor detailed the testing mechanisms he utilized to 
calculate claimant’s permanent impairment.  He explained that claimant had normal two-

HEISTER V. DREAM II HOLDINGS, LLC/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 10 
 
point discrimination but complained of altered sensation in the left hand. (Ex. 1, p. 7)  She 
also had a positive Tinel’s and Phalen’s test. Id.  Dr. Taylor explained how claimant’s test 
results and ongoing symptoms revealed moderate left median neuropathy at the wrist.  
Dr. Taylor opined that claimant demonstrated evidence of residual carpal tunnel 
syndrome from an electrodiagnostic standpoint. Id.  While I have some concerns 
regarding the extent of claimant’s disability, I nevertheless believe claimant has sustained 
a permanent disability as a result of the August 1, 2018, work injury. 
Defendants argue claimant’s ongoing symptoms could be attributable to claimant’s 
unrelated trigger finger(s).  While this is certainly plausible, no physician solely attributed 
claimant’s ongoing symptoms to the unrelated trigger finger condition. (See JE3, pp. 55-
60)  Moreover, no physician expressly addressed what symptoms were attributable to the 
left trigger finger and what symptoms were attributable to the left carpal tunnel syndrome.  
It is clear from the evidentiary record that claimant had ongoing issues separate from the 
trigger finger condition(s).  Dr. Taylor was cognizant of claimant’s unrelated trigger finger 
condition(s). (See Ex. 1, p. 3)  He limited his permanent impairment rating to the residual 
effects of claimant’s carpal tunnel syndrome. (Ex. 1, p. 7) 
I find the opinion of Dr. Taylor to be the most credible and convincing in this 
evidentiary record.  Dr. Taylor provided a well-reasoned explanation of claimant’s 
permanent impairment and I accept his impairment ratings.  As such, I find claimant has 
proven that she sustained a permanent injury to the left wrist as a result of the August 1, 
2018, work injury.  Specifically, I find claimant has proven she sustained five percent 
permanent impairment of the left arm as a result of the August 1, 2018, work injury. 
Mrs. Heister also asserts a claim for Second Injury Fund benefits.  Mrs. Heister 
alleges that she sustained a first qualifying injury for purposes of the Second Injury Fund 
on or about October 31, 2013.  In support of her Second Injury Fund claim, Mrs. Heister 
introduced contemporaneous medical records documenting her initial injury and surgical 
intervention.  Claimant also requested that Dr. Taylor examine her right upper extremity 
and provide an impairment rating related to the same.  Dr. Taylor diagnosed claimant with 
prior carpal tunnel syndrome on the right.  Dr. Taylor assigned five percent right upper 
extremity impairment and recommended permanent restrictions. (Ex. 1, p. 8)   
The Second Injury Fund asserts claimant failed to meet her burden of proving a 
prior loss or loss of use of her right upper extremity.  To this end, the Fund asserts there 
is no evidence in the record to support a finding that claimant had permanent partial 
impairment or permanent loss of use of her right upper extremity which existed prior to 
her alleged work injury on or about August 1, 2018.   
The Fund correctly points out that Dr. Castaneda released claimant to return to her 
position with the defendant employer in 2014. (Hr. Tr., p. 83)  The Fund further points out 
that claimant did, in fact, return to her same position with the defendant employer and she 
did not request any formal work accommodations for her right carpal tunnel syndrome. 
Id.  She sought no medical treatment for her right carpal tunnel syndrome after Dr. 
Castaneda’s release in 2014. (Hr. Tr., pp. 82-83)  She carried no permanent work 
restrictions as a result of her right carpal tunnel syndrome until she was evaluated by Dr. 
Taylor.   

HEISTER V. DREAM II HOLDINGS, LLC/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 11 
 
Dr. Taylor’s opinions pertaining to the right upper extremity are not rebutted in the 
evidentiary record.  I accept Dr. Taylor’s permanent impairment rating and find claimant 
has proven five percent permanent impairment of the right upper extremity as a result of 
the October 31, 2013, injury.  I decline, however, to adopt Dr. Taylor’s restrictions related 
to the right upper extremity given claimant’s ability to return to work for the defendant 
employer, without accommodations, between Dr. Castaneda’s release and the August 1, 
2018, work injury.   
I find that claimant has proven permanent disability to both her right upper 
extremity as a result of the 2013 injury, and to her left upper extremity as a result of the 
August 1, 2018, work injury.  I also find that claimant has proven that these injuries have 
produced a combined loss of future earning capacity, albeit minimal.  I reject the 
permanent work restrictions offered by Dr. Taylor; however, I accept that claimant likely 
has some ongoing symptoms with her bilateral upper extremities that limit her functional 
abilities.   
Having found claimant carried her burden of proving both a first and second 
qualifying injury, I must now determine claimant’s loss of earning capacity. 
Claimant submitted a vocational evaluation report.  Claimant’s vocational expert 
opines that Mrs. Heister has sustained a loss of earning capacity in the range of 20 to 25 
percent. (Ex. 3, p. 25)  Claimant’s vocational expert largely relies upon the restrictions 
offered by Dr. Taylor. (See Ex. 3, p. 25)  I do not find claimant’s vocational report to be 
particularly convincing.  The report only focuses on one set of restrictions, and it is difficult 
to conceptualize how Dr. Taylor’s general restrictions could result in a 20 to 25 percent 
loss of earning capacity.  Moreover, the vocational expert’s understanding of claimant’s 
post-surgery status is inaccurate.  Claimant did not continue to have pain and poor 
tolerance for any use of her left hand following surgery and therapy.  In fact, the medical 
records reveal just the opposite.  Claimant reported minimal pain and provided she was 
noticing improvements in the amount of weight she could lift and carry.  
I find claimant has proven only a modest loss of future earning capacity.  
Considering her limited educational background, her employment history, her age, her 
failure to prove definitive work restrictions, and her limited permanent impairment, as well 
as all other factors of industrial disability outlined by the Iowa Supreme Court, I find that 
Mrs. Heister has proven she sustained a ten percent (10%) loss of future earning capacity 
as a result of the combined effects of the 2013 right carpal tunnel and August 1, 2018, 
left carpal tunnel injuries. 
The parties dispute claimant’s gross average weekly earnings at the time of her 
injury.  Review of the parties’ arguments demonstrates that there is a factual dispute about 
what weeks should be included in the calculation.  Claimant asserts that she had earnings 
of $396.00 per week, while defendants contend that the applicable gross earnings prior 
to the date of injury were $352.00 per week. (Hearing Report, p. 2) 
Claimant contends her customary earnings for a pay period are those reflected by 
at least a 70-hour pay period, or at least $700.00.  Claimant’s calculation excludes five 
pay periods ending on March 17, 2018, April 29, 2018, May 13, 2018, May 27, 2018, and 
July 8, 2018.  Claimant contends these pay periods do not reflect her customary earnings.  

HEISTER V. DREAM II HOLDINGS, LLC/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 12 
 
Claimant did not provide testimony as to why she was absent from employment and/or 
was not scheduled to work 70 hours or more during the aforementioned pay periods.   
Defendants’ calculation similarly excludes the pay period ending on May 13, 2018.  
As such, I find that the pay period ending on May 13, 2018, should be excluded as 
unrepresentative.  According to their post-hearing brief, defendants’ calculation includes 
all other pay periods excluded by claimant.   
Analyzing all of the wage records in evidence, the mean hours worked by claimant 
is 65.12.  The median hours worked by claimant is 67.60.  Of the 26 pay periods in 
evidence, claimant worked 70 or more hours 11 times (12 if you round 69.93 up to 70).  
Of the 14 pay periods that immediately precede the date of injury, claimant worked 70 or 
more hours just three times. 
Given this information, I find the pay periods ending on July 8, 2018, May 27, 2018, 
April 29, 2018, and March 17, 2018, are representative of claimant’s customary earnings.  
I accept the defendant employer and defendant insurer’s gross earnings and rate 
calculation as the more accurate calculation.   
Claimant is seeking an underpayment of $29.27 per week for the period of August 
25, 2018, through November 25, 2018.  The parties stipulate that claimant was off work 
during this period of time.  During this period of time, defendants were paying temporary 
total disability (TTD) benefits at the rate of $253.21. (Hr. Tr., pp. 6-7)  Having accepted 
defendants’ rate calculation, I find claimant is not entitled to an underpayment of $29.27 
per week for the period of August 25, 2018, through November 25, 2018.   
Claimant brought a successful petition in arbitration.  Therefore, costs will be 
assessed against defendants in the conclusions of law section. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The initial dispute submitted for resolution is whether claimant proved she 
sustained a permanent disability of the left wrist as a result of the August 1, 2018, work 
injury.   
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based. A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible. George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148 (Iowa 
1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154 (Iowa App. 1997); Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283 (Iowa App. 1996). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question.  The weight to be given to an expert 
opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy of the 
facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances.  The expert 

HEISTER V. DREAM II HOLDINGS, LLC/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 13 
 
opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 
N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); Dunlavey v. 
Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, 
Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994).  Unrebutted expert medical testimony cannot be 
summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 
1994). 
In this case, I found the medical opinions of Dr. Taylor, claimant’s expert, to be 
most convincing and credible.  As such, I found claimant carried her burden of proving 
she sustained a permanent disability of the left wrist as a result of the August 1, 2018, 
work injury.  Having reached this finding of fact, I conclude that claimant also carried her 
burden of proving entitlement to an award of permanent partial disability benefits against 
the employer.  I further conclude claimant has proven she sustained five percent 
permanent impairment of the left arm as a result of the August 1, 2018, work injury.   
Mrs. Heister also seeks an award of benefits from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  
Section 85.64 governs Second Injury Fund liability.  Before liability of the Fund is 
triggered, three requirements must be met.  First, the employee must have lost or lost the 
use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye.  Second, the employee must sustain a loss or loss 
of use of another specified member or organ through a compensable injury.  Third, 
permanent disability must exist as to both the initial injury and the second injury. 
The Second Injury Fund Act exists to encourage the hiring of handicapped persons 
by making a current employer responsible only for the amount of disability related to an 
injury occurring while that employer employed the handicapped individual as if the 
individual had had no preexisting disability.  See Anderson v. Second Injury Fund, 262 
N.W.2d 789 (Iowa 1978); 15 Iowa Practice, Workers’ Compensation, Lawyer, section 
17:1, p. 211 (2014-2015). 
In this case, the parties disputed whether claimant sustained a first qualifying 
injury.  It is clear and obvious from the medical records in evidence that claimant sustained 
an injury on or about October 31, 2013, to her right wrist.  It is less clear that claimant 
sustained permanent disability as a result of the October 31, 2013, injury.  Ultimately, I 
accepted the unrebutted expert opinion of Dr. Taylor with respect to claimant’s right wrist 
injury, and found claimant sustained permanent disability as a result of the October 31, 
2013, injury.  I therefore found claimant carried her burden of proving she sustained a first 
qualifying injury on or about October 31, 2013.   
Although the right wrist injury had minimal impact or effect on claimant’s earning 
capacity prior to the August 1, 2018, work injury, Dr. Taylor opined that claimant has 
ongoing issues within the right wrist.  Dr. Taylor assigned a five percent permanent 
impairment to claimant’s right upper extremity as a result of the 2013 injury.  While it is 
likely claimant’s permanent impairment is less than the five percent assigned by Dr. 
Taylor, the 2017 amendments to the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Act restrict my ability 
to accept an impairment rating that is not expressly provided by a physician.  As such, I 
found claimant carried her burden of proving she sustained five percent permanent 
impairment of the right upper extremity as a result of the October 31, 2013, injury.   
Having found and concluded that claimant carried her burden of proving 

HEISTER V. DREAM II HOLDINGS, LLC/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 14 
 
permanent disability to the right wrist as a result of the October 31, 2013, injury, as well 
as permanent disability to the left wrist as a result of the August 1, 2018, work injury, I 
conclude that claimant carried her burden of proving a compensable claim against the 
Second Injury Fund.  Iowa Code section 85.64. 
The Fund is responsible for the industrial disability present after the second injury 
that exceeds the disability attributable to the first and second injuries. Section 85.64. 
Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467 (Iowa 1990); Second Injury Fund 
v. Neelans, 436 N.W.2d 355 (Iowa 1989); Second Injury Fund v. Mich. Coal Co., 274 
N.W.2d 300 (Iowa 1979). 
Functional impairment is an element to be considered in determining industrial 
disability which is the reduction of earning capacity, but consideration must also be given 
to the injured employee's age, education, qualifications, experience, motivation, loss of 
earnings, severity and situs of the injury, work restrictions, inability to engage in 
employment for which the employee is fitted and the employer's offer of work or failure to 
so offer. McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 181 (Iowa 1980); Olson v. 
Goodyear Service Stores, 255 Iowa 1112, 125 N.W.2d 251 (1963); Barton v. Nevada 
Poultry Co., 253 Iowa 285, 110 N.W.2d 660 (1961).  The analysis now also requires 
consideration of claimant’s proximity to retirement. 
Compensation for industrial disability shall be paid in relation to 500 weeks as the 
disability bears to the body as a whole. Section 85.34.  However, the Second Injury Fund 
is entitled to a credit for all permanent disability attributable to either of the qualifying 
scheduled member injuries. 
In this case, I found that Mrs. Heister sustained 10 percent loss of earning capacity 
as a result of the combined effects of the first and second qualifying injuries.  This is 
equivalent to 50 weeks of permanent partial disability benefits.  I concluded the employer 
owes claimant 12.5 weeks of permanent disability benefits for the August 1, 2018, left 
wrist injury.  I found claimant sustained five percent permanent impairment of the right 
upper extremity as a result of the 2013 injury.  Five percent of the right arm is equivalent 
to 12.5 weeks of permanent disability benefits.   
Therefore, I conclude that the Second Injury Fund is entitled to 25 weeks of credit 
against the industrial disability award.  Reducing the 50 weeks by the 25-week credit, I 
conclude that claimant is entitled to an award from the Second Injury Fund in the amount 
of 25 weeks of benefits.   
Second Injury Fund's benefits commence upon the expiration of the employer's 
obligation to pay benefits for the second injury.  Iowa Code section 85.64(1). 
The parties dispute the rate at which claimant's weekly benefits should be paid. 
Both parties calculate their respective rates utilizing Iowa Code section 85.36(6) as the 
applicable code section. Claimant asserts an average weekly wage of $396.00, with a 
corresponding workers' compensation rate of $282.48. This rate calculation only includes 
weeks in which claimant worked 70 or more hours prior to the date of injury. In contrast, 
defendants assert an average weekly wage of $352.00, with a corresponding workers' 
compensation rate of $253.21. This rate calculation excludes only the pay period ending 
on May 13, 2018. 

HEISTER V. DREAM II HOLDINGS, LLC/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 15 
 
Section 85.36(6) states, “[i]f the employee was absent from employment for 
reasons personal to the employee during part of the thirteen calendar weeks preceding 
the injury, the employee's weekly earnings shall be the amount the employee would have 
earned had the employee worked when work was available to other employees of the 
employer in a similar occupation. A week which does not fairly reflect the employee's 
customary earnings shall be replaced by the closest previous week with earnings that 
fairly represent the employee's customary earnings.” 
The Iowa Supreme Court provided an in-depth analysis of what qualifies as 
“customary earnings” in the case of Jacobson Transp. Co. v. Harris, 778 N.W.2d 192 
(Iowa 2010). Ascertainment of an employee's customary earnings does not turn on a 
determination of what earnings are guaranteed or fixed; rather, it asks simply what 
earnings are usual or typical for that employee [...] An employee need not justify the 
weekly variance with a particular explanation. The amount of the variance alone, by the 
magnitude of its departure from the usual earnings of the employee, may suffice to justify 
the exclusion of a week's earnings from the weekly rate calculation. (Id.). 
In Jacobson, the commissioner averaged the earnings of the claimant truck driver 
for thirty weeks prior to the injury. The commissioner then focused on the thirteen weeks 
of earnings prior to the injury, throwing out three weeks in which earnings were markedly 
less than average. The Supreme Court of Iowa rejected the employer's argument that it 
was irrational to exclude the lowest weeks without also excluding the highest weeks. In 
that particular case, the high weeks were not unusually high when compared to the rest 
of the claimant's earning history. 
The test to determine whether a week is representative is whether the claimant's 
earnings during each particular week was customary for that particular employee given 
his or her earning history as a whole. 
Claimant contends the paychecks for the weeks ending on March 17, 2018, April 
29, 2018, May 13, 2018, May 27, 2018, and July 8, 2018 are abnormally low and not 
representative of her customary earnings.  Claimant contends her customary earnings for 
a pay period are those reflected by at least a 70-hour pay period, or at least $700.00.   
Analyzing all of the wage records in evidence, the mean hours worked by claimant 
is 65.12.  The median hours worked by claimant is 67.60.  Of the 26 pay periods in 
evidence, claimant worked 70 or more hours 11 times (12 if you round 69.93 up to 70).  
Of the 14 pay periods that immediately precede the date of injury, claimant worked 70 or 
more hours just three times. 
Given this information, I find the pay periods ending on July 8, 2018, May 27, 2018, 
April 29, 2018, and March 17, 2018, are representative of claimant’s customary earnings.  
Defendants assert the pay period ending on July 22, 2018, is not representative of 
claimant’s customary earnings as it is abnormally high.  I tend to agree with defendants 
in this regard; however, defendants nevertheless included the pay period in their rate 
calculation and ask this agency to find the same reasonable. 
While the evidentiary record arguably supports a lower rate calculation, I find 
defendants' rate calculation is nevertheless reasonable and fairly reflects claimant's 
earnings immediately prior to the date of injury. As such, I find claimant's average weekly 

HEISTER V. DREAM II HOLDINGS, LLC/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 16 
 
wage to be $352.00 (technically $351.87). Relying upon the parties' stipulations that 
claimant is married and entitled to two exemptions, and using the Iowa Workers' 
Compensation Manual with effective dates of July 1, 2018, through June 30, 2019, I 
determine the applicable weekly rate for benefits in this case is $253.21. 
Finally, claimant seeks an award of costs.  Costs are awarded at the discretion of 
this agency. Iowa Code section 86.40.  In this case, claimant established entitlement to 
benefits from the employer.  I conclude it is appropriate to assess costs in some amount.  
Exercising my discretion, I conclude that it is appropriate to assess claimant's filing fee of 
$100.00, as well as the service fees associated with sending certified mail to the 
employer.  I also assess the costs associated with the vocational report, which total 
$536.50.  No costs will be assessed against the Second Injury Fund. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
The employer and insurance carrier shall pay claimant twelve and one-half (12.5) 
weeks of permanent partial disability benefits commencing on February 11, 2019. 
The employer and insurance carrier shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump 
sum together with interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant 
maturity published by the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the 
date of injury, plus two percent. See Gamble v. AG Leader Technology File No. 5054686 
(App. Apr. 24, 2018). 
The employer and insurance carrier shall be entitled to a credit for all weekly 
benefits paid to date. 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant's costs as set forth in this decision. 
The employer and insurance carrier shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) 
as required by this agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
The Second Injury Fund shall pay claimant twenty-five (25) weeks of permanent 
partial disability benefits commencing on May 9, 2019. 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the stipulated rate of two hundred fifty-three 
and 21/100 dollars ($253.21). 
Signed and filed this _____20th ______ day of May, 2021. 
 
 
 
                MICHAEL J. LUNN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 
 
 
 
 
             COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 

HEISTER V. DREAM II HOLDINGS, LLC/2ND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 17 
 
 
 
The parties have been served as follows: 
Christopher Fry (via WCES) 
Tansha Clarke (via WCES) 
Meredith Cooney (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal must 
be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission 
by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been granted, the 
notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of 
Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be 
received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period 
will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
