Case Number: 5067003
Case Title:  RETTERATH, BARRY V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WKS
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Retterath Barry-5067003d.pdf
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
BARRY RETTERATH, 
  : 
 
 
  :                         File No. 5067003 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :  
       ARBITRATION DECISION 
JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS, 
  : 
 
 
  :  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
Self-Insured, 
  :        Head Note Nos.:  1803, 4000.2 
 
Defendant. 
  :  
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Barry Retterath filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ compensation 
benefits from, the employer, John Deere Waterloo Works, a self-insured employer. 
The matter came on for hearing on February 6, 2020, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Joseph L. Walsh in Waterloo, Iowa.  The record in the 
case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 6; Claimant’s Exhibits  1 through 7; 
Defendant’s Exhibits A through D; as well the sworn testimony of claimant. Dwight Van 
Wyngarden served as the court reporter.  The parties argued this case and the matter 
was fully submitted on March 3, 2020. 
ISSUES AND STIPULATIONS 
 
The stipulations contained in the hearing order have been approved and are 
deemed ordered with the consent of the parties. 
The parties have stipulated that claimant sustained an injury which arose out of 
and in the course of employment on July 12, 2017.  This injury is a cause of both 
temporary and permanent disability.  The claimant is not seeking any additional 
temporary disability benefits, however, he contends he is entitled to additional 
permanent partial disability benefits for permanent injury to his body as a whole.  The 
defendant contends this is a scheduled right shoulder disability.  The parties stipulate 
that the commencement date for disability benefits is March 26, 2018.  The defendant 
denies claimant is entitled to any additional weekly benefits. 
The elements which comprise the rate of compensation are all stipulated at this 
time.  Affirmative defenses have been waived.  The parties reached a stipulation 
regarding the credit to which defendant is entitled.  Claimant makes no claim for medical 
expenses, however, he does seek reimbursement for the independent medical 
evaluation under Section 85.39, which has been partially paid.  The claimant seeks 
penalty benefits for an unreasonable denial and delay of benefits. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2020-Dec-22  10:04:09     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

RETTERATH V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 2 
 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Barry Retterath was 55 years old as of the date of hearing.  He testified live and 
under oath at hearing.  He is found to be highly credible.  While he could not recall exact 
treatment dates at hearing, his testimony was generally consistent with the other 
evidence in the record.  His testimony was straightforward and matter-of-fact.  There 
was nothing about his demeanor which caused the undersigned any concern regarding 
his credibility.  On the contrary, Mr. Retterath appeared entirely honest and sincere and 
his testimony is afforded significant weight. 
Mr. Retterath, has a two-year vocational degree in HVAC.  After graduating high 
school, he joined the Army National Guard, where he worked as a supply truck driver.  
He served in the military for six years and was honorably discharged.  Since leaving the 
military, Mr. Retterath has worked exclusively in the field of HVAC.  From the time of his 
discharge until 2005, he worked for several different companies either installing or 
servicing HVAC equipment.  He testified extensively regarding the difference in job 
activities in those positions.  Installation work is generally more physically demanding, 
requiring lifting and significant overhead work.  Service work involves more trouble-
shooting and problem solving.  The work is usually lower to the ground and less 
physically strenuous. 
In 2005, Mr. Retterath began employment with John Deere Waterloo Works 
(hereafter, Deere).  He was hired to perform HVAC work in Department 27.  He passed 
Deere’s preemployment physical and had no restrictions at his time of hire. 
On July 12, 2017, Mr. Retterath sustained a work injury which arose out of and in 
the course of his employment.  Specifically, while he was disconnecting boiler piping he 
felt something give way in his right shoulder.  “I could tell something either snapped or 
popped or whatever, and I looked down and I had a great big ball like in my bicep area.  
(Transcript, page 16)  He immediately reported the injury, was seen by Deere’s medical 
department and sent for an MRI.  The MRI revealed a complete tear of the long head 
biceps tendon, a partial tear of the distal supraspinatus, infraspinatus and subscapularis 
tendons, and a partial tear of the common extensor tendon.  (Joint Exhibit 2, page 5)  
He was quickly referred to an orthopedic surgeon, Robert Bartelt, M.D. 
There is no real dispute regarding Mr. Retterath’s course of treatment.  Dr. 
Bartelt treated him conservatively with work restrictions, physical therapy and injections 
and eventually placed him at maximum medical improvement on October 9, 2017.  At 
that time, Dr. Bartelt recommended he return to work with no restrictions.  Dr. Bartelt 
assigned an impairment rating on October 17, 2017, stating the following: 
As you know, I treated Barry for his right shoulder injury.  This was treated 
conservatively.  He had a long head of biceps tendon rupture at the 
shoulder as well as a partial thickness tear of the rotator cuff.  He has 
returned to work.  I evaluated the patient on 10/16/17 in order to assess 
his motion and strength. 
 
 

RETTERATH V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 3 
 
 
The patient demonstrates 160 degrees of both forward flexion and 
abduction.  He demonstrates 90 degrees external rotation and 20 degrees 
internal rotation.  Using the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment, fifth edition, pages 475 through 479, we assign the patient 6% 
impairment to this right upper extremity based on loss of motion of the 
shoulder. 
(Def. Ex. A, p. 1)  Deere initially paid this rating as six percent of an arm, or 15 weeks of 
benefits. 
Mr. Retterath, however, was not fully healed.  In November 2017, Mr. Retterath 
returned for an additional injection.  In January 2018, Jeffrey Clark, M.D., evaluated him 
for additional treatment options.  Dr. Clark provided two options.  Either he could have 
further conservative treatment or he could have a surgical arthroscopy to further assess 
and repair his rotator cuff.  Mr. Retterath decided to “just live with it right now.”  (Jt. Ex. 
6, p. 27) 
Since being released, Mr. Retterath returned to his regular job in Department 
027.  He continues to work at his regular position, with the same or better earnings.  He 
testified that he is able to perform this job but he does receive assistance from co-
workers on some of the heavier, overhead tasks.  His hobbies have changed.  In 
particular, he has given up bow hunting and he has been unable to bowl.  He testified 
credibly that he would be unable to perform some of the heavier HVAC installation work 
that he performed prior to starting at Deere.  I find Mr. Retterath undoubtedly has a 
significant loss of function resulting from the work injury. 
Mr. Retterath was evaluated by Arnold Delbridge, M.D., in May 2018, for 
purposes of an Iowa Code section 85.39 independent medical evaluation (IME).  Dr. 
Delbridge issued a report from this evaluation in September 2018 which assessed an 8 
percent upper extremity impairment. 
Mr. Retterath’s diagnosis from his injury of July 12, 2017 when he was 
reaching on piping at work and felt pain in his biceps and a deformity was 
not able to work was:  1) incomplete tear of right rotator cuff, 2) 
subacromial impingement, 3) arthritis of his AC joint on the right and 4) 
ruptured proximal biceps long head tendon. 
It is difficult to say that the rotator cuff incomplete tear was materially 
aggravated by his injury and it probably did not aggravate his AC joint or 
his subacromial impingement.  However, the injury of consequence was a 
rupture of the proximal biceps tendon, the long head of the biceps tendon.  
The long head of the biceps tendon arises from the superior portion of the 
glenoid which is definitely on the scapular side of the shoulder joint.  In 
other words, the long head of the biceps does arise proximal to the 
shoulder joint itself.  It would qualify as an injury or impairment proximal to 
the shoulder joint itself.  It would quality [sic] as an injury or impairment 
proximal to the glenohumeral joint and would be considered a body-as-a-
whole injury. 

RETTERATH V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 4 
 
 
What I found in my evaluation of Mr. Retterath on 5-29-18 when I 
examined him, was that he had limited range of motion of internal rotation 
of 60 degrees, a loss of 30 degrees, a 2% impairment. 
The long head of the biceps does not always affect strength in the 
shoulder but it persistently affects strength in the elbow flexion and 
supination.  Mr. Retterath has definite loss of range of motion in his 
shoulder per figure 16-46 in Guides to Evaluation of Permanent 
Impairment.  While he does not have much loss of motion of his pronation 
and supination, he does have definite weakness in elbow flexion of which 
a rupture of the long head of the biceps would affect.  On Table 16-35, 
flexion of his elbow is weak and I placed his strength deficit as a 3 and his 
extension is normal and his pronation is normal, but his supination is 
considerably weaker than on the other side and I placed that as a 3 as 
well.  Adding up those two gives 6% impairment of the right upper 
extremity on the basis of loss of strength of flexion and supination of his 
elbow. 
(Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 1-2) 
 
Combining all the deficits, Dr. Delbridge arrived at an 8 percent impairment of the 
right upper extremity, which converts to 5 percent of the whole body.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 2)  
He suggested further treatment including injections and possibly surgery, would be 
necessary in the future.  (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 3) 
I find Dr. Delbridge’s report to be convincing as it is highly consistent with Mr. 
Retterath’s testimony and the other evidence in the record. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The fighting issue in this case is primarily a legal one.  It involves the 2017 
legislative changes to Iowa Code Chapter 85 which added the “shoulder” to the list of 
scheduled members in Iowa Code section 85.34(2) (2019).  The specific issue in this 
case is whether claimant’s disability is a scheduled disability to his “shoulder” under 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(n) or an unscheduled disability under Section 85.34(2)(v). 
As fate would have it, the claimant sustained his injury on July 12, 2017, eleven 
days after the new law became effective.  There is no dispute about this.  There is also 
no real fact dispute about the situs of the injury and resulting disability.  Mr. Retterath’s 
primary disabling condition is best described as ruptured proximal biceps long head 
tendon.  (Cl. Ex. 1, p. 1; Jt. Ex. 6, p. 27; Def. Ex. A, p. 1)  Mr. Retterath had other 
diagnoses, however, this was his primary disabling condition associated with the work 
injury.  The legal issue in the case is whether this specific, undisputed condition is a 
disability to his “shoulder” or whether it is an unscheduled disability to his body as a 
whole. 
Since this case was heard, the Commissioner filed two appeal decisions which 
are controlling on the legal issue.  The first was Deng v. Farmland Foods, File No. 
5061883 (Appeal September 29, 2020).  In Deng, the Commissioner held that the 2017 

RETTERATH V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 5 
 
 
amendments to Chapter 85 were ambiguous as to the definition of the shoulder.  He 
therefore undertook an effort to construe the statute by looking to the intent of the 
legislature.  Id. at 5.  He ultimately concluded the following: 
I recognize the well-established standard that workers’ compensation 
statutes are to be liberally construed in favor of the worker, as their 
primary purposes is to benefit the worker.  See Des Moines Area Reg'l 
Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839, 842 (Iowa 2015) (citations 
omitted); see also Jacobson Transp. Co. v. Harris, 778 N.W.2d 192, 197 
(Iowa 2010); Xenia Rural Water Dist. v. Vegors, 786 N.W.2d 250, 257 
(Iowa 2010) (“We apply the workers' compensation statute broadly and 
liberally in keeping with its humanitarian objective....”); Griffin Pipe Prods. 
Co. v. Guarino, 663 N.W.2d 862, 865 (Iowa 2003) (“[T]he primary purpose 
of chapter 85 is to benefit the worker and so we interpret this law liberally 
in favor of the employee.”).  This liberal construction, however, cannot be 
performed in a vacuum.  As discussed above, several of the principles of 
statutory construction indicate the legislature did not intend to limit the 
definition of “shoulder” under section 85.34(2)(n) to the glenohumeral joint.  
For these reasons, I conclude “shoulder” under section 85.34(2)(n) is not 
limited to the glenohumeral joint. 
Claimant’s injury in this case was to the infraspinatus muscle. As 
discussed, the infraspinatus is part of the rotator cuff, and the rotator cuff’s 
main function is to stabilize the ball-and-socket joint.  As noted by both Dr. 
Bansal and Dr. Bolda, the rotator cuff is generally proximal to the joint.  
However, because the rotator cuff is essential to the function of the 
glenohumeral joint, it seems arbitrary to exclude it from the definition of 
“shoulder” under section 85.34(2)(n) simply because it “originates on the 
scapula, which is proximal to the glenohumeral joint for the most part.” 
(Def. Ex. A, [Depo. Tr., 27]).  In other words, being proximal to the joint 
should not render the muscle automatically distinct. 
Given the entwinement of the glenohumeral joint and the muscles that 
make up the rotator cuff, including the infraspinatus, and the importance of 
the rotator cuff to the function of the joint, I find the muscles that make up 
the rotator cuff are included within the definition of “shoulder” under 
section 85.34(2)(n).  Thus, I find claimant’s injury to her infraspinatus 
should be compensated as a shoulder under section 85.34(2)(n).  The 
deputy commissioner’s determination that claimant’s infraspinatus injury is 
a whole body injury that should be compensated industrially under section 
85.34(2)(v) is therefore respectfully reversed.  
Deng, at 10-11. 
 
The second is Chavez v. MS Technology, LLC, File No. 5066270 (App. 
September 30, 2020), which was filed the day after Deng.  In Chavez, the 
Commissioner affirmed his legal holding in Deng and applied his interpretation to the 
various impairments and disabilities sustained by the claimant in that case. 

RETTERATH V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 6 
 
 
Again, as explained in Dr. Peterson’s operative note, claimant’s 
subacromial decompression was performed to remove scar tissue and 
fraying between the supraspinatus and the underside of the acromion.  
As discussed above, the acromiom forms part of the socket and helps 
protect the glenoid cavity, and as such, I found it is closely interconnected 
with the glenohumeral joint in both location and function. And as 
discussed in Deng, I found the supraspinatus - a muscle that forms the 
rotator cuff - to be similarly entwined with the glenohumeral joint.  Thus, 
claimant’s subacromial decompression impacted two anatomical parts that 
are essential to the functioning of the glenohumeral joint; in fact, the 
procedure was actually performed to improve the function of the joint.  As 
such, I find any disability resulting from her subacromial decompression 
should be compensated as a shoulder under section 85.34(2)(n).  
I therefore find none of claimant’s injuries are compensable as 
unscheduled, whole body injuries under section 85.34(2)(v).  The deputy 
commissioner’s finding that claimant sustained an injury to her body as a 
whole is therefore respectfully reversed. 
Chavez, at 6. 
 
The key holdings of Deng and Chavez are: 
1. The definition of a “shoulder” is ambiguous in Section 85.34(2)(n).  Deng, at 
4. 
2. There is no “ordinary” meaning of the word shoulder.  Deng, at 5. 
3. The appropriate way to interpret the statute is to examine at the legislative 
history.  Deng, at 5. 
4. The well-established history of “liberal construction” of workers’ compensation 
statutes is inapplicable here because to do so would be to ignore the 
legislature’s intent to limit compensation to injured workers in the 2017 
amendments.1  Deng, at 10-11. 
5. The legislature did not intend to limit the definition of a “shoulder” to the 
glenohumeral joint.  Rather, the legislature intended to include the 
                                            
1 The fundamental guiding principle of statutory construction in a workers’ compensation case is 
that the statute is to be interpreted liberally in favor of the injured worker and their family.  “Any doubt in 
its construction is thus resolved in favor of the employee.”  Teel v. McCord, 394 N.W. 2d 405, 407 (Iowa 
1986). Workers’ compensation laws are to be construed in favor of the injured worker. Myers. v. F.C.A. 
Services, Inc., 592 N.W.2d 354, 356 (Iowa 1999).  The beneficent purpose is not to be defeated by 
reading something into the statute that is not there. Cedar Rapids Community School v. Cady, 278 
N.W.2d 298 (Iowa 1979).  This, combined with the legal principle that the legislature is presumed to know 
the prior construction of the law. State ex rel. Palmer v. Board of Supervisors of Polk County, 365 N.W.2d 
35, 37 (Iowa 1985), would lead me to side with the claimant in this case.  This, however, is not what the 
Commissioner held.  As a Deputy Commissioner, I am bound to follow the rulings of the Commissioner. 

RETTERATH V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 7 
 
 
entwinement of the glenohumeral joint and the muscles that make up the 
rotator cuff.  Deng, at 11. 
Applying this interpretation of the facts of this case, I find the claimant suffered an 
injury to his “shoulder” under Iowa Code section 85.43(2)(n).  As such, his disability 
shall be assessed as a scheduled disability, which means I am arbitrarily limited to 
choosing between the impairment ratings of the expert physicians. 
Having reviewed the record as a whole, I find that the claimant has suffered an 8 
percent functional impairment to his right shoulder, as assigned by Dr. Delbridge.  I find 
Dr. Delbridge’s rating and explanation to be the most credible rating and the most 
consistent with the other evidence in the record, including the claimant’s highly credible 
testimony.  Dr. Delbridge’s rating was performed after Mr. Retterath had returned to 
work.  In other words, the timing of his evaluation was more reliable than Dr. Bartelt’s 
rating, which was performed a week after he returned to full-duty.  As such, the claimant 
is entitled to 8 percent of 400 weeks or 32 weeks of compensation commencing on 
March 26, 2018. 
The next issue is penalty.   
Iowa Code 86.13(4) provides the basis for awarding penalties against an 
employer.  Iowa Code 86.13(4) states: 
(a) 
If a denial, a delay in payment, or a termination of benefits occurs 
without reasonable or probable cause or excuse known to the employer or 
insurance carrier at the time of the denial, delay in payment, or termination 
of benefits, the workers’ compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
in addition to those benefits payable under this chapter, or chapter 85, 
85A, or 85B, up to fifty present of the amount of benefits that were denied, 
delayed, or terminated without reasonable or probable cause or excuse.   
(b) 
The workers’ compensation commissioner shall award benefits 
under this subsection if the commissioner finds both of the following facts: 
(1) The employee has demonstrated a denial, delay in 
payment, or termination of benefits.   
(2) The employer has failed to provide a reasonable or 
probable cause or excuse for the denial, delay in payment, or 
termination of benefits.  
(c) 
In order to be considered a reasonable or probable cause or excuse 
under paragraph “b”, an excuse shall satisfy all of the following criteria: 
(1) The excuse was preceded by a reasonable investigation 
and evaluation by the employer or insurance carrier into 
whether benefits were owed to the employee. 

RETTERATH V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 8 
 
 
(2) The results of the reasonable investigation and evaluation 
were the actual basis upon which the employer or insurance 
carrier contemporaneously relied to deny, delay payment of, or 
terminate benefits.   
(3) The employer or insurance carrier contemporaneously 
conveyed the basis for the denial, delay in payment, or 
termination of benefits to the employee at the time of the denial, 
delay, or termination of benefits.   
If weekly compensation benefits are not fully paid when due, Iowa Code section86.13 
requires that additional benefits be awarded unless the employer shows reasonable 
cause or excuse for the delay or denial.  Robbennolt v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 555 
N.W.2d 229 (Iowa 1996).  Delay attributable to the time required to perform a 
reasonable investigation is not unreasonable.  Kiesecker v. Webster City Custom 
Meats, Inc., 528 N.W.2d 109 (Iowa 1995).   
It is also not unreasonable to deny a claim when a good faith issue of law or fact 
makes the employer’s liability fairly debatable.  An issue of law is fairly debatable if 
viable arguments exist in favor of each party.  Covia v. Robinson, 507 N.W.2d 411 
(Iowa 1993).  An issue of fact is fairly debatable if substantial evidence exists which 
would support a finding favorable to the employer.  Gilbert v. USF Holland, Inc., 637 
N.W.2d 194 (Iowa 2001).  An employer’s bare assertion that a claim is fairly debatable 
is insufficient to avoid imposition of a penalty.  The employer must assert facts upon 
which the commissioner could reasonably find that the claim was “fairly debatable.”  
Meyers v. Holiday Express Corp., 557 N.W.2d 502 (Iowa 1996).   
If an employer fails to show reasonable cause or excuse for the delay or denial, 
the commissioner shall impose a penalty in an amount up to 50 percent of the amount 
unreasonably delayed or denied.  Christensen v. Snap-On Tools Corp., 554 N.W.2d 254 
(Iowa 1996).  The factors to be considered in determining the amount of the penalty 
include: the length of the delay, the number of delays, the information available to the 
employer, and the employer’s past record of penalties.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 238.   
For purposes of determining whether an employer has delayed in making 
payments, payments are considered “made” either (a) when the check addressed to a 
claimant is mailed, or (b) when the check is delivered personally to the claimant by the 
employer or its workers’ compensation insurer.  Robbennolt, 555 N.W.2d at 235-236; 
Kiesecker, 528 N.W.2d at 112.   
Penalty is not imposed for delayed interest payments.  Schadendorf v. Snap-On 
Tools Corp., 757 N.W.2d 330, 338 (Iowa 2008); Davidson v. Bruce, 594 N.W.2d 833, 
840 (Iowa 1999).    
Claimant asserts penalty is mandatory because Deere initially assessed and paid 
permanency based upon claimant’s impairment to his right upper extremity.  (Cl. Ex. C)  
Deere treated the right upper extremity as an arm under Section 85.34(2)(m) and paid 
the 6 percent as a percentage of 250 weeks instead of 400 weeks (under subsection n).  
In its brief, Deere acknowledges this mistake stating no one “discovered the inadvertent 

RETTERATH V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 9 
 
 
mistake until the Claimant notified Defendant of the change and that the payment 
should have been made on 400 weeks for a shoulder on 3/20/19.” (Ex 5-15).”  (Deere 
Brief, p. 11) 
While I find this excuse completely believable, it is not a legally valid excuse, 
particularly in light of the fact that Deere has taken the position from the beginning that 
this is a scheduled disability rather than unscheduled.  Deere did take action to correct 
the mistake as soon as the claimant, through counsel, pointed it out.  I find that penalty 
is mandatory.  Nine weeks of permanency benefits owed to the claimant were delayed 
for over a year due to Deere’s improper calculations.  The appropriate amount for the 
penalty, considering all of the relevant factors including Deere’s history of penalties in 
Claimant’s Exhibit 7, is $3,299.00, an amount which should serve to deter Deere from 
such mistakes in the future. 
The next issue is IME expense. 
IME Blurb 
Claimant seeks reimbursement for an 85.39 IME as set forth in Claimant’s Exhibit 
6.  This included x-rays and records review, which Deere declined to pay.  These 
expenses totaled $399.00.  I find that these expenses should be reimbursed under 
Section 85.39. 
The final issue is costs. 
Iowa Code section 86.40 states: 
Costs.  All costs incurred in the hearing before the commissioner shall be 
taxed in the discretion of the commissioner. 
Iowa Administrative Code Rule 876—4.33(86) states: 
Costs.  Costs taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a 
deputy commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original notice 
and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa Code 
sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ deposition 
testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed the amounts provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the reasonable costs of obtaining no more 
than two doctors’ or practitioners’ reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, (8) 
costs of persons reviewing health service disputes. Costs of service of notice and 
subpoenas shall be paid initially to the serving person or agency by the party 
utilizing the service. Expenses and fees of witnesses or of obtaining doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports initially shall be paid to the witnesses, doctors or 
practitioners by the party on whose behalf the witness is called or by whom the 
report is requested. Witness fees shall be paid in accordance with Iowa Code 
section 622.74. Proof of payment of any cost shall be filed with the workers’ 
compensation commissioner before it is taxed. The party initially paying the 

RETTERATH V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 10 
 
 
expense shall be reimbursed by the party taxed with the cost. If the expense is 
unpaid, it shall be paid by the party taxed with the cost. Costs are to be assessed 
at the discretion of the deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation 
commissioner hearing the case unless otherwise required by the rules of civil 
procedure governing discovery.  This rule is intended to implement Iowa Code 
section 86.40. 
Iowa Administrative Code rule 876—4.17 includes as a practitioner, “persons 
engaged in physical or vocational rehabilitation or evaluation for rehabilitation.”  A report 
or evaluation from a vocational rehabilitation expert constitutes a practitioner report 
under our administrative rules.  Bohr v. Donaldson Company, File No. 5028959 (Arb. 
November 23, 2010); Muller v. Crouse Transportation, File No. 5026809 (Arb. 
December 8, 2010)  The entire reasonable costs of doctors’ and practitioners’ reports 
may be taxed as costs pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33.  Caven v. John Deere Dubuque 
Works, File Nos. 5023051, 5023052 (App. July 21, 2009).    
The claimant’s deposition was entered into evidence and reviewed by the 
undersigned.  Having reviewed the file as a whole, I find Deere is responsible for the 
costs in the amount of $164.40. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED 
Defendant shall pay claimant thirty-two (32) weeks of permanent partial disability 
benefits at the rate of seven hundred fifty-five and 46/100 ($755.46) per week from 
March 26, 2018. 
Defendant shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum. 
Defendant shall pay interest on unpaid weekly benefits awarded herein as set 
forth in Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendant shall be given credit for the weeks previously paid. 
Defendant shall pay a penalty in the amount of three thousand two hundred 
ninety-nine and no/100 dollars ($3,299.00). 
Defendant shall reimburse the unreimbursed IME expenses in the amount of 
three hundred ninety-nine and no/100 dollars ($399.00). 
Defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by this agency 
pursuant to rule 876 IAC 3.1(2). 
 
 

RETTERATH V. JOHN DEERE WATERLOO WORKS 
Page 11 
 
Right to Appeal: This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 
20 days from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 86) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The 
notice of appeal must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing 
party has been granted permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper 
form.  If such permission has been granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines 
Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836.  The notice of appeal must be received by the Division of 
Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
Costs in the amount of one hundred sixty four and 40/100 dollars ($164.40) are 
taxed to defendant. 
Signed and filed this _22nd __ day of December, 2020. 
 
   __________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOSEPH L. WALSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
The parties have been served, as follows:  
James Kalkhoff (via WCES) 
Charles Showalter (via WCES) 
 
