Case Number: 22003877.03
Case Title:  FLYNN, LAURIE V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Flynn Laurie-2200377.03d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
LAURIE FLYNN, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
   File No. 22003877.03 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                       
LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC., 
  : 
 
ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :                  
 
Employer, 
  : 
 
 
  :                      
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
INDEMNITY INS. CO. OF N. AMERICA,   : 
 
 
  : 
          Head Note Nos.:  1802, 1803 
 
Insurance Carrier, 
  :              
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Laurie Flynn, filed a petition in arbitration seeking workers' 
compensation benefits from Lennox Industries, Inc. (Lennox), employer, and Indemnity 
Insurance Company of North America, insurer, both as defendants.  This matter was 
heard on April 9, 2024, with a final submission date of May 10, 2024.   
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1 through 8, Claimant’s Exhibits 
1 through 5, Defendants’ Exhibits A through D, and the testimony of claimant. 
 
 
The parties filed a hearing report at the commencement of the arbitration 
hearing.  On the hearing report, the parties entered into various stipulations.  All of 
those stipulations were accepted and are hereby incorporated into this arbitration 
decision and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be raised 
or discussed in this decision.  The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
1. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent partial disability benefits. 
2. Commencement date of benefits. 
3. Whether claimant is entitled to additional temporary disability benefits. 
4. Mitigation of damages. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2024-Sep-04  15:17:21     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

FLYNN V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 2 
 
In the hearing report the parties indicated that claimant’s entitlement to 
reimbursement for an independent medical evaluation (IME) was an issue in dispute.  
Claimant indicated in her post-hearing brief that the IME had been paid and was no 
longer at issue.  (Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, page 9)  As a result, reimbursement of 
the IME will not be discussed in this decision. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Claimant was 53 years old at the time of hearing.  (Hearing Transcript, page 9)  
Claimant graduated from high school.  She has an associate’s degree in criminal 
justice.  (Tr., pp. 9-10)  Claimant worked in a meat processing plant.  Claimant worked 
as a resident counselor for children and as a customer service representative.  
(Claimant’s Exhibit 3, page 23)  Claimant began with Lennox in 2010.  (Tr., p. 10) 
Claimant worked at Lennox as a secondary sniffer machine operator.  The job 
required claimant to look for Freon leaks.  (Tr., pp. 11-13)   
Claimant’s prior medical history is relevant.  Claimant injured her left shoulder 
and hand in January 2012.  (Ex. 1, pp. 1-2)  In August 2013, claimant had a neck and a 
left shoulder injury.  In December 2013, claimant had a C5-C7 fusion.  (Ex. 1, p. 2)   
In August 2019, claimant had lower back problems and was off work for a few 
weeks.  Claimant returned to work at full duty.  (Ex. 1, p. 2) 
On October 6, 2021, claimant was walking into work with her husband when she 
lost her balance on broken asphalt or rock.  Claimant said she did not fall.  As claimant 
was trying to get her balance, she stepped on a crack in the pavement, causing her to 
fall to her hands and knees.  Claimant says she was unable to stand or put weight on 
her left leg due to pain.  Claimant was taken by ambulance to the UnityPoint 
Marshalltown Emergency Room (UnityPoint).  (Ex. 1, pp. 2-3; Tr., pp. 17-19) 
At UnityPoint claimant was assessed as having left leg muscle spasms and left 
hip pain.  She was treated with medication and released.  (Ex. 1, p. 3)   
On October 8, 2021, claimant was evaluated by Sherman Jew, D.O.  Dr. Jew 
assessed claimant as having pain in the left hip, left leg, left upper arm, left shoulder,  
right hand and right knee.  He prescribed medication and returned claimant to work at a 
sit-down job only.  (Joint Exhibit 3, p. 22) 
Claimant underwent an MRI on December 13, 2021.  It showed a grade I 
spondylolisthesis at L5-S1, secondary to bilateral L5 pars fractures, and mild to 
moderate degenerative disk disease at T12-L1 and L5-S1.  Claimant was also assessed 
as having a mild foraminal stenosis at L1-2 on the right and L5-S1 bilaterally.  (JE 4, pp. 
45-46)  Claimant was referred to an orthopedic specialist.  (JE 3, p. 44) 
Claimant was seen by Trevor Schmitz, M.D., on January 7, 2022.  He assessed 
claimant as having a lumbar radiculopathy, multilevel facet arthropathy and isthmic 

FLYNN V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 3 
 
spondylosis.  He recommended claimant have epidural steroid injections (ESI) at the 
L5-S1 level.  (JE 5, p. 49) 
On January 18, 2022, claimant had L5-S1 ESI injections given by Thomas Klein, 
M.D.  (JE 5, p. 52)  Claimant testified the injections gave her short minor relief of 
symptoms.  (Tr., p. 26) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Schmitz on February 16, 2022.  Surgery was discussed 
and chosen as a treatment option.  (JE 5, p. 52) 
On April 4, 2022, claimant underwent surgery consisting of L5-S1 decompression 
and lumbar interbody fusion using iliac crest bone marrow.  Surgery was performed by 
Dr. Schmitz.  (JE 6, p. 81) 
Claimant testified surgery improved her symptoms, but that she still had pain.  
(Tr., p. 28) 
Claimant said she returned to work at Lennox at light duty and continued the sit-
down job she had done prior to surgery.  (Tr., p. 28) 
Claimant testified that on approximately May 11, 2022, she was sitting at her job 
at Lennox and when she went to stand up, she felt a pop in her back.  (Tr., p. 29)  
Claimant said she felt immediate pain at the surgical site.  (Tr., p. 29) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Schmitz on May 13, 2022.  Claimant had a lumbar x-ray 
that showed the hardware was stable.  Claimant was recommended to undergo physical 
therapy.  (JE 5, pp. 62-63) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Schmitz in follow up on June 24, 2022.  Claimant had 
continued lower back pain.  Claimant was recommended to continue physical therapy.  
(JE 5, p. 68)   
Claimant testified that in July of 2022, she and her husband went to a motorcycle 
rally in Algona, Iowa.  Claimant said she and her husband did not ride a motorcycle due 
to her bad back.  She said that she slipped on loose gravel at the rally.  Claimant said 
she had a brief increase in lower back pain that shortly returned to baseline.  (Tr., pp. 
33-34) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Schmitz on August 12, 2022.  Claimant indicated she 
had gone to a bike rally, had walked up and down hills and slipped on rock.  Claimant 
indicated progress in physical therapy, but had developed a limp after slipping.  
Claimant’s lifting restrictions were increased to 30 pounds.  Claimant was referred to 
work conditioning.  (JE 5, pp. 69-70) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Schmitz on September 9, 2022.  Claimant had returned 
to work full duty with the exception of heavy lifting screw boxes at work.  Claimant’s 
symptoms had improved.  Claimant was prescribed more physical therapy.  (JE 5, pp. 
72-73) 

FLYNN V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 4 
 
Claimant saw Dr. Schmitz again on October 21, 2022.  She indicated her pain 
levels were low, but she did not believe she could lift more than 20 pounds due to back 
pain.  Dr. Schmitz gave claimant a 20-pound lifting restriction.  She was found to be at 
maximum medical improvement (MMI) on that date.  (JE 5, pp. 76-79) 
Claimant testified she requested a second opinion from defendants.  Defendants 
initially denied that request.  Claimant said that after the denial, she sought treatment 
with her personal medical provider.  (Tr., p. 37) 
On February 14, 2023, claimant was evaluated by Christa Slagle, DNP, for back 
pain.  Claimant was assessed as having lower back pain.  Ms. Slagle recommended an 
MRI.  (Ex. 1, p. 8) 
In a letter dated February 15, 2023, Dr. Schmitz found that claimant had a 20 
percent permanent impairment based on a finding that claimant fell into the DRE lumbar 
category IV.  (JE 5, p. 80) 
Claimant testified that defendants did not authorize the MRI.  Defendants did 
schedule claimant for an IME with Joseph Chen, M.D.  (Tr., p. 38) 
In a March 19, 2023, report, Dr. Chen gave his opinions of claimant’s condition 
following an IME.  He opined that claimant’s October 6, 2021, work injury did not cause 
a substantial aggravation of claimant’s pre-existing L5-S1 spondylolisthesis.  
(Defendants’ Exhibit B, page 19) 
Dr. Chen opined that claimant had a 20 percent permanent impairment due to 
the lumbar fusion, but apportioned all 20 percent of claimant’s impairment to a pre-
existing condition.  (Ex. B, p. 20)   
Dr. Chen opined that claimant had a temporary exacerbation of her left 
trochanteric bursitis and that claimant’s current complaints of left hip pain were due to a 
fall that she had while on vacation.  (Ex. B, p. 21)  He opined that claimant had a 7 
percent permanent impairment due to her left hip condition, but apportioned all 7 
percent to claimant’s pre-existing condition.  (Ex. B, p. 22) 
On April 10, 2023, claimant was evaluated by Chad Abernathey, M.D., for a 
second opinion.  Dr. Abernathey recommended an MRI.  (JE 7, p. 86) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Abernathey on May 17, 2023, following the MRI.  The 
MRI showed a stable fusion.  Dr. Abernathey did not believe claimant required further 
surgery, but required further conservative treatment.  (JE 7, p. 87) 
Claimant testified she requested pain management from defendants.  
Defendants referred claimant to Tork Harman, M.D., a pain specialist.  (Tr., pp. 41-42) 
On October 9, 2023, Dr. Harman performed a lumbar medial branch block.  (JE 
8, p. 88)  Dr. Harman performed a second lumbar medial branch block on October 31, 

FLYNN V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 5 
 
2023.  (JE 8, p. 93)  The blocks were effective for only one day and then claimant’s 
symptoms returned to baseline.  (Ex. 1, p. 9) 
Claimant returned to Dr. Harman on December 1, 2023.  On that date Dr. 
Harman performed a bilateral lumbar radiofrequency ablation at the L4-5 and L5-L6 
facet joints bilaterally.  (JE 8, pp. 96-98)  Claimant testified the procedure provided 
some relief of symptoms, but did not eliminate her pain.  (Tr., p. 43) 
In a March 2, 2024 report, Dr. Chen gave his opinions of claimant’s condition.  
The report suggested Dr. Chen examined claimant on a second occasion.  (Ex. B, pp. 
32-34)  However, the report also indicates that the date of the exam occurred on March 
14, 2023.  (Ex. B, p. 24)  Based on this, it is found the report is ambiguous and it is 
unclear if Dr. Chen re-examined claimant on or about March 2, 2024, or merely 
performed a records review. 
Dr. Chen reiterated his opinion that claimant’s October 6, 2021, injury was a 
temporary aggravation of a pre-existing condition, and that the October 6, 2021, injury 
did not necessitate claimant’s fusion surgery.  He also reiterated that he still believed 
that claimant had a 20 percent permanent impairment, all of which was related to 
claimant’s pre-existing condition.  (Ex. B, p. 36)  He also recommended that claimant 
required a 50-pound lifting restriction.  (Ex. B, p. 36) 
In a March 11, 2024 report, John Kuhnlein, D.O., gave his opinions of claimant’s 
condition following an IME.  Claimant indicated she had intermittent activity-dependent 
lower back pain that radiated into the left gluteal area and posterior thigh.  Claimant 
indicated her symptoms had improved since the radiofrequency ablation.  (Ex. 1, p. 9) 
Dr. Kuhnlein assessed claimant as having, in part, a grade I spondylolisthesis, 
foraminal stenosis, and radiculopathy with an L5-S1 fusion and bilateral hip strain.  (Ex. 
1, p. 12) 
Dr. Kuhnlein found claimant had reached MMI for her back on December 1, 
2023, following the radiofrequency ablation and October 27, 2021, for all other 
diagnoses.  (Ex. 1, p. 13)  He found claimant fell in the DRE lumbar category IV and 
found claimant had a 23 percent permanent impairment.  He limited claimant, in part, to 
no lifting more than 20 pounds.  (Ex. 1, p. 13)  He opined claimant may require 
radiofrequency ablations in the future.  (Ex. 1, p. 14)  
At the time of hearing, claimant had returned to work at Lennox at the job she 
had prior to injury.  Claimant said she does not lift, push or pull heavy objects at work.  
At the time of hearing claimant was taking over-the-counter and prescription 
medications for her back.  (Tr., p. 46)  She testified she made more at Lennox at the 
time of hearing relative to the earnings at the time of injury.  (Tr., p. 55) 
 
 

FLYNN V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 6 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The first issue to be determined is the extent of claimant’s entitlement to 
permanent partial disability benefits. 
 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa R. App. P. 6.904(3). 
Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v), states, in relevant part: 
In all cases of permanent partial disability other than those described or 
referred to in paragraphs “a” through “u”, the compensation shall be paid 
during the number of weeks in relation to five hundred weeks as the 
reduction in the employee’s earning capacity caused by the disability 
bears in relation to the earning capacity that the employee possessed 
when the injury occurred…If an employee who is eligible for 
compensation under this paragraph returns to work or is offered 
work for which the employee receives or would receive the same or 
greater salary, wages, or earnings than the employee received at the 
time of the injury, the employee shall be compensated based only 
upon the employee’s functional impairment resulting from the injury, 
and not in relation to the employee’s earning capacity. 
Notwithstanding section 85.26, subsection 2, if an employee who is 
eligible for compensation under this paragraph returns to work with the 
same employer and is compensated based only upon the employee’s 
functional impairment resulting from the injury as provided in this 
paragraph and is terminated from employment by that employer, the 
award or agreement for settlement for benefits under this chapter shall be 
reviewed upon commencement of reopening proceedings by the 
employee for a determination of any reduction in the employee’s earning 
capacity caused by the employee’s permanent partial disability. (Emphasis 
added) 
The record indicates that claimant did return to work and was making more 
money at the time of hearing than she was at the time of injury.  Given this record, any 
permanent partial disability benefits claimant is awarded will be analyzed under Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
Three experts have given their opinions regarding claimant’s permanent 
impairment from the October 6, 2021, work injury.  Dr. Schmitz treated claimant for an 
extended period of time and performed surgery on claimant.  Dr. Schmitz opined that 
claimant had a 20 percent permanent impairment.  This was based on a finding that 
claimant fell into the DRE lumbar category IV of the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  (JE 5, p. 80)  Claimant’s unrebutted testimony is 
that Dr. Schmitz did not perform a physical exam on her regarding her permanent 
impairment evaluation, and that he spent between 7-8 minutes on claimant for his 
permanent impairment rating.  (Tr., pp. 36-37) 

FLYNN V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 7 
 
Dr. Chen issued two IME reports on claimant’s permanent impairment.  It is 
unclear from the second report whether Dr. Chen actually examined claimant or 
performed a records review.  Dr. Chen opined claimant’s October 6, 2021, injury was a 
temporary aggravation of a pre-existing condition.  He also opined that the October 6, 
2021, injury did not necessitate claimant’s fusion surgery.  He opined that claimant had 
a 20 percent permanent impairment, but apportioned all 20 percent due to claimant’s 
pre-existing condition.  (Ex. B, p. 36) 
There is no evidence in the record that claimant had a permanent impairment 
from a pre-existing condition.  In the pre-hearing report, defendants stipulated that 
claimant’s October 6, 2021, injury resulted in a permanent disability.  As noted, it is 
unclear whether Dr. Chen actually examined claimant regarding his second IME report.  
Based on these facts, Dr. Chen’s opinion regarding permanent impairment and 
causation are found not credible. 
Dr. Kuhnlein evaluated claimant once for an IME.  Dr. Kuhnlein opined that 
claimant’s October 6, 2021, injury resulted in a 23 percent permanent impairment to the 
body as a whole.  Like Dr. Schmitz, Dr. Kuhnlein found that claimant fell under the DRE 
lumbar category IV under the Guides. 
Dr. Kuhnlein’s report regarding claimant’s permanent impairment is more detailed 
than that of Dr. Schmitz.  The record indicates claimant had ongoing pain after she was 
released from Dr. Schmitz’s care.  The record indicates Dr. Kuhnlein spent more time 
with claimant in his evaluation than Dr. Schmitz.  Dr. Kuhnlein’s evaluation is closer in 
time to the hearing, and is thus a more accurate depiction of claimant’s permanent 
impairment at the time of hearing.  Given this record, it is found that Dr. Kuhnlein’s 
rating on permanent impairment is more convincing than that of Dr. Schmitz.  Claimant 
is found to have a 23 percent permanent impairment.  Claimant is entitled to 115 weeks 
of permanent partial disability benefits (500 weeks x 23 percent). 
The next issue to be determined is commencement date of claimant’s permanent 
partial disability benefits.  Two experts have opined regarding claimant’s MMI date.  Dr. 
Schmitz found that claimant’s MMI date was on October 21, 2022.  (JE 5, p. 77)  Dr. 
Kuhnlein opined claimant’s MMI date was December 1, 2023, the date that claimant 
received the radiofrequency ablation from Dr. Harman.  (Ex. 1, p. 13)   
The AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment define MMI as “a 
condition or state that is well stabilized and unlikely to change substantially in the next 
year, with or without medical treatment.  Over time, there may be some change; 
however, further recovery or deterioration is not anticipated.”  (Guides, p. 601) 
The record indicates Dr. Harman told claimant the radiofrequency ablations were 
never permanent, but they did substantially improve claimant’s condition.  The record 
indicates Dr. Harman also told claimant her pain would return and another 
radiofrequency ablation may be necessary.  Claimant testified at the time of hearing that 
she anticipated having a second radiofrequency ablation in the near future.  (Tr., pp. 43, 
61) 

FLYNN V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 8 
 
Given this record, it is found that the opinions of Dr. Schmitz regarding MMI are 
more convincing than those of Dr. Kuhnlein.  Claimant is found to be at MMI as of 
October 21, 2022.  Claimant’s permanent partial disability benefits shall commence as 
of October 21, 2022.   
The next issue to be determined is whether claimant is due additional payment of 
temporary partial disability benefits due to an underpayment. 
 
   
An employee is entitled to appropriate temporary partial disability benefits during 
those periods in which the employee is temporarily, partially disabled.  An employee is 
temporarily, partially disabled when the employee is not capable medically of returning 
to employment substantially similar to the employment in which the employee was 
engaged at the time of the injury, but is able to perform other work consistent with the 
employee's disability.  Temporary partial benefits are not payable upon termination of 
temporary disability, healing period, or permanent partial disability simply because the 
employee is not able to secure work paying weekly earnings equal to the employee's 
weekly earnings at the time of the injury.  Section 85.33(2). 
As detailed above, on October 6, 2021, claimant was taken from work at Lennox 
by an ambulance to the emergency department.  (Tr., p. 19)  On October 8, 2021, 
claimant was evaluated by Dr. Jew who returned claimant to work at light duty.  (JE 3, p. 
22)  Claimant returned on October 11, 2023, with a restriction of sit-down work only.  
(Tr., p. 23)  Claimant worked under that temporary restriction from the date of injury until 
she was found at MMI by Dr. Schmitz on October 21, 2022.  (JE 5, p. 77) 
Based on Claimant’s Exhibit 4, page 28, from the pay period of October 10, 
2021, through June 12, 2022, there were 22 weeks during which claimant’s gross 
earnings from work were less than the stipulated average weekly wage at the time of 
hearing.  According to Claimant’s Exhibit 4, page 28, claimant is due $535.89 in 
underpaid temporary partial disability benefits.  (Ex. 4, p. 28; Claimant’s Post-Hearing 
Brief, pp. 8-9) 
As detailed above, claimant bears the burden of proof in why she should receive 
additional temporary partial disability benefits for the period of October 10, 2021, 
through June 12, 2022.  Iowa Code section 85.33(2) indicates that temporary partial 
disability benefits are paid “. . . to an employee because of the employee’s temporary 
partial reduction in earning ability as a result of the employee's temporary partial 
disability.”  There is no evidence in the record that this decrease in the average weekly 
wage from the periods shown in Exhibit 4, page 28, was caused by claimant’s injury or 
the requirement that she be on light duty.   
As claimant has failed to carry her burden of proof her reduction in average 
weekly wage that she was paid for the period shown in Exhibit 4, page 28, is a result of 
her temporary partial disability, claimant has failed to carry her burden of proof she is 
entitled to additional temporary partial disability benefits.   
The final issue to be determined is mitigation.  

FLYNN V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 9 
 
On the hearing report, defendants indicated as an affirmative defense that 
claimant had a “failure to mitigate damages.”  Defendants carry the burden of proof in 
proving mitigation of damages in this case. 
Defendants offer no evidence regarding a mitigation of damages defense.  
Defendants failed to argue mitigation of damages in the post-hearing brief.  Given this 
record, defendants have failed to carry their burden of proof that claimant had a duty to 
mitigate damages in this case. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
That defendants shall pay claimant one hundred fifteen (115) weeks of 
permanent partial disability benefits at the rate of five hundred ninety and 69/100 dollars 
($590.69) per week commencing on October 21, 2022. 
  That defendants shall pay accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum together with 
interest at an annual rate equal to the one-year treasury constant maturity published by 
the federal reserve in the most recent H15 report settled as of the date of injury, plus 
two percent.  
That defendants shall be given credit for benefits previously paid. 
That defendants shall pay costs. 
That defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury as required by Rule 876 
IAC 3.1(2). 
 
Signed and filed this ___4th ___ day of September, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
James Ballard (via WCES) 
 
Robert Gainer (via WCES) 
 
     JAMES F. CHRISTENSON 
          DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
 COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 

FLYNN V. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC. 
Page 10 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Division of Workers’ Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday 
