Case Number: 23701089.01
Case Title:  DIEHL, MICHAEL V. WELLS FARGO BANK, N.A. D/B/A WELLS FARGO HOME MTG.
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Diehl Michael - 23701089.01d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
Michael Diehl, 
 
 
 
  : 
            File No. 23701089.01 
 
Claimant, 
   
 
 
  : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  : 
 
 A R B I T R A T I O N 
Vs. 
 
 
 
 
 
  : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  : 
 
       D E C I S I O N 
Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., d/b/a 
 
  : 
Wells Fargo Home Mtg. 
 
 
  : 
 
Employer, 
 
 
 
  : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  : 
And 
 
 
 
 
 
  : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  : 
Old Republic Insurance Company, 
  : 
Head Notes:  1100, 1108, 1400, 1800 
 
Insurance Carrier,  
 
  : 
 
 
 1803 
 
Defendants.  
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
The claimant, Michael Diehl, filed a petition for arbitration seeking workers’ 
compensation benefits from employer Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., (“Wells Fargo”) and its 
insurer, Old Republic Insurance Company.  Jason Neifert appeared on behalf of the 
claimant.  Joni Ploeger appeared on behalf of the defendants.   
 
The matter came on for hearing on January 16, 2025, before Deputy Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner Andrew M. Phillips.  Pursuant to an order of the Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, the hearing occurred electronically via Zoom.  
The hearing proceeded without difficulty.  
 
The record in this case consists of Joint Exhibits 1-8, Claimant’s Exhibits 1-10, 
and Defendants’ Exhibits A-T.  The exhibits were received into the record without 
objection. 
 
Zachary Witte and the claimant testified on behalf of the claimant.  Nicole 
Swords, Carlee Cashatt, and Bill Reichert testified on behalf of the defendants.  Debra 
Hoadley was appointed the official reporter and custodian of the notes of the 
proceeding.  The matter was considered fully submitted following briefing by the parties 
on March 7, 2025.     
STIPULATIONS 
 
Through the hearing report, as reviewed at the commencement of the hearing as 
amended on March 12, 2025, the parties stipulated and/or established the following: 
1. There was an employer-employee relationship at the time of the alleged injury. 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Apr-23  07:24:55     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 2 
  
2. That, at the time of the alleged injury, the claimant’s gross earnings were two 
thousand eight hundred one and 23/100 dollars ($2,801.23) per week, that the 
claimant was married and entitled to four exemptions, providing a weekly rate 
of compensation of one thousand six hundred eighty-one and 19/100 dollars 
($1,681.19).   
 
3. That, with regard to certain medical expenses: 
 
a. The medical providers would testify as to the reasonableness of their 
fees and/or treatment set forth in the listed expenses, and the 
defendants would not offer contrary evidence. 
 
4. That, prior to the hearing, the claimant was paid one hundred seventy-five 
thousand five hundred sixty-five and 40/100 dollars in disability income, and 
that the defendants are entitled to a credit for this amount pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.38(2).    
 
5. That the costs listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 10 have been paid.   
The defendants waived some of their affirmative defenses.   
 
Subsequent to the hearing, the parties filed an amended hearing report.  The 
parties stipulated that the defendants paid one hundred seventy thousand three 
hundred twenty-seven and 40/100 dollars ($170,327.40) in net disability benefits.  This 
amounted to seventy-six thousand three hundred thirty-two and 75/100 dollars 
($76,332.75) in net short-term disability benefits from August 6, 2022, to January 27, 
2023, and ninety-eight thousand nine hundred ninety-four and 65/100 dollars 
($98,994.65) in net long term disability benefits from January 28, 2023, to April 27, 
2024.    
The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether the claimant sustained an injury which arose out of, and in the 
course of, his employment on April 19, 2022 to April 24, 2022. 
  
2. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of temporary disability during a period of 
recovery. 
 
3. Whether the claimant is entitled to temporary disability and/or healing period 
benefits from July 30, 2022, to June 14, 2024.   
 
4. Whether the claimant was off work from July 30, 2022, to June 14, 2024.   

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 3 
 
5. Whether the alleged injury is a cause of permanent disability. 
  
6. The extent of permanent disability benefits, should any be awarded.   
 
7. Whether the disability is an industrial disability. 
  
8. The proper commencement date for permanent partial disability benefits, if 
any are awarded. 
 
9. Whether the claimant is entitled to reimbursement and/or payment of medical 
expenses listed in Claimant’s Exhibit 9. 
 
10. With regard to the disputed medical expenses: 
 
a. Whether the fees or prices charged by the providers were fair and 
reasonable. 
b. Whether the treatment was reasonable and necessary. 
c. Whether the listed expenses were causally connected to the work 
injury. 
d. Whether the listed expenses are at least causally related to the 
medical conditions upon which the claim of injury is based. 
e. Whether the requested expenses were authorized by the defendants. 
 
11. Whether the claimant is entitled to a specific taxation of costs, and the 
amount of those costs.   
  
12. Whether the defendants have proven an affirmative defense of a lack of 
timely notice pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.23. 
The parties also noted in Section 10 of the Hearing Report:  
Defendants deny Claimant’s COVID-19 infection arose out of or in the 
course of his employment (i.e. during the work conference on or about April 
19, 2022).  Claimant cannot show the work conference was a substantial 
factor in his COVID diagnosis.  Even if it is found Claimant’s COVID-19 
infection is work-related, Defendants assert Claimant has not sustained a 
permanent injury/disability and/or industrial disability. 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Michael Diehl, the claimant, was 38 years old at the time of the hearing.  
(Testimony).  He resides in Clive, Iowa, with his children.  (Testimony).  At the time of 
the alleged injury, he was married and also lived with his wife.  (Testimony).  Mr. Diehl 

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 4 
testified that his wife was a homemaker at the time of his alleged injury.  (Testimony).  
She would get groceries, drop-off and pick-up his young son from preschool, and keep 
their house clean.  (Testimony).  Mr. Diehl’s wife would also take his young daughter to 
and from dance classes.  (Testimony).  At the time of the alleged injury, Mr. Diehl’s 
daughter was in second grade, in a class with twenty-plus other children.  (Testimony).  
His son was in preschool, in a class with twelve-to-thirteen other children.  (Testimony).  
Neither his wife, nor children wore masks around groups of people.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Diehl graduated from the University of Iowa with a degree in 
interdepartmental business studies.  (Testimony).  Following his graduation from 
college, Mr. Diehl moved to Colorado where he worked as an intern for The Integer 
Group.  (Testimony).  He then took a job with Wells Fargo as a home mortgage 
consultant in 2010.  (Testimony).  He received a promotion to a sales supervisor 
position in the beginning of 2016.  (Testimony).  In 2020, he was again promoted to a 
relocation supervisor role.  (Testimony).  These roles were all sedentary in nature.  
(Defendants’ Exhibit P:96).   
As a relocation supervisor, he managed a team of 10 to 15 home mortgage 
consultants.  (Testimony).  These consultants sold home mortgages.  (Testimony).  He 
helped manage people, risks, and sales.  (Testimony).  He also obtained an NMLSR 
certification through his work with Wells Fargo.  (DE P:96).  This is a license that allows 
an individual to sell mortgages.  (DE P:96).  By 2022, Mr. Diehl was managed by a team 
in Minneapolis, Minnesota, and worked one week from his home office and one week in 
an office in the Des Moines, Iowa, area.  (Testimony).  According to his supervisor, he 
was a good performer.  (Testimony).   
On February 11, 2022, Mr. Diehl visited with his primary care physician, Casey 
Tyler, M.D., for an annual examination.  (Joint Exhibit 1:1-2).  Mr. Diehl had a history of 
pancreatitis.  (JE 1:1).   
In April of 2022, Mr. Diehl attended a sales conference in Boca Raton, Florida, at 
the invitation of Wells Fargo.  (Testimony).  He received an invitation to this conference 
due to his performance as a relocation supervisor.  (Testimony).  He was allowed to 
bring his then-wife as a guest.  (Testimony).  He traveled to the conference via airplane 
on April 19, 2022.  (Testimony).  He testified that he and his wife went to the conference 
one day earlier than other coworkers, as he was in the “President’s Club."  (Testimony).  
Mr. Diehl estimated that 1,000 to 2,000 people attended the conference.  (Testimony).  
The conference took place across multiple hotels.  (Testimony).   
One of Mr. Diehl’s longtime friends and coworkers, Zachary Witte, also attended 
the conference with him.  (Testimony).  He confirmed multiple details regarding Mr. 
Diehl’s recollection of the conference.  (Testimony).  He also noted that he neglected to 
wear a mask while attending the conference.  (Testimony).  Nicole Swords, the 
claimant’s supervisor, also attended the conference.  (Testimony).   
During a typical day at the conference, Mr. Diehl would have breakfast with 
groups of coworkers and leadership of Wells Fargo.  (Testimony).  He would then attend 

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 5 
breakout sessions with speakers regarding the market and Wells Fargo’s business for 
the rest of the morning.  (Testimony).  In the afternoon, he would enjoy leisure activities, 
such as lounging by the pool or golfing.  (Testimony).  Some of these activities were 
organized by Wells Fargo.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Diehl and his wife stayed for one extra day in Florida following the conclusion 
of the conference.  (Testimony).  He returned to work on April 25, 2022.  (Testimony).   
On April 27, 2022, after his return from the conference, Mr. Diehl testified that he 
participated in a conference call led by his boss, Nicole Swords.  (Testimony).  Other 
sales supervisors including Bill Reichert, Tera Hansboro, Jeremy Frost, Stephanie 
Gehrls, and Carlee Cashatt, also participated in the call.  (Testimony).  Ms. Swords 
testified that these were calls that occurred several times per week to discuss their 
current work.  (Testimony).   
According to Mr. Diehl, during this conference call, another sales supervisor, Bill 
Reichert, mentioned that a member of his team from Minneapolis, Minnesota, who 
attended the conference, tested positive for COVID-19 (“COVID”).  (Testimony).  This 
led Mr. Diehl to take a COVID test during the conference call, even though he 
experienced no symptoms at that time.  (Testimony).  He testified that this test was 
positive, and that he informed the people on the conference call.  (Testimony).  He 
testified in his deposition that he told those on the conference call that he felt he 
contracted COVID while at the Wells Fargo conference.  (DE P:96).  A photo of the 
positive test is in evidence.  (CE 8:55).  Ms. Swords did not recall Mr. Diehl making 
mention of a positive COVID test during their conference call, and noted that this would 
have stood out because it was not a normal topic of conversation for their conference 
calls.  (Testimony).   She also did not recall Mr. Reichert commenting on an employee 
having a positive COVID test following the conference.  (Testimony).  Ms. Cashatt also 
did not recall Mr. Diehl mentioning a COVID test during the conference call.  
(Testimony).  However, Ms. Cashatt admitted that this could have happened and she 
simply did not recall the conversation.  (Testimony).  Mr. Reichert testified that he had 
no recollection of mentioning that one of his team members contracted COVID.  
(Testimony).   
Two other Wells Fargo employees that Mr. Diehl knew also tested positive for 
COVID around the same time.  (Testimony).  That included Mr. Witte, who tested 
positive sometime shortly after returning from the conference.  (Testimony).  Mr. Diehl 
testified in his deposition hearing that ten-to-fifteen other employees from the Des 
Moines office also tested positive for COVID following the conference, but he did not 
know their names.  (DE P:96).   
Mr. Witte recalled Mr. Diehl sending him a text message inquiring as to his 
positive test.  (Testimony).  Mr. Witte also testified that several other attendees of the 
conference contracted COVID, and that there was conversation around the Wells Fargo 
offices that a number of those who attended a concert by the musical artist Flo Rida 
contracted COVID.  (Testimony).  Specifically, Mr. Witte testified that banter around the 
Wells Fargo office was that “…hey, Flo Rida gave us all COVID…”  (Testimony).  

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 6 
Neither Ms. Swords, nor her wife, ever got sick following the conference.  (Testimony).  
She was also not aware of any other Wells Fargo employees testing positive for COVID 
following the conference.  (Testimony).  She felt that if a number of conference 
attendees were testing positive for COVID following the conference, it would have been 
a topic of conversation around Wells Fargo.  (Testimony). Ms. Cashatt also did not 
recall any conversation about any Wells Fargo employees returning from the 
conference and contracting COVID.  (Testimony).  Mr. Reichert also did not recall any 
conversation about a number of conference attendees contracting COVID.  (Testimony).  
Like Ms. Swords, he felt that this would have been a topic of conversation at Wells 
Fargo, if it occurred.  (Testimony).   
Ms. Swords testified that Wells Fargo had a COVID reporting system so that 
employees could report a positive test.  (Testimony).  She noted that supervisors would 
receive an email if someone on their team reported a positive COVID test.  (Testimony).  
She recounted never receiving a notice regarding Mr. Diehl.  (Testimony).  Mr. Reichert 
also did not recall Mr. Diehl ever mentioning contracting COVID.  (Testimony).   
On April 28, 2022, Mr. Diehl had a telemedicine visit with Dr. Casey regarding 
concerns of COVID.  (JE 1:3-4).  Mr. Diehl complained of malaise, rhinitis, cough, and a 
positive COVID test following his recent travel to Florida.  (JE 1:3-4).  He also had chills 
and nausea.  (JE 1:4).  Mr. Diehl told Dr. Casey that he had a coworker who tested 
positive for COVID.  (JE 1:4).  Dr. Casey recommended conservative treatment, 
including rest, hydration, and Tylenol as needed.  (JE 1:4).  Mr. Diehl was not interested 
in “COVID-19 tailored treatments.”   (JE 1:4).   
Mr. Diehl was asked why he attributed his COVID diagnosis to the Wells Fargo 
conference, to which he responded: “My belief is because I don’t think that there’s really 
any other way that I could have gotten it.  There was a lot of exposure at the 
conference, and then three days later I tested positive for it and didn’t get any 
symptoms until four days after being back from it, so…”  (Testimony).  He was asked if 
he felt it was just as likely that he could have contracted COVID from a non-work 
source, to which he responded: “My own personal opinion, no.  Definitely not after the 
conference; and from my personal opinion, no, I think I would have gotten symptoms 
beforehand if – if I got it before the conference.”  (Testimony).   
Mr. Diehl entered a quarantine period following his diagnosis.  (Testimony).  
Soon after, Mr. Diehl began to develop symptoms including body aches, a fever, and a 
cough.  (Testimony).  These symptoms worsened over time.  (Testimony).  Eventually, 
Mr. Diehl experienced bloody stool, which led him to report to the emergency room.  
(Testimony).  There, he was diagnosed with E. coli.  (Testimony).  He then developed a 
high fever, diarrhea, a stomachache, and chills.  (Testimony).  He also developed 
“super bad headaches.”  (Testimony).  These headaches worsened as the days 
progressed.  (Testimony).  Eventually, all of his symptoms dissipated, except for his 
headaches.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Diehl reported to the emergency room at Methodist West Hospital in West 
Des Moines, Iowa, on May 2, 2022, complaining of diarrhea and rectal bleeding.  (JE 

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 7 
3:24-34).  Mr. Diehl mentioned his positive COVID test and that he had five-to-eight 
daily episodes of diarrhea which eventually contained blood.  (JE 3:24).  He also noted 
having chills and fever.  (JE 3:26).  The provider in the emergency department took a 
stool sample, which returned as positive for E. coli.  (JE 3:29).  He was provided Zofran 
and discharged with instructions to follow-up with his primary care provider.  (JE 3:32-
33).   
Mr. Diehl was off of work for one week during his quarantine period.  (DE P:96).  
He then returned to work.  (DE P:96).   
On June 1, 2022, Mr. Diehl returned to Dr. Casey’s office following his 
emergency room visit.  (JE 1:5-6).  Dr. Casey noted Mr. Diehl’s previous COVID 
diagnosis, as well as a diagnosis of E. coli.  (JE 1:5).  Mr. Diehl also complained of 
generalized headaches and diarrhea.  (JE 1:5).  Mr. Diehl told Dr. Casey that his 
headaches were mild to moderate in the temporal area.  (JE 1:5).  Tylenol provided him 
with no benefit, but Excedrin helped provide some relief.  (JE 1:5).  Dr. Casey opined 
that the claimant’s COVID and E. coli resolved, but that his ongoing headaches and 
diarrhea were “residuals from his recent infections.”  (JE 1:6).  Dr. Casey provided the 
claimant with prescription medication for his headaches and for anxiety.  (JE 1:6).   
Mr. Diehl stopped working in July of 2022 because his migraines prevented him 
from looking at a computer screen.  (Testimony; DE P:96).   
On July 8, 2022, Mr. Diehl returned to Dr. Casey’s office for complaints of anxiety 
and generalized headaches.  (JE 1:7).  Mr. Diehl told Dr. Casey that his anxiety 
improved significantly since his last visit.  (JE 1:7).  However, his headaches continued 
through his forehead, bilateral temples, and around to the back of his head.  (JE 1:7).  
These headaches were new since his COVID infection.  (JE 1:7).  He also described 
neck tightness.  (JE 1:7).  Dr. Casey speculated as to whether the headaches may be 
tension headaches.  (JE 1:7).  Dr. Casey provided the claimant with additional 
prescription medication for his headaches.  (JE 1:7).  Mr. Diehl testified that Dr. Casey 
supported him stopping working in July of 2022; however, the medical record is silent as 
to this issue.  (Testimony; JE 1:7).   
 
Dr. Casey saw Mr. Diehl again on August 11, 2022.  (JE 1:8).  Mr. Diehl 
continued to complain of generalized headaches starting in his temples and wrapping 
around his head.  (JE 1:8).  The headaches persisted following his COVID infection and 
occurred on a daily basis.  (JE 1:8).  Mr. Diehl noted that once or twice per day, the 
headaches became so severe that he had to sit in a dark room with ice packs on his 
head.  (JE 1:8).  Mr. Diehl also told Dr. Casey that staring at a computer screen 
worsened his headaches.  (JE 1:8).  Dr. Casey reviewed the results of the MRI and 
opined that Mr. Diehl had a “combination of tension type and periorbital headache that 
seem to be made worse by eye strain.”  (JE 1:8).  The MRI showed no evidence of 
compression or “CSF” flow blockage.  (JE 1:8).  Dr. Casey provided the claimant with 
additional recommendations and prescription.  (JE 1:8).  He also provided a referral to 
neurology and ophthalmology.  (JE 1:8).   

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 8 
 
Mr. Diehl visited Des Moines Eye Surgeons on August 22, 2022, where Bradley 
Hammer, M.D. examined him.  (JE 4:40).  Mr. Diehl noted issues with decreased visual 
acuity, and inquired to Dr. Hammer as to whether or not any eye issues were causing 
his headaches.  (JE 4:40).  He noted light sensitivity since his COVID infection.  (JE 
4:40).  Dr. Hammer found nothing ocular to explain Mr. Diehl’s headaches.  (JE 4:40).   
 
Mark Zlab, M.D., examined Mr. Diehl on September 6, 2022, at the Iowa Clinic.  
(JE 5:41-42).  Mr. Diehl noted his ongoing headaches since his COVID infection, and 
that an MRI found a cyst.  (JE 5:41).  He asked Dr. Zlab if allergies may cause his 
headaches.  (JE 5:41).  Dr. Zlab found Mr. Diehl to have no abnormalities to his ears or 
throat during the examination, but did note Mr. Diehl to have a deviated septum.  (JE 
5:41).  He also reviewed the MRI and opined that the cyst seen thereon was a “very 
common” mucus retention cyst, and was not the source of his headaches.  (JE 5:42).  
Finally, he noted that Mr. Diehl’s sense of smell would return, but that it may take some 
time.  (JE 5:42).   
 
On September 7, 2022, Mr. Diehl reported to Ballenger Chiropractic & 
Acupuncture with complaints of discomfort in his posterior head, cervical spine, and 
trapezius regions.  (JE 6:43-44).  He also complained of low back pain.  (JE 6:43).  
Further, Mr. Diehl complained that he was attempting to manage his headaches until he 
can visit with a neurologist.  (JE 6:43).   
 
Mr. Diehl had additional chiropractic treatment on October 13, 2022.  (JE 6:45-
46).  He continued to complain of neck pain, back pain, and headaches.  (JE 6:45).  He 
sought care in order to alleviate his symptoms ahead of seeing a neurologist.  (JE 6:45).   
 
On October 20, 2022, Dr. Casey completed FMLA paperwork provided to him by 
Lincoln Financial Group.  (JE 2:16-17).  He documented that Mr. Diehl experienced 
chronic headaches and sensitivity to light, for which he treated with a neurologist.  (JE 
2:16).  He noted that Mr. Diehl required “continuous” leave from July 30, 2022, to 
December 15, 2022, due to incapacity caused by possible episodic flare-ups.  (JE 2:17).   
 
Dr. Casey filled out additional paperwork for Lincoln Financial Group on October 
26, 2022.  (JE 2:18-19).  Again, Dr. Casey documented a chronic headache and 
sensitivity to light.  (JE 2:18).  Dr. Casey noted that Mr. Diehl was on medication for his 
condition, and treating with a neurologist.  (JE 2:18).  Dr. Casey noted that Mr. Diehl 
was on leave from July 20, 2022, to October 21, 2022, and that his absence from work 
was due to incapacity caused by possible episodic flare-ups of his chronic condition.  
(JE 2:19).     
 
Mr. Diehl continued his chiropractic treatment on October 27, 2022.  (JE 6:47-
48).  He continued to complain of pain in the lumbar spine, posterior head, posterior 
neck, and posterior trapezius.  (JE 6:47).  He continued to await a visit with a 
neurologist.  (JE 6:47).   
 
On November 3, 2022, Mr. Diehl returned to Dr. Casey’s office with continued 
complaints of headaches, an acute upper respiratory infection, and GERD.  (JE 1:9).  

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 9 
His headaches continued to occur on a daily basis following his COVID infection and E. 
coli infection.  (JE 1:9).  He described a dull aching to sharp stabbing pain in his retro-
orbital area into the temples and then wrapping around his head.  (JE 1:9).  Looking at a 
computer screen, driving, or focusing his vision aggravated his headaches.  (JE 1:9).  
Dr. Casey noted, “Mike had COVID 5 months ago which seems to be one of the factors 
that help trigger these headaches.”  (JE 1:9).  Dr. Casey recommended that Mr. Diehl 
continue taking Tylenol and provided him with a prescription for headache medication.  
(JE 1:9).  He also opined that an oncoming upper respiratory infection was likely 
complicating the claimant’s ongoing headaches.  (JE 1:9).  Dr. Casey also assisted Mr. 
Diehl with filling out a form for Lincoln Financial, in which he noted that Mr. Diehl should 
be on light duty due to headaches and vision problems that were triggered by looking at 
screens for long periods of times.  (JE 1:10).  These restrictions were imposed from July 
22, 2022, to March 31, 2023.  (JE 1:10).   
 
Dr. Casey prepared more paperwork on November 4, 2022, again documenting 
Mr. Diehl’s chronic headaches and sensitivity to light.  (JE 2:20-21).  He again noted the 
claimant’s treatment with a neurologist including prescribed medications.  (JE 2:20).  Dr. 
Casey also documented that Mr. Diehl should be on continuous leave from October 22, 
2022, to December 18, 2022, due to incapacity caused by possible episodic flare-ups.  
(JE 2:21).   
 
On November 14, 2022, Mr. Diehl visited with Mohammad Alsharabati, M.D., a 
neurologist, regarding his ongoing headaches.  (JE 7:49-50).  Mr. Diehl noted that he 
had COVID in April of 2022, and then began having headaches in May of 2022.  (JE 
7:49).  These developed into migraine-type headaches in “late summer” of 2022.  (JE 
7:49).  Looking at screens worsened his headaches.  (JE 7:49).  Mr. Diehl indicated that 
his headaches were located behind his eyes into his temples and the back of his head.  
(JE 7:49).  Dr. Alsharabati found Mr. Diehl to have an unremarkable neurological 
examination.  (JE 7:49).  He diagnosed Mr. Diehl with chronic migraine, muscle tension 
headache, and medication overuse headache.  (JE 7:49).  Dr. Alsharabati prescribed a 
different medication for the claimant in order “to break the current cycle of refractory 
headaches and migraines.”  (JE 7:50).  He asked Mr. Diehl to return in two months.  (JE 
7:50).   
 
Dr. Casey submitted additional paperwork to Lincoln Financial on February 2, 
2023, documenting Mr. Diehl’s headache syndrome and vision issues triggered by 
prolonged looking at screens.  (JE 2:22-23).  Mr. Diehl noted that he could only watch 
screens or be in a bright light for short periods of time before he needed a break.  (JE 
2:22).  These symptoms were daily since May or June of 2022.  (JE 2:22).  Dr. Casey 
recommended restrictions of light daily activity with frequent breaks from any activity 
which triggers headaches.  (JE 2:22).  Dr. Casey indicated that these restrictions began 
on June 1, 2022, and ran to February 13, 2023.  (JE 2:23).  His return to work date 
depended on his response to treatment.  (JE 2:23).   
 
On February 13, 2023, Dr. Casey examined Mr. Diehl again for a “health 
maintenance examination.”  (JE 1:12-13).  According to Dr. Casey, Mr. Diehl’s biggest 
concern over the prior six months was his headaches.  (JE 1:12).  Dr. Casey noted that 

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 10 
Mr. Diehl had COVID and E. coli during the summer of 2022, and that he developed 
headaches after that.  (JE 1:12).  Mr. Diehl had not worked since August 1, 2022.  (JE 
1:12).  Dr. Casey noted that Mr. Diehl was working on transitioning from short-term 
disability to long-term disability.  (JE 1:12).  Dr. Casey opined that Mr. Diehl could only 
look at screens for about 20 minutes before he developed headaches.  (JE 1:12).  He 
noted, “[g]iven he works a desk based computer job, he has not been able to work due 
to the computer screen setting off his headaches.”  (JE 1:12).  Mr. Diehl noted no new 
features to his headaches.  (JE 1:12).  Dr. Casey noted that Mr. Diehl took a number of 
prescription medications in order to relieve his headaches.  (JE 1:12).   
 
Mr. Diehl followed-up with Dr. Casey again on March 27, 2023, in order to 
coordinate his FMLA and disability paperwork.  (JE 1:14-15).  Dr. Casey noted: 
Last June he came down with both a COVID URI and E. coli gastroenteritis 
at about the same time.  After recovering from those, he developed mixed 
muscle tension and migraine type headaches that been [sic] steadily 
progressive problem.  His headaches are exacerbated by prolonged looking 
at screens or reading, bright lights, or pressure on his head such as wearing 
glasses or a ball.  If he tries to focus his vision (screen, reading) or is in 
bright light for 30 to 75 minutes, he gets headache flares accompanied by 
decreased mental focus/inability to maintain his concentration, decreased 
visual acuity and nausea/vomiting. 
(JE 1:14).  Mr. Diehl indicated that his headaches occurred on a daily basis, and that he 
took prescription medications in an effort to alleviate his symptoms.  (JE 1:14).  Dr. 
Casey opined that Mr. Diehl’s symptoms made it “very difficult if not impossible to 
function at his desk based computer job which requires him to focus on a computer 
screen…”  (JE 1:14).  According to Dr. Casey these issues “certainly seem to be a large 
barrier in performing that type of work based on what he is outlining here.”  (JE 1:15).   
 
In a letter dated March 29, 2023, Dr. Alsharabati opined that Mr. Diehl suffered 
from severe headaches and migraines “that have been refractory to medications and 
treatments.”  (JE 7:51).  Due to his constant pain, lack of sleep, and the side effects of 
his medications, Mr. Diehl could not function.  (JE 7:51).  Dr. Alsharabati concluded that 
Mr. Diehl “…has been disabled by his medical condition and cannot perform in any 
gainful job.”  (JE 7:51).   
 
On April 4, 2023, Mr. Diehl sent a letter to Liberty Mutual summarizing his 
disability appeal.  (CE 7:54).  He indicated that he felt that he contracted COVID and 
E.coli while at a Wells Fargo conference in April of 2022.  (CE 7:54).  He also described 
a number of his symptoms.  (CE 7:54).   
 
Based upon a referral from Dr. Casey, Mr. Diehl began treating with the Mayo 
Clinic on June 12, 2023.  (JE 8:52-54).  Mr. Diehl told the treating provider that he 
contracted COVID in April of 2022, and that he continued to have headaches following 
his illness.  (JE 8:52).  He then began experiencing more severe headaches in May of 
2022, which then worsened in August of 2022.  (JE 8:52).  Mr. Diehl indicated that he 

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 11 
had headaches every day, and rated them 6 to 7 out of 10 in intensity.  (JE 8:52).  He 
described his headaches as pressure-like with throbbing and jabbing.  (JE 8:52).  He 
also had issues mixing up words or expressing his thoughts.  (JE 8:52).  Lack of sleep, 
lights, stress, fatigue, physical exertion, coughing, loud sounds, and chewing triggered 
his headaches.  (JE 8:52).  The provider reviewed the MRI and opined that they 
observed “reduced mammilopontine distance and reduced prepontine cistern with a 
Bern score being 2/7.”  (JE 8:53).  Mr. Diehl was diagnosed with a spontaneous 
cerebrospinal fluid leak.  (JE 8:53).  The provider clarified this diagnosis and opined, 
“[c]linical history could support a diagnosis of either spontaneous spinal CSF leak or 
persistent headache related to prior systemic viral infection (COVID 19) with a 
phenotype of chronic migraine.”  (JE 8:53).  It was then recommended that Mr. Diehl 
have a cerebral cisternogram, and MRI of his brain, cervical spine, lumbar spine, and 
thoracic spine.  (JE 8:53).   
 
On July 7, 2023, Mr. Diehl returned to the emergency department at Methodist 
West Hospital with complaints of migraines over the prior year.  (JE 3:35-39).  Mr. Diehl 
told the provider that his headaches began following a COVID infection, and that the 
Mayo Clinic informed him that he had issues with “CSF” leakage.  (JE 3:35).  A CT scan 
of Mr. Diehl’s head showed no acute issues or cerebral atrophy.  (JE 3:39).  He was 
discharged.  (JE 3:39).   
 
Mr. Diehl had a “DSM day 1, right side down” performed at the Mayo Clinic on 
August 10, 2023.  (JE 8:57).  He was diagnosed with a “CSF leak.”  (JE 8:57).   
 
On August 11, 2023, Mr. Diehl reported to the emergency department at the 
Mayo Clinic reporting a generalized tonic seizure.  (JE 8:55-56).  Mr. Diehl was told that 
he went rigid with his arms and legs extended for about 10 seconds followed by an 
abnormal breathing pattern and confusion.  (JE 8:55).  A CT of his head showed 
significant intracranial contrast and “some evidence of pneumocephalus on the right.”  
(JE 8:56).  The evaluating physician opined that the seizure was provoked by 
contrast/normocephaly, and that he was hopeful that this would resolve.  (JE 8:56).   
 
Mr. Diehl had an Onyx embolization of CSF venous fistulas at the right C6 and 
right T12 levels.  (JE 8:63-64).   
Mr. Diehl had a “DSM day 2, left side down” on August 11, 2023, at the Mayo 
Clinic.  (JE 8:58-62).  It was noted that the MRI of the brain suggested CSF hypotension 
“including subtle effacement of prepontine cistern and subtle dural enhancement and 
possible thickening.”  (JE 8:59).  MRI of the spine showed no evidence of extradural 
fluids.  (JE 8:59).  The record continued, “[d]igital subtraction myelography suggest CSF 
fistula on the right at C6-7 as well as at T12-L1.”  (JE 8:59).  His seizure was noted.  (JE 
8:59).  For his spontaneous CSF leak, it was noted he would undergo embolization.  (JE 
8:59).   
In an undated record that followed his embolization, Mr. Diehl visited with a Mayo 
Clinic provider via telemedicine.  (JE 8:60-61).  He noted significant improvement 
following the procedure, including almost complete resolution of his headaches.  (JE 

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 12 
8:60).  He continued to experience some numbness in his fingers.  (JE 8:60-61).  Mr. 
Diehl testified that this procedure only helped to alleviate his symptoms temporarily.  
(Testimony). 
Mr. Diehl received a letter on October 17, 2023, indicating that his position was 
going to be eliminated following his return from leave.  (DE K:75).   
On November 9, 2023, Mr. Diehl sent a message to the department of neurology 
at the Mayo Clinic.  (JE 8:65).  He indicated that he had been doing “really well and not 
having headaches for the last few months.”  (JE 8:65).  However, over the last week, he 
began experiencing severe migraines again at night.  (JE 8:65).  These migraines 
sometimes carried over into the next day.  (JE 8:65).   
On November 29, 2023, Mr. Diehl visited the division of pain medicine at the 
Mayo Clinic.  (JE 8:66-67).  Mr. Diehl told the provider that his refractory headaches 
reoccurred “in the setting of a discovered CSF leak status post onyx embolization of the 
CSF-venous fistula.”  (JE 8:67).  According to the provider, the distribution of Mr. Diehl’s 
pain was consistent with a bilateral greater and lesser occipital neuralgia and a bilateral 
supraorbital neuralgia.  (JE 8:67).  A recent MRI of the brain showed no changes from a 
prior MRI.  (JE 8:67).  The provider performed greater and lesser occipital nerve blocks 
and a supraorbital nerve block.  (JE 8:67).   
According to the defendants’ discovery responses, Mr. Diehl’s employment with 
Wells Fargo ended on November 30, 2023, as his position was eliminated.  (CE 5:42; 
DE M:81).   
Mr. Diehl had a telemedicine visit with Mark Whealy, M.D., of the neurology 
department at the Mayo Clinic on December 1, 2023.  (JE 8:68-69).  Mr. Diehl noted 
that his headaches returned two weeks prior, especially in the afternoon and evening.  
(JE 8:68).  He described these headaches as similar to those which he experienced 
prior to his embolization.  (JE 8:68).  Dr. Whealy opined that Mr. Diehl experienced a 
recurrent CSF venous fistula, and recommended a repeat digital subtraction 
myelogram.  (JE 8:69).   
On December 5, 2023, Mr. Diehl returned to the Mayo Clinic for another 
myelogram.  (JE 8:70-72).  Dr. Whealy found nothing on the myelogram, and thus 
suggested a blood patch.  (JE 8:72).   
Mr. Diehl returned to the Mayo Clinic on December 6, 2023, for an epidural blood 
patch injection at multiple levels.  (JE 8:73-75).  Mr. Diehl tolerated the procedure well.  
(JE 8:73).   
 
On January 5, 2024, Mr. Diehl participated in a telemedicine visit with the Mayo 
Clinic.  (JE 8:76-77).  Mr. Diehl found that he had a 15 percent to 20 percent 
improvement in his headaches since the procedure.  (JE 8:76).  His headaches were 
worse in the morning, for which he took Tylenol and ibuprofen.  (JE 8:76).   

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 13 
 
Dr. Whealy visited with Mr. Diehl via telemedicine on January 12, 2024.  (JE 
8:78-79).  Mr. Diehl noted that the pattern of his headaches changed following the 
procedure to place a blood patch.  (JE 8:78).  Now, his headaches were worse when he 
lay down, and when he awoke in the morning.  (JE 8:78).  Dr. Whealy opined that this 
may be “rebound intracranial hypertension.”  (JE 8:78).  He recommended increased 
prescription medication, and requested that Mr. Diehl follow-up with him in one month.  
(JE 8:78-79).   
 
On January 27, 2024, Mr. Diehl sent Dr. Whealy a message indicating that his 
migraines returned and caused him to be irritable.  (JE 8:80).  He also felt that he lost 
25 percent to 50 percent of his hearing due to “a ton of fluid in [his] head…”  (JE 8:80).  
He felt that he had constant drainage requiring him to blow his nose all of the time.  (JE 
8:80).  Dr. Whealy responded that, if laying down improved his headaches, Mr. Diehl 
may still have a CSF leak.  (JE 8:81).  Dr. Whealy recommended a “NM cisternogram” 
for further evaluation.  (JE 8:81).   
 
Mr. Diehl returned to visit Dr. Whealy at the Mayo Clinic again on February 27, 
2024.  (JE 8:82-83).  Based upon testing, Dr. Whealy opined that there was a low 
probability of a continued CSF.  (JE 8:83).  Dr. Whealy recommended Mr. Diehl 
discontinue a certain prescription medication due to certain findings.  (JE 8:83).  Dr. 
Whealy also recommended another non-targeted multilevel blood patch.  (JE 8:83).  If 
Mr. Diehl had a positive response to the blood patch, then Dr. Whealy recommended 
putting him on a wait list for a photon detector CT myelogram.  (JE 8:83).   
 
On March 7, 2024, Mr. Diehl had another round of epidural blood patch injections 
at multiple levels.  (JE 8:84).  Mr. Diehl tolerated the procedure well.  (JE 8:84).   
 
Mr. Diehl had a telemedicine visit with Dr. Whealy on April 16, 2024.  (JE 8:85-
86).  Mr. Diehl indicated that since March 21, 2024, he started feeling “much better” with 
no headaches for several weeks.  (JE 8:85).  He then started to have moderate “livable” 
headaches.  (JE 8:85).  Dr. Whealy noted that Mr. Diehl was on a wait list for photon 
myelograms.  (JE 8:85).  In the interim, Dr. Whealy recommended another blood patch.  
(JE 8:86).   
 
On May 3, 2024, Mr. Diehl had another epidural blood patch injection at multiple 
levels of his spine.  (JE 8:87).   
 
Mr. Diehl sent the Mayo Clinic a message on May 12, 2024, indicating that he 
experienced severe low back pain following his blood patch placement.  (JE 8:88).  He 
also noted a lack of stamina and that he vomited four times after mowing the lawn.  (JE 
8:88).  The provider at the Mayo Clinic wrote back with some limitations on his physical 
activities and also with some questions.  (JE 8:88).  In response, Mr. Diehl noted that 
his headaches had not yet improved, but that his back pain felt better.  (JE 8:89).  Dr. 
Wheatly placed an order for a nurse visit.  (JE 8:89).   

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 14 
 
The recommended nurse visit occurred on June 3, 2024, with a nurse from the 
Mayo Clinic.  (JE 8:90-91).  Mr. Diehl noted that he started feeling better about one 
week prior, but that he continued to have headaches.  (JE 8:90).   
 
On June 13, 2024, Mr. Diehl had the previously recommended photon counting 
detector CT myelogram.  (JE 8:92-93).  According to Dr. Whealy, this showed no 
evidence of a CSF leak or fistula.  (JE 8:92).  Dr. Whealy noted that, despite this finding, 
Mr. Diehl continued to have “significant benefit with blood patches…”  (JE 8:92).  Mr. 
Diehl also noted that taking topiramate provided him with relief, as he experienced a 
terrible migraine following a missed dose.  (JE 8:92).  Dr. Whealy recommended 
another non-targeted blood patch, along with symptomatic management of his migraine.  
(JE 8:92-93).  Dr. Whealy also discussed using a Cefaly device with Mr. Diehl.  (JE 
8:93).   
 
Mr. Diehl had another blood patch procedure on June 14, 2024, at the Mayo 
Clinic.  (JE 8:94-95).  He tolerated the procedure well.  (JE 8:94-95).   
 
On August 30, 2024, Dr. Whealy met with Mr. Diehl again at the Mayo Clinic.  (JE 
8:96-97).  Mr. Diehl received injections of Botox in an effort to treat his chronic 
migraines.  (JE 8:96-97).   
 
Mr. Diehl had a telemedicine visit with Dr. Whealy on October 22, 2024.  (JE 
8:98).  Mr. Diehl was unsure if he had any benefit from the Botox injections, yet.  (JE 
8:98).  He was to return to have an additional blood patch on November 1, 2024.  (JE 
8:98).  Dr. Whealy also discussed a repeat MRI of the brain.  (JE 8:98).   
 
Mr. Diehl testified that Dr. Whealy told him that his CSF issues were due to his 
COVID infection.  (Testimony).  I did not find any medical records documenting this 
opinion from Dr. Whealy.   
 
On November 1, 2024, Mr. Diehl returned to the Mayo Clinic for another blood 
patch placement.  (JE 8:99-100).   
 
At the arrangement of claimant’s counsel, Mr. Diehl underwent an IME with John 
Kuhnlein, D.O., M.P.H., F.A.C.P.M., F.A.C.O.E.M.  (CE 1:1-22).  The examination itself 
occurred on October 22, 2024.  (CE 1:1-22).  Mr. Diehl testified that this examination 
lasted for four hours.  (Testimony).  Dr. Kuhnlein issued a report outlining his findings 
from the exam and his opinions on November 18, 2024.  (CE 1:1-22).  Dr. Kuhnlein 
began his report by outlining Mr. Diehl’s job responsibilities at Wells Fargo.  (CE 1:1-2).  
Mr. Diehl noted that he worked in a large room at an office, and managed employees 
sitting in one row of cubes.  (CE 1:1-2).  He noted that he was not aware of any 
measures taken by Wells Fargo in their HVAC systems in order to prevent viruses from 
spreading.  (CE 1:2).   
Mr. Diehl outlined his trip to Florida for the Wells Fargo sales conference in April 
of 2022.  (CE 1:2).  He flew in a large aircraft to attend the conference, and rode in a 
bus with other attendees.  (CE 1:2).  As noted in his testimony, there were a large 
number of attendees of the conference.  (CE 1:2).  Mr. Diehl recounted hearing 

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 15 
occasional coughs or sneezes, but he did not recall interacting with any visibly ill 
employees.  (CE 1:2).  He then returned to Iowa on another large aircraft.  (CE 1:2).  Mr. 
Diehl told Dr. Kuhnlein that there was no vaccination or mask policy in place during his 
trip to Florida, as “staff members complained enough that these requirements were 
discontinued…”  (CE 1:2).  Mr. Diehl was not aware of any COVID infections amongst 
those with whom he worked prior to attending the Wells Fargo conference.  (CE 1:2).  
He told Dr. Kuhnlein that, during a meeting following his return from Florida, another 
manager indicated that another employee tested positive for COVID.  (CE 1:2).  He also 
noted hearing that 10 to 15 other attendees also became ill with COVID; however, he 
did not know who these people were, nor where they were during the sales conference.  
(CE 1:2).  He then outlined the onset of his symptoms and his medical care.  (CE 1:2-
11).   
Mr. Diehl told Dr. Kuhnlein that he had constant bitemporal headaches radiating 
to the occipital area, the neck, and the trapezius area.  (CE 1:11).  Recently to the IME, 
Mr. Diehl began experiencing frontal aspects of headaches.  (CE 1:12).  His headaches 
were worse in the morning and evening.  (CE 1:12).  He also described brain fog and 
short-term memory issues.  (CE 1:12).  Mr. Diehl also noted having musculoskeletal 
aches and pains following placement of blood patches.  (CE 1:12).  Mr. Diehl reported 
limitations in his sports and hobbies due to his ongoing headaches.  (CE 1:13).  Dr. 
Kuhnlein then completed a physical examination of Mr. Diehl.  (CE 1:13-15).  Based 
upon his review of the medical records, the claimant’s history, and his physical 
examination, Dr. Kuhnlein provided the claimant with the following diagnoses: 
1) COVID infection 
a) Chronic migraine headaches 
i) 
Status post single seizure after 8/10/2023 myelogram 
ii) 
C6 and T12 CDF venous fistula with 8/17/2023 C6 and T12 
embolization (Brinkiji) 
(1) Musculoskeletal 
neck 
pain 
after 
the 
embolization 
procedure (also CT myelogram report, 12/4/2023) 
iii) 
Findings suggesting intracranial hypotension 
iv) 
Medication-induced decreased red count, leukopenia and 
neutropenia-resolved 
b) Reduced sense of smell by report 
c) Hearing loss right ear-resolved 
d) Upper respiratory tract symptoms-resolved 
e) GI symptoms returned to baseline 
2) Concurrent enteropathogenic E. coli infection of unknown etiology-
resolved 
(CE 1:15).   
 
Dr. Kuhnlein’s report continued with his opinions regarding causation of Mr. 
Diehl’s COVID infection.  (CE 1:15-16).  Dr. Kuhnlein opined, “[i]t is more likely than not 
that Mr. Diehl was exposed to the COVID virus and contracted it during the Wells Fargo 
Boca Raton sales conference.  The chronic migraine headaches developed as a result 

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 16 
of the infection.  He developed a seizure after the myelogram as a sequela to the 
original infection.”  (CE 1:16).  He also opined that Mr. Diehl’s musculoskeletal neck and 
right radicular pain were a sequela to the embolization procedure for the CSF venous 
fistula “that became symptomatic as a result of the COVID infection.”  (CE 1:16).  Dr. 
Kuhnlein continued, “[t]his symptom spectrum would represent a form of long COVID 
that would more likely than not be related to the workplace exposure.”  (CE 1:16).  Dr. 
Kuhnlein then noted that COVID was “ubiquitous at the time Mr. Diehl…” contracted it, 
which “…suggests that he could have been exposed in multiple locations.”  (CE 1:16).  
However, Dr. Kuhnlein felt that Mr. Diehl had “no known nonoccupational exposure to 
the virus...” as Mr. Diehl’s wife traveled with him and did not contract COVID.  (CE 
1:16).  Dr. Kuhnlein concluded noting that: 
Mr. Diehl was in fairly close quarters at this meeting with over 1000 other 
Wells Fargo employees and discovered upon returning that some of the 
employees from his local group had developed COVID.  Within a few days 
of returning from the meeting (while he more likely than not incubated the 
infection), he turned positive just before his significant symptoms stated.  
With his chronology and a lack of known nonoccupational exposure, to state 
that he was exposed because the virus was ubiquitous would be 
speculative.  He was in an environment where the virus was known to infect 
coworkers, so it would be more likely than not that he would have been 
exposed in the same environment with those coworkers. 
(CE 1:16).   
 
Dr. Kuhnlein placed Mr. Diehl at MMI as of June 14, 2024.  (CE 1:16).  He 
recommended that Mr. Diehl continue to follow-up with the providers at the Mayo Clinic.  
(CE 1:16).  He then used the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 
Fifth Edition, to provide an impairment rating for Mr. Diehl.  (CE 1:16-17).  Dr. Kuhnlein 
noted that “COVID did not exist when the Fifth Edition was originally published, so it is 
not specifically addressed in The Guides.”  (CE 1:16).  Thus, he felt that the instructions 
on page 11 were “helpful.”  (CE 1:16).  He then turned to Chapter 18 of the Guides to 
provide Mr. Diehl with a 3 percent whole person impairment for his chronic migraines, 
which included a rating for cognitive dysfunction, as Dr. Kuhnlein felt that Mr. Diehl’s 
headaches seemed to be producing the same despite “…no evidence in the currently 
available record that the cognitive dysfunction is otherwise related to the COVID 
infection.”  (CE 1:17).  Dr. Kuhnlein then provided a permanent impairment based upon 
“the cervical myofascial response after the embolization procedure, his right sided 
symptoms after the procedure and the Onyx casts noted after the embolization 
procedure… as a sequela to the CSF embolization.”  (CE 1:17).  Dr. Kuhnlein used the 
DRE method based upon pages 379-380 of the Guides, and placed Mr. Diehl into the 
DRE Cervical Category II.  (CE 1:17).  Based upon this, he provided Mr. Diehl with a six 
percent whole person impairment.  (CE 1:17).  Using the Combined Values Chart on 
page 604 of the Guides, Dr. Kuhnlein combined the 3 percent whole person impairment 
with the 6 percent whole person impairment to arrive at a 9 percent whole person 
impairment for Mr. Diehl.  (CE 1:17).   

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 17 
 
Dr. Kuhnlein concluded his report by offering proposed permanent restrictions for 
Mr. Diehl.  (CE 1:17).  Dr. Kuhnlein recommended that Mr. Diehl only lift 50 pounds 
occasionally from the floor to the waist and from the waist to the shoulder, and 20 
pounds occasionally over his shoulder.  (CE 1:17).  Mr. Diehl could sit, stand, or walk, 
on an unrestricted basis.  (CE 1:17).  He could occasionally bend at the waist and crawl.  
(CE 1:17).  He could frequently kneel.  (CE 1:17).  He had no restrictions regarding his 
lower extremities, vision, hearing, or communications.  (CE 1:17).  Dr. Kuhnlein 
restricted Mr. Diehl from working in exceptionally bright or loud environments.  (CE 
1:17).  He could work on computer monitors for 15 minutes with alternating 10-minute 
rests.  (CE 1:17).   
At the arrangement of defendants, Mr. Diehl visited with Robert Broghammer, 
M.D., R.Ph., for an IME on December 9, 2024.  (DE D:32-54).  Dr. Broghammer is 
board certified in occupational medicine.  (DE F:63).  Mr. Diehl testified that he only met 
with Dr. Broghammer for 20 minutes, despite the medical record indicating that he met 
with Dr. Broghammer for 45 minutes.  (Testimony).  Dr. Broghammer issued a report 
following the IME outlining his opinions.  (DE D:32-54).  Dr. Broghammer answered 
certain questions from a letter from defendants’ counsel in his report.  (DE D:32-54).  
This letter contained a few inaccuracies; however, they are not fatal to Dr. 
Broghammer’s opinions, and it does not appear that his opinions are substantially 
based upon this information.  In preparing his report, Dr. Broghammer relied on medical 
records, Mr. Diehl’s deposition transcript, and his examination and interview with Mr. 
Diehl, in preparing his report.  (DE D:32).   
Dr. Broghammer began his report with a medical records summary.  (DE D:32-
47).  This review also included review of Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME report and Dr. McKinsey’s 
IME report.  (DE D:43-46).  Dr. Broghammer noted some criticisms of Dr. Kuhnlein’s 
report, including that Dr. Kuhnlein ignored the opinions of Dr. Whealy, that there was no 
known occupational exposure to COVID, and that no Wells Fargo employee knew of 
coworkers being infected with COVID from the sales conference.  (DE D:44).  Dr. 
Broghammer also commented that Mr. Diehl’s headaches were due to a spontaneous 
CSF leak and not his COVID infection.  (DE D:45).  He also disagreed with Dr. 
Kuhnlein’s impairment rating opinion using the DRE cervical category II, as Mr. Diehl did 
not have radicular symptoms.  (DE D:45).   
Mr. Diehl told Dr. Broghammer, “[b]asically, I got COVID when I was in Florida at 
a work conference for Wells Fargo.”  (DE D:47).  He further noted that he experienced 
an E. coli infection after returning from Florida.  (DE D:47).  Following his recovery from 
these illnesses, Mr. Diehl continued to experience severe headaches that worsened 
over time.  (DE D:47).  At the time of the examination, Mr. Diehl continued to suffer from 
headaches which caused him to lose his train of thought.  (DE D:47).  At times, he woke 
during the night with severe headaches.  (DE D:47-48).  He also experienced back pain 
following blood patch procedures.  (DE D:47).   
Dr. Broghammer examined Mr. Diehl and found him to have normal facial 
expressions and facial movement.  (DE D:48-49).  He also noted full range of motion in 
the extremities.  (DE D:49).  He performed a seated straight leg test, which was 

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 18 
negative for radicular symptoms.  (DE D:49).  He displayed a normal gait and normal 
posture.  (DE D:49).   
The doctor diagnosed Mr. Diehl with a remote history of COVID infection in April 
of 2022, and anosmia secondary to his COVID infection.  (DE D:49).  He also 
diagnosed Mr. Diehl with three conditions which he noted were “non-COVID-related.”  
(DE D:49).  These were: a spontaneous cerebrospinal fluid leak, intracranial 
hypotension, and chronic migraine headaches.  (DE D:49).  Dr. Broghammer related the 
second and third diagnoses to the spontaneous cerebrospinal fluid leak.  (DE D:49).  Dr. 
Broghammer opined that Mr. Diehl was likely exposed to COVID between April 12, 
2022, and April 24, 2022, as the incubation period for COVID was “around five days, but 
[could] range from two to fourteen days…”  (DE D:49).  Dr. Broghammer continued by 
opining that he could not identify a date “beyond a mere possibility of when he was 
exposed to COVID...” and that it was “…certainly possible it occurred during the 
conference and it is also just as possible that it occurred during Mr. Diehl’s personal 
time that occurred prior to and after the conference.”  (DE D:49).  Dr. Broghammer 
concluded that it was “…not possible beyond a reasonable degree of medical certainty 
to state that Mr. Diehl was exposed during the conference in Boca Raton, Florida[,] 
when he had multiple other potential sources of exposure..."  (DE D:50).  Dr. 
Broghammer opined that Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinions were based upon incomplete 
information since a number of Wells Fargo employees contradicted Mr. Diehl’s assertion 
that other Wells Fargo employees tested positive for COVID following the sales 
conference.  (DE D:50).  Dr. Broghammer opined further that it was impossible to state 
when Mr. Diehl was exposed to COVID.  (DE D:50).   
Dr. Broghammer was asked whether having COVID could cause the symptoms 
of which Mr. Diehl complained following his COVID infection.  (DE D:50).  Dr. 
Broghammer, citing to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, noted that long 
COVID was “a chronic condition that occurs after the SARS-CoV-2 infection is present 
for at least three months.”  (DE D:50).  Symptoms of long COVID, according to Dr. 
Broghammer included: fatigue, brain fog, post exertional malaise, symptoms that 
worsen after physical or mental effort, fever, difficulty breathing, coughing, chest pain, 
heart palpitations, difficulty thinking or concentrating, headaches, sleep problems, 
dizziness, pins and needles feelings, change in smell or taste, depression or anxiety, 
diarrhea, stomach pain, constipation, joint or muscle pain, and a rash.  (DE D:51).  Dr. 
Broghammer noted that Mr. Diehl had some of these symptoms, but that Mr. Diehl’s 
ongoing issues were due to his spontaneous cerebrospinal fluid leak which was 
unrelated to his COVID infection.  (DE D:51).  Dr. Broghammer opined, “[i]t should be 
noted that a spontaneous leak is just that – spontaneous in nature and often occurs 
without any known cause.”  (DE D:51).  Further, there was no evidence to show that Mr. 
Diehl’s COVID infection aggravated any of his pre-existing conditions such as chronic 
diarrhea or anxiety and depression.  (DE D:52).   
The doctor placed Mr. Diehl at MMI for his COVID infection within two weeks of 
his infection.  (DE D:52).  Since Mr. Diehl had a viral infection, Dr. Broghammer 
recommended no permanent restrictions.  (DE D:52).  He also opined that Mr. Diehl had 
no permanent impairment pursuant to the Guides due to his COVID infection.  (DE 

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 19 
D:52). Dr. Broghammer also recommended no additional medical care related to his 
COVID symptoms.  (DE D:52).   
Dr. Broghammer concluded his report by addressing Mr. Diehl’s comment that 
Dr. Whealy told him that his COVID infection caused his spontaneous CSF leak.  (DE 
D:53).  The doctor noted, as I observed, that Dr. Whealy did not express this opinion in 
any of his medical records.  (DE D:53).  Additionally, Dr. Broghammer performed a brief 
review of available medical studies and found only one case of a nine-year-old child 
who sustained a CSF leak following a COVID infection.  (DE D:53).  According to 
authors of the study, the causes of the leak could have been traumatic or idiopathic in 
nature and merely concluded that the onset of the CSF leak in the child “might involve 
COVID-19.”  (DE D:53).  Thus, Dr. Brogahmmer concluded that the theory that Mr. 
Diehl’s CSF leak was caused by his COVID infection was only a medical possibility and 
not a medical probability.  (DE D:53).   
 
In a report solicited by the defendants, dated December 13, 2024, David 
McKinsey, M.D., provided his opinions regarding Mr. Diehl’s condition.  (DE A:1-6).  Dr. 
McKinsey noted that he responded to questions in a letter from defendants’ counsel.  
(DE A:1).  In the letter from defendants’ counsel, there are some minor inaccuracies.  
(DE B:7-13).  These inaccuracies are not fatal to the opinions of Dr. McKinsey.   
Dr. McKinsey is board certified in internal medicine.  (DE C:15).  He is the chief 
of the infectious diseases section at Research Medical Center in Kansas City, Missouri, 
and is also a clinical professor of medicine at the University of Kansas School of 
Medicine.  (DE C:14).  He also was in private practice for Metro Infectious Disease 
Consultants in Kansas City, Missouri.  (DE C:14).  According to his CV, Dr. McKinsey 
assisted in authoring several articles on topics concerning COVID.  (DE C:25-26).   
In preparing his report, Dr. McKinsey reviewed medical records from a number of 
providers, Mr. Diehl’s deposition, and Dr. Kuhnlein’s IME report.  (DE A:1-6).  Dr. 
McKinsey noted that Mr. Diehl attended two family events to celebrate Easter on April 
17, 2022, and then left for the Wells Fargo meeting in Florida on April 19, 2022.  (DE 
A:2).  He recounted being informed that a coworker tested positive for COVID on April 
27, 2022, leading him to take a COVID test, which was positive.  (DE A:2).  He began 
exhibiting symptoms on April 28, 2022.  (DE A:2).  The report then outlined Mr. Diehl’s 
medical treatment through May of 2024.  (DE A:2-4).   
Dr. McKinsey then outlined his opinions on Mr. Diehl’s COVID infection.  (DE 
A:4-6).  Dr. McKinsey noted that the dominant variant of COVID at the time of Mr. 
Diehl’s infection was the “Omicron variant,” and that it was likely that Mr. Diehl was 
infected by this variant.  (DE A:4).  Dr. McKinsey noted further that Mr. Diehl’s illness did 
not occur within the setting of an outbreak, which was defined as “…a higher incidence 
of infections in a specific location than expected.”  (DE A:4).  Because of this, the 
source of Mr. Diehl’s COVID infection could not be determined with certainty; however, 
the date of exposure to COVID could be “extrapolated by assessing the known 
incubation period of the Omicron variant and the date of onset of symptoms…”  (DE 
A:4).  Dr. McKinsey noted that the incubation period for the Omicron variant of COVID 

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 20 
was between 2 and 12 days.  (DE A:4).  Dr. McKinsey noted that Dr. Casey’s report 
outlined symptoms beginning four days prior to his visit on April 28, 2022.  (DE A:4).  
Since Mr. Diehl had a positive test on April 27, 2022, and became symptomatic on April 
24, 2022, Dr. McKinsey opined that Mr. Diehl could have been exposed as early as April 
12, 2022, or April 16, 2022.  (DE A:4).  These dates occurred prior to Mr. Diehl’s trip to 
Florida.  (DE A:4).  Dr. McKinsey noted that the date of exposure could also have been 
as late as April 26, 2022, which was after Mr. Diehl returned from Florida.  (DE A:4).  Dr. 
McKinsey continued: “In my extensive experience most COVID-19 cases outside of 
outbreak settings have been acquired after exposure to family members.  COVID 
infection can be transmitted by persons who are asymptomatic and are in the incubation 
period of their illnesses.”  (DE A:4).  He further noted that Mr. Diehl spent considerable 
time with family members on April 17, 2022.  (DE A:4).  Dr. McKinsey concluded that,  
Based on the available evidence in this case it is not possible within a 
reasonable degree of medical certainty to pinpoint the source of Mr. Diehl’s 
COVID exposure and the date on which this occurred beyond mere 
possibilities.  COVID remained widespread throughout the United States in 
April 2022.  It is plausible that his parents and children had COVID-19 
although they were not tested and thus none had a confirmed diagnosis of 
COVID.  Whether or not Mr. Diehl acquired COVID-19 from an 
unrecognized contact in the community, a family member, or a coworker 
cannot be ascertained retrospectively.   
(DE A:4).   
 
Dr. McKinsey was then asked whether Mr. Diehl contracted COVID while at the 
Wells Fargo conference.  (DE A:5).  He opined, “[t]here is no evidence to suggest that 
Mr. Diehl’s exposure was a result of attendance at the conference in Florida as opposed 
to some other source, beyond a mere possibility.”  (DE A:5).  He noted that a confirmed 
outbreak among attendees would be expected “had this been the source of his 
infection.”  (DE A:5).  Dr. McKinsey was critical of Dr. Kuhnlein’s opinions that Mr. Diehl 
acquired COVID at the Wells Fargo conference “because some of his unnamed 
coworkers had developed COVID.”  (DE A:5).  Dr. McKinsey opined, “…it is just as likely 
that he acquired the infection from another person at a location other than the work 
conference…” as most cases in adults outside of confirmed outbreaks were acquired 
from children.  (DE A:5).  Dr. McKinsey further concluded that Mr. Diehl’s presence at 
the Wells Fargo conference was not a substantial factor or cause of his COVID infection 
due to a lack of a confirmed outbreak among conference attendees.  (DE A:5).  He 
further opined “…it is plausible that his exposure occurred up to a week before he 
attended the conference, or several days after the end of the conference…” and that his 
exposure occurred either from a family member or someone else in the community due 
to the widespread prevalence of COVID in the community in April of 2022.  (DE A:5).   
 
The report continued with Dr. McKinsey opining as to whether COVID could 
cause the symptoms and conditions developed by Mr. Diehl.  (DE A:5).  Dr. McKinsey 
noted Mr. Diehl’s recurrent severe headaches following his COVID infection.  (DE A:5).  
He noted that, “to [his] knowledge his chronic headaches have not been attributed by 

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 21 
any of his treating health care providers to COVID-19, and the etiology of the 
headaches, which have persisted despite treatment of possible cerebrospinal fluid-
venous fistula, has been unclear.”  (DE A:5).  Dr. McKinsey noted that he treated a large 
number of patients with COVID and long COVID, and that he had not seen any patients 
with long-term headaches as a complication of the infection.  (DE A:5).  Further, he 
noted that medical literature did not report similar cases to Mr. Diehl’s.  (DE A:5).  Thus, 
Dr. McKinsey concluded that Mr. Diehl’s ongoing headaches were not related to his 
COVID infection in April of 2022.  (DE A:5).  Additionally, Mr. Diehl’s COVID was not 
known to aggravate any of his prior conditions, such as exocrine pancreatic 
insufficiency.  (DE A:6).    
Mr. Diehl had a DSM day 1, right side down, performed at the Mayo Clinic on 
December 19, 2024.  (JE 8:101).  He had a second day of this same procedure on 
December 20, 2024.  (JE 8:102-103).   
 
On December 27, 2024, Mr. Diehl had another blood patch placed at the Mayo 
Clinic.  (JE 8:104).  The procedure occurred with no complications.  (JE 8:104).   
Since that time, Mr. Diehl’s headaches returned.  (Testimony).  He has treated 
with blood patches and Botox in an attempt to alleviate his headaches.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Diehl was cleared to return to work in October of 2023; however, he was 
informed shortly before returning that he was laid off.  (Testimony).  He was told that 
there was no need for his position anymore.  (Testimony).   
At the time of the hearing, Mr. Diehl experienced worsening symptoms, including 
what he described as “lightning-bolt headaches” that shoot from his eyebrows into his 
temples and through the back of his head.  (Testimony).  He described waking in the 
morning, and then having a migraine begin 5 to 10 minutes after he gets out of his 
morning shower.  (Testimony).  He takes Tylenol and ibuprofen to make the pain 
manageable on a day to day basis.  (Testimony).  At times, his headache will worsen 
into the afternoon and evening.  (Testimony).  His migraines inhibit his ability to fall 
asleep and stay asleep.  (Testimony).   
Following his termination from Wells Fargo, Mr. Diehl found a job as a sales 
manager in April of 2024.  (Testimony).  However, he did not like the work in insurance 
sales, and quit that position after two weeks.  (Testimony).  Then, on September 3, 
2024, he started a job at The Dana Company, selling property and casualty insurance, 
commercial insurance, and personal insurance.  (Testimony).  In that position, he 
earned seventy and 00/100 dollars ($70,000.00) per year.  (Testimony).  He also earned 
a commission, but had not worked at the company long enough to have earned much 
commission.  (Testimony).  He testified that he was unsure how long he would be able 
to continue in his current position, as using computers and focusing for too long 
aggravated his headaches.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Diehl testified that, since April 27, 2022, he has never tested positive for 
COVID.  (Testimony).  He indicated that neither his ex-wife, nor his children, ever tested 

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 22 
positive for COVID.  (Testimony).  Mr. Diehl indicated that he received the COVID 
vaccine and a booster, manufactured by Moderna.  (Testimony).   
Mr. Diehl testified that wearing masks was not mandated in the state of Florida, 
nor at the conference.  (Testimony).  He also testified that he did not wear a mask 
during this time.  (Testimony).   
Testimony was elicited from Mr. Diehl regarding his activities prior to attending 
the April of 2022 sales conference.  (Testimony).  He noted that he spent time with his 
daughter on April 10, 2022, as she broke her arm.  (Testimony).  On April 11, 2022, he 
spent the day at home with his son and daughter, and at the hospital with his daughter.  
(Testimony).  On April 12, 2022, he was at Iowa Methodist Medical Center, as his 
daughter’s broken arm was receiving treatment.  (Testimony).  On April 15, 2022, he 
was in Clive, Iowa.  (Testimony).  On April 16, 2022, Mr. Diehl went to the Omaha Zoo 
with his wife, daughter, and one of his nieces.  (Testimony).  He celebrated Easter on 
April 17, 2022, with members of his wife’s family and his family.  (Testimony).   
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established has the burden 
of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence.  Iowa Rule of Appellate 
Procedure 6.904(3).   
Affirmative Defense Pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.23 
Before considering any of the other disputed issues in this case, I will first 
consider whether the defendants have proven an affirmative defense regarding timely 
notice pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.23.  The defendants assert that Mr. Diehl failed 
to provide Wells Fargo with notice within 90-days, as required by Iowa Code section 
85.23.  The claimant argues that he did provide actual notice to Wells Fargo on April 27, 
2022, during a conference call.   
Iowa Code section 85.23 requires an employee to give notice of the occurrence 
of an injury to the employer within 90 days from the date of the occurrence, unless the 
employer has actual knowledge of the occurrence of the injury.   
The purpose of the 90-day notice or actual knowledge requirement is to give the 
employer an opportunity to timely investigate the facts surrounding the injury.  The 
actual knowledge alternative to notice is met when the employer, as a reasonably 
conscientious manager, is alerted to the possibility of a potential compensation claim 
through information which makes the employer aware that the injury occurred and that it 
may be work related.  Dillinger v. City of Sioux City, 368 N.W.2d 176, 180 (Iowa 1985); 
Robinson v. Dept. of Transp., 296 N.W.2d 809, 811 (Iowa 1980).   
Failure to give notice is an affirmative defense, which the employer must prove 
by a preponderance of the evidence.  DeLong v. Iowa State Highway Commission, 229 
Iowa 700, 295 N.W. 91, 92 (1940).   
 

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 23 
In this case, Mr. Diehl attended a sales conference for Wells Fargo from April 19, 
2022, to April 24, 2022.  After returning from the conference, Mr. Diehl testified that he 
was on a weekly conference call with other Wells Fargo employees, led by his 
supervisor, Ms. Swords.  During this conference call, Mr. Diehl testified that Mr. Reichert 
informed the participants on the call that one of his team members in Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, who also attended the sales conference, tested positive for COVID.  In 
response to this information, Mr. Diehl tested himself for COVID.  His test was positive.   
Mr. Diehl testified that, upon receiving a positive test, he informed the fellow 
Wells Fargo employees on the call and immediately began to quarantine.  During his 
deposition, he testified that he told those on the conference call that, not only did he test 
positive for COVID, he felt he contracted it while at the Wells Fargo conference.   
Wells Fargo employees provided testimony during the hearing as to this issue.  
Neither Ms. Swords, nor Mr. Reichert recalled Mr. Reichert mentioning that one of his 
team members tested positive for COVID following their return from the conference.  
Ms. Swords indicated that a revelation such as this would have stood out to her, as it 
would not have been a normal topic of conversation during one of these calls.  
Additionally, she noted that she did not recall Mr. Diehl mentioning a positive test during 
their call.  Ms. Cashatt testified similarly.  The parties stipulated that another Wells 
Fargo employee would have testified to the same recollection of Ms. Cashatt.  Upon 
cross-examination, several of the Wells Fargo witnesses agreed that this still may have 
happened, and that they simply did not recall any disclosure due to the passage of time 
since the conference call.  However, the Wells Fargo witnesses also indicated that a 
disclosure of this nature, or that a number of Wells Fargo employees testing positive for 
COVID following the conference, would have been a notable event for them.  Mr. Diehl 
also never used the internal Wells Fargo system to inform Wells Fargo of his COVID 
diagnosis.  However, it appears that this system was not widely used, nor was it 
mandatory.   
The claimant points to the first First Report of Injury (“FROI”) filed by Wells Fargo 
as evidence that Wells Fargo was on notice of Mr. Diehl’s COVID infection as of April 
19, 2022.  This FROI was filed on March 8, 2024.  This report indicated that the 
“administrator” was notified of Mr. Diehl’s COVID infection as of January 9, 2024.  The 
defendants filed a second FROI on November 18, 2024.  This FROI indicated that the 
employer was notified of Mr. Diehl’s COVID infection as of January 9, 2024.  An affidavit 
accompanying this second FROI indicated that the person who completed the first FROI 
was an employee of Sedgwick CMS, and that she was informed by Wells Fargo that the 
initial date of employer notification in the first FROI was incorrect.  It is clear from 
reviewing the evidence that the first FROI was filed with incorrect information.  If Mr. 
Diehl’s testimony is to believed, he did not inform Wells Fargo until at least April 27, 
2022, of his COVID infection.  Additionally, Mr. Diehl left for Florida on April 19, 2022.  
Thus, it is not possible for him to maintain his claim if the date of April 19, 2022, as the 
date of notification is correct.  Therefore, this element of the claimant’s argument is 
moot.   

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 24 
The claimant points to the testimony of Mr. Diehl as proof that he provided notice 
to Wells Fargo of his COVID infection on April 27, 2022, during a conference call.  The 
defendants elicited testimony from three different individuals as to this issue at the 
hearing.  All three individuals noted that they did not recall Mr. Diehl ever telling them 
that he tested positive for COVID during the conference call on April 27, 2022.  
However, they all admitted that it was possible that this occurred and they simply did not 
remember.  Mr. Diehl included a photo of his positive COVID test into evidence.  This 
was taken on April 27, 2022, at about 12:30 p.m.  This lines up with the time at which 
the conference call occurred.  There is also no reason that Mr. Diehl would have taken a 
random COVID test following his return from Florida while he showed no symptoms 
unless he had reason to believe he was exposed to COVID.  Considering Mr. Diehl was 
told another employee who attended the conference contracted COVID and then 
informed his manager that he received a positive test result, Mr. Diehl proved that he 
provided Wells Fargo with actual notice that he had a COVID infection following his 
return from the sales conference.  The defendants did nothing to rebut this evidence, 
except for producing employees who could not recall the specific events of the 
conference call.  It is the defendants’ burden to prove that Mr. Diehl did not provide 
notice, as this is an affirmative defense.  The defendants failed to carry their burden.  
This is not to say that Mr. Diehl contracted COVID at the sales conference.  It is simply 
an indication that the defendants did not meet their burden. 
Considering the foregoing, the defendants failed to prove their affirmative 
defense by a preponderance of the evidence.     
Arising out of and in the Course of Employment 
 
The claimant alleges that his COVID infection arose out of, and in the course of, 
his employment with Wells Fargo as a result of his infection during a sales conference 
attended on behalf of Wells Fargo.  The defendants argue that the claimant did not 
prove by a preponderance of the evidence that he contracted COVID specifically at the 
Wells Fargo sales conference. 
To receive workers’ compensation benefits, an injured employee must prove, by 
a preponderance of the evidence, that the employee’s injuries arose out of, and in the 
course of the employee’s employment with the employer.  2800 Corp. v. Fernandez, 
528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 1995).  The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or 
source of the injury.  The words “in the course of” refer to the time, place and 
circumstances of the injury.  Id.  An injury arises out of employment when a causal 
relationship exists between the employment and the injury.  Quaker Oats v. Ciha, 552 
N.W.2d 143, 151 (Iowa 1996).  The injury must be a rational consequence of a hazard 
connected with the employment and not merely incidental to the employment.  Koehler 
Elec. v. Willis, 608 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000).  The Iowa Supreme Court has held that an 
injury occurs “in the course of employment” when: 
it is within the period of employment at a place where the employee 
reasonably may be in performing his duties, and while he is fulfilling those 
duties or engaged in doing something incidental thereto.  An injury in the 

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 25 
course of employment embraces all injuries received while employed in 
furthering the employer’s business and injuries received on the employer’s 
premises, provided that the employee’s presence must ordinarily be 
required at the place of the injury, or, if not so required, employee’s 
departure from the usual place of employment must not amount to an 
abandonment of employment or be an act wholly foreign to his usual 
work.  An employee does not cease to be in the course of his employment 
merely because he is not actually engaged in doing some specifically 
prescribed task, if, in the course of his employment, he does some act which 
he deems necessary for the benefit or interest of his employer.   
Farmers Elevator Co. v. Manning, 286 N.W.2d 174, 177 (Iowa 1979).   
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
Mr. Diehl contends that he contracted COVID during a Wells Fargo sales 
conference in Florida sometime between April 19, 2022, and April 24, 2022.  In 
considering Mr. Diehl’s contention, it is important to consider his personal schedule in 
the time leading up to his COVID infection.   
On April 10, 2022, Mr. Diehl’s daughter broke her arm.  The next day, he spent 
some time at home with his children.  He also went to the hospital with his daughter for 
treatment of her broken arm.  On April 12, 2022, there are photos of Mr. Diehl with his 
daughter at Iowa Methodist Medical Center, a large hospital, for treatment of his 
daughter’s broken arm.  He spent time with his family on April 15, 2022.  He then went 
to the Omaha Zoo on April 16, 2022, with his ex-wife, daughter, and one of his 
daughter’s cousins.  While at the zoo, he was around a number of people.  He chose 
not to wear a mask during this trip.  He also visited a drive-through of a fast food 
restaurant on the way home from the zoo.  He then spent Easter at two family 
gatherings with his ex-wife’s family and his family.  These gatherings were indoors and 
unmasked.   
On April 19, 2022, Mr. Diehl and his ex-wife boarded an airplane to Florida.  They 
did not wear masks.  Mr. Diehl then spent the next few days at a Wells Fargo sales 
conference in Boca Raton, Florida.  His days were spent having breakfast with fellow 
Wells Fargo employees, listening to presentations, and having leisure time with other 
employees and their spouses.  Mr. Diehl spent his leisure time with several individuals 

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 26 
while he attended the conference.  These include Ms. Cashatt’s husband, Ms. Swords, 
his ex-wife, Ms. Cashatt, Mr. Witte, and Zach Gallick.1  Their activities included lounging 
at the pool or beach, dining together, golfing, and generally relaxing.  He also attended 
a concert by musical artist Flo Rida.   
Mr. Diehl also interacted with other Wells Fargo employees at the conference.  
Mr. Diehl did not recall interacting with any noticeably ill individuals during the 
conference, nor did he hear anyone coughing or sniffling beyond mere incidental 
coughs or sniffles.  He also did not recall anyone coughing on him or sneezing on him. 
Following the conclusion of the conference, Mr. Diehl and his ex-wife remained 
behind in Florida for one additional day.  They dined at several restaurants, enjoyed the 
hotel pool, and generally relaxed.  They then boarded an airplane and returned to Iowa 
on April 24, 2022.  Mr. Diehl then returned to work.  As noted above, he was informed 
during a conference call on April 27, 2022, that another Wells Fargo employee on Mr. 
Reichert’s team tested positive for COVID following his return from the conference.  
Despite his experiencing no symptoms, Mr. Diehl chose to take a COVID test, which 
returned a positive result.  There is no evidence indicating that Mr. Diehl was in close 
contact for any prolonged period of time with the infected individual on Mr. Reichert’s 
team.   
Mr. Diehl later learned that Mr. Witte also tested positive for COVID.  Mr. Witte 
testified that there were rumors swirling around Wells Fargo that at least 10 to 15 
people also tested positive for COVID following the conference, this included Nate 
Gallick.  However, as noted herein, Mr. Gallick did not testify at the hearing, so it is 
unclear as to whether this occurred.  Additionally, this testimony was contradicted by 
Wells Fargo employees such as Ms. Cashatt, Ms. Swords, and Mr. Reichert.  They all 
testified that it would have been memorable news if the sales conference resulted in a 
number of people contracting COVID.   
I have some credibility concerns regarding Mr. Witte.  He testified that he has 
known Mr. Diehl since middle school.  They also attended college together.  They have 
remained friends since that time.  They and their children continue to interact on a 
regular basis, including play-dates for their children and golfing excursions for the 
adults.  Considering their long relationship, it is possible that his testimony is biased in 
favor of Mr. Diehl.  The greater weight of the evidence indicates that no significant 
outbreak of COVID occurred among Wells Fargo employees following the sales 
conference.   
Mr. Diehl’s ex-wife never tested positive for COVID.  Additionally, Mr. Reichert, 
Ms. Swords, Ms. Swords’ wife, Ms. Cashatt, nor Ms. Cashatt’s husband, did not test 
positive for COVID following the conference, despite their participating in many of the 
same activities of the conference as Mr. Diehl.   
I next turn to the opinions of the medical providers.  The claimant presents the 
opinions of Dr. Kuhlein in support of the proposition that the claimant’s COVID infection 
                                                 
1 Mr. Gallick did not testify at the hearing.   

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 27 
arose out of and in the course of his employment with Wells Fargo.  Dr. Kuhnlein 
concluded that it was more likely than not that Mr. Diehl was exposed to COVID during 
the sales conference despite his later comment that COVID was “ubiquitous” at the time 
Mr. Diehl contracted it, which suggested that Mr. Diehl could have been exposed in 
multiple locations.  Dr. Kuhnlein opined:  
Mr. Diehl was in fairly close quarters at this meeting with over 1000 other 
Wells Fargo employees and discovered upon returning that some of the 
employees from his local group had developed COVID.  Within a few days 
of returning from the meeting (while he more likely than not incubated the 
infection), he turned positive just before his significant symptoms started.  
With his chronology and a lack of known nonoccupational exposure, to 
state that he was exposed because the virus was ubiquitous would be 
speculative.  He was in an environment where the virus was known to 
infect coworkers, so it would be more likely than not that he would have 
been exposed in the same environment with those coworkers. 
(CE 1:16).  Dr. Kuhnlein’s conclusion that multiple Wells Fargo employees contracted 
COVID following the conference is not supported by the facts in evidence.  Additionally, 
Dr. Kuhnlein’s report is silent as to his consideration of Mr. Diehl’s activities prior to 
attending the conference, such as visiting a hospital, attending multiple Easter 
gatherings, and making a trip to the Omaha Zoo.  The lack of consideration for these 
issues casts some doubt on Dr. Kuhnlein’s conclusions.   
The defendants provided a report from Dr. Broghammer.  As noted previously, 
there are some issues with information provided to Dr. Broghammer ahead of his IME 
with Mr. Diehl.  However, it does not appear that this faulty information was substantially 
relied upon by Dr. Broghammer in arriving at his opinions.  Dr. Broghammer opined that 
Mr. Diehl was likely exposed to COVID between April 12, 2022, and April 24, 2022, due 
to the incubation period of the virus being between two and fourteen days, with a 
general incubation period of five days.  Dr. Broghammer could not identify a date of 
infection beyond a mere possibility that it occurred during the conference.  He noted that 
it was “…certainly possible that it occurred during Mr. Diehl’s personal time that 
occurred prior to and after the conference…” and that it was “…not possible beyond a 
reasonable degree of medical certainty to state that Mr. Diehl was exposed during the 
conference in Boca Raton, Florida[,] when he had multiple other potential sources of 
exposure.”  (DE D:49-50).   
The defendants also rely on a report from Dr. McKinsey.  Dr. McKinsey is board 
certified in internal medicine and infectious disease.  He is the chief of infectious 
diseases section at Research Medical Center in Kansas City, Missouri, and is a clinical 
professor of medicine at the University of Kansas School of Medicine.  He also authored 
several articles on topics surrounding COVID.  He is unquestionably the most qualified 
doctor in this case to opine on matters of infectious diseases.   
Dr. McKinsey noted that the Omicron variant of COVID was the dominant variant 
of COVID circulating within the population at the time of Mr. Diehl’s infection.  Dr. 

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 28 
McKinsey rightfully noted that there was no documented outbreak of COVID at the 
Wells Fargo conference.  Considering the lack of a documented outbreak, Dr. McKinsey 
concluded that he could not determine with certainty the source of Mr. Diehl’s COVID 
infection.  He extrapolated the date of Mr. Diehl’s infection based upon the known 
incubation period for the Omicron variant of 2 to 12 days and the onset of Mr. Diehl’s 
symptoms.2  Based upon his review of the record, Dr. McKinsey opined that Mr. Diehl 
could have been exposed to COVID as early as April 12, 2022, or April 16, 2022, and as 
late as April 26, 2022.   
Dr. McKinsey outlined his experience with COVID infections, including his 
opinion that most cases occurring outside of a known outbreak setting were acquired 
after exposure to family members, as COVID could be transmitted by asymptomatic 
carriers or those in the incubation period.  Dr. McKinsey concluded that it was not 
possible, within a reasonable degree of medical certainty, to pinpoint the source of Mr. 
Diehl’s COVID exposure beyond a mere possibility.  His COVID infection could have 
been acquired from a number of sources, including a community contact, a family 
member, or a coworker.  This was especially true, according to Dr. McKinsey, because 
of the lack of a confirmed outbreak of COVID at the Wells Fargo conference.   
I find the opinions of Dr. Kuhnlein to be lacking in this case.  He does not provide 
enough detail to support his conclusions that Mr. Diehl became infected with COVID at 
the Wells Fargo conference.  Dr. Kuhnlein based his opinions on unconfirmed reports 
that employees from Wells Fargo who attended the conference became infected with 
COVID after returning from the conference.  The evidence shows that there was only 
one other confirmed attendee of the conference who contracted COVID, Mr. Witte.  
Additionally, Dr. Kuhnlein seems to discount Mr. Diehl’s attendance at several family 
gatherings and his trip to the popular Omaha Zoo when he noted that Mr. Diehl had a 
lack of known nonoccupational exposure.  He makes no mention of a possible 
timeframe in which Mr. Diehl may have been infected with COVID, unlike the other 
medical experts in this case.  He engages in no extended discussion of the COVID 
incubation period.   
Dr. Broghammer’s opinions are more clear than Dr. Kuhnlein’s.  However, they 
are bolstered when considering the subsequent opinions of Dr. McKinsey.  Dr. 
Broghammer noted that Mr. Diehl was likely exposed to COVID between April 12, 2022, 
and April 24, 2022.  This is similar in the range noted by Dr. McKinsey.  Overall, Dr. 
Broghammer’s opinions are persuasive.   
I find the opinions of Dr. McKinsey to be the most clear and consistent in this 
matter.  Dr. McKinsey is without question the most qualified provider in this case to 
opine on the source of Mr. Diehl’s COVID infection.  He bolstered his opinions with the 
                                                 
2 Dr. McKinsey made one notable error in his report, w hich is a medical record from Dr. Casey indicating that Mr. Diehl’s 
symptoms began on April 24, 2022.  Mr. Diehl asserts that his symptoms began on April 28, 2022, the day after he took his test.  
Nevertheless, this is not fatal to Dr. McKinsey’s opinions.  
 

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 29 
medical evidence, medical literature, and his experience treating and evaluating 
patients with COVID.   
Proving that an individual contracted a highly communicable, ubiquitous virus 
such as COVID without exposure to things like a confirmed outbreak or known direct 
exposure to an infected coworker is difficult.  Considering the evidence in the record, I 
find that Mr. Diehl did not prove by a preponderance of the evidence that his COVID 
infection arose out of, and in the course of, his employment during the Wells Fargo 
conference in Florida.  Mr. Diehl certainly proved that it was possible that his infection 
was caused by his attendance at the conference; however, mere possibility is not 
adequate.  A cause must be probable.   
Because Mr. Diehl did not prove by a preponderance of the evidence that his 
COVID infection arose out of, and in the course of, his employment, his claims 
concerning temporary disability, permanent disability, and reimbursement of medical 
expenses also necessarily fail.  Therefore, I will not engage in an extended discussion 
surrounding these issues.   
Costs 
Claimant seeks an award of costs.  Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of 
the deputy commissioner hearing the case.  See 876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33; 
Iowa Code section 10A.328.  876 Iowa Administrative Code 4.33(6) provides:  
[c]osts taxed by the workers’ compensation commissioner or a deputy 
commissioner shall be (1) attendance of a certified shorthand reporter or 
presence of mechanical means at hearings and evidential depositions, (2) 
transcription costs when appropriate, (3) costs of service of the original 
notice and subpoenas, (4) witness fees and expenses as provided by Iowa 
Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (5) the costs of doctors’ and 
practitioners’ deposition testimony, provided that said costs do not exceed 
the amounts provided by Iowa Code sections 622.69 and 622.72, (6) the 
reasonable costs of obtaining no more than two doctors’ or practitioners’ 
reports, (7) filing fees when appropriate, including convenience fees 
incurred by using the WCES payment gateway, and (8) costs of persons 
reviewing health service disputes.   
Pursuant to the holding in Des Moines Area Regional Transit v. Young, 867 
N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015), only the report of an IME physician, and not the examination 
itself, can be taxed as a cost according to 876 IAC 4.33(6).  The Iowa Supreme Court 
reasoned, “a physician’s report becomes a cost incurred in a hearing because it is used 
as evidence in lieu of the doctor’s testimony,” while “[t]he underlying medical expenses 
associated with the examination do not become costs of a report needed for a hearing, 
just as they do not become costs of the testimony or deposition.”  Id.  (noting 
additionally that “[i]n the context of the assessment of costs, the expenses of the 
underlying medical treatment and examination are not part of the costs of the report or 
deposition”).  The commissioner has found this rationale applicable to expenses 

DIEHL V. WELLS FARGO BANK N.A. 
Page 30 
incurred by vocational experts.  See  Kirkendall v. Cargill Meat Solutions Corp., File No. 
5055494 (App. Dec., December 17, 2018); Voshell v. Compass Group, USA, Inc., File 
No. 5056857 (App. Dec., September 27, 2019).   
In my discretion, I decline to award the claimant any costs.   
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
That the claimant shall take nothing further. 
That the defendant shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by 
this agency pursuant to 876 Iowa Administrative Code 3.1(2) and 876 Iowa 
Administrative Code 11.7.   
Signed and filed this ___23rd ____ day of April, 2025. 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Jason Neifert  
(via WCES) 
Joni Ploeger  
(via WCES) 
 
RIGHT TO APPEAL:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above.  Pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code.  The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form.  If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address:  Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa 
Workers’ Compensation Division, 6200 Park Avenue, Suite 100, Des  Moines, Iowa  50321.  The notice of appeal 
must be received by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision.  The appeal 
period will be extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on the weekend or legal holiday. 
 
   ANDREW M. PHILLIPS 
               DEPUTY WORKERS’ 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
