Case Number: 19006744.02
Case Title:  LEE, JODI V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/2ND INJ-FUND
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Lee Jodi-19006744.02d.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
  : 
JODI LEE, 
  : 
 
 
  :                  File No. 19006744.02 
 
Claimant, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  :                     
 
 
  :             ARBITRATION DECISION 
JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS, 
  :                         
 
 
  :   
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
  :     Head Note Nos.:  1402.40, 1802, 1803, 
 
 
  :    
 
 
2204, 2701, 2907, 3001,      
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
 
3002, 3201, 3202, 4100 
 
 
  : 
 
Defendants. 
  : 
______________________________________________________________________ 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
Claimant, Jodi Lee, seeks workers’ compensation benefits from defendant, John 
Deere Dubuque Works (hereinafter referred to as “Deere”), as the self-insured 
employer, as a result of an admitted work injury on June 7, 2019.  Ms. Lee also seeks 
an award of benefits from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  Hearing occurred on 
October 2, 2024. 
Claimant was the only witness to testify at hearing.  The parties offered Joint 
Exhibits 1 through 12.  Claimant offered Exhibits 1 through 11.  Deere offered Exhibits A 
through S.  The Second Injury Fund did not offer a separate set of exhibits.  All exhibits 
were received into evidence without objection.   
At the commencement of the hearing, the parties submitted a hearing report.  On 
that hearing report, the parties entered into several stipulations.  The parties’ 
stipulations are accepted and relied upon in this decision.  No findings of fact or 
conclusions of law will be made with respect to the parties’ stipulations.  The parties are 
now bound by their stipulations. 
ISSUES 
The parties submitted the following issues for determination: 
1. Whether claimant is entitled to temporary total disability, or healing period, 
benefits and, if so, the extent of such entitlement. 
2. Whether claimant is entitled to permanent partial disability benefits and, if so, 
whether the disability is limited to the right arm that should be compensated 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2025-Apr-10  11:59:20     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 2 
 
 
as a scheduled member injury or extends to an unscheduled injury such that 
claimant may qualify for industrial disability benefits. 
3. The extent of claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability benefits, if any, 
including a claim for permanent total disability benefits. 
4. If claimant is not permanently and totally disabled under the traditional 
industrial disability analysis, whether claimant qualifies as an odd-lot 
employee. 
5. The proper date for commencement of permanent disability benefits, if any. 
6. Claimant’s weekly gross earnings prior to the injury date and the 
corresponding weekly compensation rate. 
7. Whether claimant is entitled to past medical mileage and, if so, in what 
amount. 
8. Whether claimant is entitled to an award of alternate medical care, including 
injections into claimant’s medial and lateral epicondyles and ongoing mental 
health counseling. 
9. Whether claimant sustained a first qualifying loss to the left foot for purposes 
of the Second Injury Fund claim. 
10. The functional loss for claimant’s alleged first qualifying injury. 
11. Whether claimant sustained a compensable and qualifying second injury on 
June 17, 2019. 
12. The functional loss for claimant’s alleged second qualifying injury. 
13. The claimant’s entitlement to Second Injury Fund benefits, if any. 
14. The second Injury Fund’s entitlement to credits against any award. 
15. Whether costs should be assessed against any party and in what amount. 
In her post-hearing brief claimant notified the agency that the parties reached an 
agreement as to past medical mileage.  That issue is now stipulated and removed as a 
disputed issue.  Defendants shall comply with the reported stipulation but no findings of 
fact or conclusions will be entered on this issue. 
 
Claimant also noted in her post-hearing brief that “Deere has authorized the 
requested ongoing care, which includes mental health treatment.”  Although alternate 
medical care is noted as a disputed issue on the hearing report, it appears there is not a 
currently justiciable dispute pertaining to ongoing or future medical care.  Therefore, the 
undersigned considers the alternate medical care dispute to be moot at the present time 

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 3 
 
 
and no findings of fact or conclusions will be entered pertaining to the alternate medical 
care issues.  There is no prejudice to claimant on this issue.  Should a ripe dispute arise 
in the future, claimant is able to file an alternate medical care petition. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
Claimant, Jodi Lee, is a 60-year-old woman.  She graduated from high school in 
1982 and obtained an associate’s degree in business administration in 1984.  Ms. Lee 
has a varied work history, which started while she was in high school. 
Ms. Lee worked from 1980 through 1985 as a housekeeper for Eagle Ridge Inn 
and Resort in Galena, Illinois.  This job involved cleaning houses and condos and 
included repetitive activities and heavy lifting.  In 1985, claimant switched positions with 
Eagle Ridge and became an owner service coordinator.  In this position, Ms. Lee 
worked as a liaison between Eagle Ridge Management and owners of the property they 
managed.  Ms. Lee would inspect over 300 properties, stage properties for rental, and 
speak with homeowners to deal with any necessary repairs to the property.  This 
position included the need to perform some heavier lifting, such as moving furniture to 
stage property for viewing and rental. 
Ms. Lee next obtained employment through Jo Davies County and Visitors 
Bureau in Galena, Illinois in 1995.  In this job, claimant greeted tourists, operated a 
phone, maintained a computer database, processed payments, and coordinated mass 
mailings for the organization.  
In 1998, claimant took a position as an administrative assistant with the Jo 
Davies County Sheriff’s office.  Ms. Lee performed various job tasks for the sheriff, 
including processing payroll, handling civil processing, maintaining employee files and 
records, as well as other administrative functions.  In 2003, claimant went to work for 
Bader Cabinets, where she assembled cabinets.  Her work required sanding, assembly, 
painting, and installing hinges and slides on the cabinets.  Claimant testified this was 
repetitive and heavy work. 
Claimant worked for Bader Cabinets for a short time and then took a position with 
Crescent Electric in East Dubuque, Illinois.  Ms. Lee again worked as an administrative 
assistant for Crescent Electric, including payroll duties.  By 2005, Ms. Lee returned to 
Eagle Ridge as a housekeeper trainer.  This position required claimant to perform 
general housekeeping duties in her training capacity. 
In 2008, claimant began employment with Jo Carroll Energy as a billing 
representative.  Claimant then worked for Wausaukee Composite in Cuba City, 
Wisconsin, as a fiberglass laminator.  Ms. Lee performed work to prepare wind turbine 
bodies.  She indicated this was very heavy work and repetitive work using a spray gun, 
impact wrenches and hand tools. 

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 4 
 
 
In 2010, claimant worked as a janitor for the Scales Mound Schools in Scales 
Mound, Illinois.  Claimant performed duties that included typical janitorial duties.  
Claimant worked in this position for only a few months. 
In January 2011, Ms. Lee began working for Deere as an assembler.  Although 
she worked in different positions throughout the Deere plant, she was technically an 
assembler throughout her employment with Deere.  In her last position prior to the date 
of injury, Ms. Lee worked on the small crawler line building radiators and cooling 
packages.  She indicated that the production demands increased during her tenure and 
she was required to produce 12 units per shift near the date of injury as opposed to 9 
units she previously produced.  She described having to place 100 zip ties per day and 
using a trigger gun to secure and tighten those zip ties.  She testified that the zip ties 
were difficult and required 10-11 pulls on the trigger gun to secure and tighten each zip 
tie. 
As a result of the repetitive nature of the position, Ms. Lee began experiencing 
right elbow pain.  She is left-handed by nature, using her left hand to eat and write.  
However, Ms. Lee testified that she uses her right hand for all other activities, including 
the work duties at Deere.  By June 6, 2019, claimant’s right elbow hurt enough that she 
reported it to her supervisor.  Unfortunately, there was no one available to cover her 
duties on that date so she completed her shift.  She reported to occupational health at 
Deere on June 7, 2019 to be evaluated. 
Ms. Lee reported right elbow pain for three to four weeks at this initial evaluation.  
The nurse practitioner documented that “her right elbow is significantly swollen, red and 
warm to touch over the later a [sic] condyle.”  (Joint Exhibit 1, page 32)  Claimant 
started therapy after that appointment but did not experience significant improvement 
with conservative care.  Deere’s occupational medicine ultimately referred claimant to 
an orthopaedic surgeon, Robert B. Bartelt, M.D., for evaluation. 
Dr. Bartelt evaluated Ms. Lee on August 9, 2019.  Dr. Bartelt diagnosed claimant 
with lateral epicondylitis of the right elbow.  He performed an injection into claimant’s 
right elbow on that date.  Claimant experienced some initial benefit from the injection 
but symptoms returned.  Dr. Bartelt also attempted a platelet rich plasma injection in 
claimant’s right elbow, maintained claimant on work restrictions, and continued 
claimant’s physical therapy.   
Unfortunately, the conservative care offered by Dr. Bartelt did not resolve 
claimant’s symptoms.  He ordered an MRI of claimant’s right elbow, which occurred on 
February 13, 2020.  Dr. Bartelt interpreted the MRI as demonstrating lateral 
epicondylitis but no other unexpected diagnoses.  He recommended against surgical 
intervention for claimant’s right elbow, but claimant eventually requested surgical 
intervention as opposed to being declared at maximum medical improvement. 
Dr. Bartelt took claimant to surgery on June 10, 2020.  He performed a right 
elbow lateral epicondylar release.  Once again, that surgery did not completely resolve 
claimant’s symptoms even with follow-up conservative care.   

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 5 
 
 
Dr. Bartelt’s office obtained an EMG of claimant’s right arm to check for radial 
nerve involvement.  The EMG did not demonstrate radial nerve dysfunction.  
Nevertheless, Dr. Bartelt performed an injection to the radial nerve, which provided 
temporary benefit.  Ultimately, Dr. Bartelt had no further recommendations and care 
was redirected to the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics (UIHC). 
Joseph A. Buckwalter, M.D., an orthopaedic surgeon, evaluated claimant at 
UIHC on October 27, 2020.  Dr. Buckwalter obtained an ultrasound on claimant’s right 
elbow.  Following the ultrasound, Dr. Buckwalter diagnosed claimant with common 
extensor tendinosis, partial thickness tear of the radial collateral ligament and moderate 
radiocapitellar joint effusion.  He recommended additional platelet rich plasma injections 
in claimant’s right elbow. 
Unfortunately, claimant returned for evaluation on January 25, 2021, and 
reported no sustained improvement of her symptoms after the injection.  By May 4, 
2021, Dr. Buckwalter noted that he had no further treatment options, other than revision 
surgery, that would be expected to improve claimant’s condition.  Claimant requested 
the recommended surgery. 
On June 7, 2021, Dr. Buckwalter took claimant to surgery and performed a right 
radial nerve decompression as well as a lateral medial epicondylitis debridement in the 
right elbow.  (Joint Ex. 7, p. 139)  Once again, therapy was initiated after surgery.  
Unfortunately, the physical therapist discontinued therapy on August 23, 2021, because 
claimant’s symptoms worsened after therapy advanced claimant’s weight limits to 3 
pounds.  Claimant continued to have numbness in her thumb and small finger.  
Additional steroid injections were attempted in September 2021. 
Unfortunately, claimant’s symptoms continued.  In June 2022, claimant’s treating 
physician, Ryan Kruse, M.D., attempted a microfragmented adipose tissue (MFAT) 
injection into claimant’s right elbow.  Ms. Lee reported an initial 20 percent improvement 
in symptoms and physical therapy was again started.  By August 2022, claimant 
continued to report a 30 percent improvement in symptoms after the MFAT injection.  
However, she reported that she had improved even more until she resumed therapy.  
Upon resuming therapy, her symptoms worsened again.  Claimant expressed frustration 
with this setback during her August 29, 2022 appointment with Dr. Kruse.  (Joint Ex. 7, 
p. 209)  Therapy was again suspended after this appointment. 
Ms. Lee sought treatment with her personal physician on September 20, 2022.  
At that appointment, claimant reported symptoms of depression and noted her work 
injury and having been off work for two years.  Claimant’s personal physician prescribed 
bupropion for depression.  (Joint Ex. 8, pp. 232-234)  
On October 18, 2022, Dr. Buckwalter declared claimant to be at maximum 
medical improvement for her right arm and ordered a functional capacity evaluation 
(FCE) to determine permanent work restrictions for claimant.  (Joint Ex. 7, pp. 222-223)  
Dr. Buckwalter noted full range of motion in claimant’s right elbow, right wrist, as well as 
normal sensation, normal stability, and no neurologic dysfunction.  However, he 

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 6 
 
 
identified two percent permanent functional impairment of the right upper extremity as a 
result of ongoing pain in claimant’s right lateral epicondyle.  (Joint Ex. 7, p. 223) 
The FCE occurred on November 3, 2022.  The administering therapist opined 
that claimant gave full and consistent effort and that the FCE was valid.  (Joint Ex. 9)  In 
a November 11, 2022 report, Dr. Buckwalter reiterated claimant achieved MMI and 
accepted the recommendations of the FCE.  Dr. Buckwalter assigned the following 
permanent restrictions for claimant’s right arm: 
Floor to waist lifting, up to 26 pounds, occasionally. 
12 inches to waist lifting, up to 37 pounds, occasionally. 
Waist to shoulder lifting, up to 30 pounds, occasionally. 
Waist to overhead lifting, up to 23 pounds, occasionally. 
Bilateral carrying up to 37 pounds, occasionally. 
Horizontal pushing up to 50 pounds of force, occasionally. 
Horizontal pulling up to 52 pounds of force, occasionally. 
… 
Ladder climbing, frequently. 
(Joint Ex. 7, p. 227) 
 
Defendants obtained a psychological evaluation performed by John Brooke, 
Ph.D. on December 8, 2022.  Dr. Brooke opined: 
Ms. Lee did not suffer a mental injury due to her 2019 right elbow injury.  
While she does understandably complain of frustration/discouragement 
and a diagnosis of situational depression seems appropriate, this is due to 
the cessation of her medical treatment, not her injury.  Level of this 
depression is mild, temporary, not impairing her functioning and not in 
need of additional treatment. 
(Defendants’ Ex. A, p. 2)   
Dr. Brooke rationalized that claimant was able to mentally cope with her ongoing 
injury and treatment until she was told there was no further available treatment to 
improve her symptoms.  “It was when she was told that there were no more treatment 
options that she became upset and was placed on an antidepressant.”  (Defendants’ 
Ex. A, p. 5)  He opined that claimant’s level of depression is mild and “will resolve with 
time.”  (Defendants’ Ex. A, p. 5) 

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 7 
 
 
Unfortunately, claimant’s physical symptoms continued.  She was later evaluated 
by a pain specialist, who recommended she be evaluated by another orthopaedic 
surgeon.  (Joint Ex. 11, pp. 281-283)  Defendants authorized evaluation by Benjamin 
Paulson, M.D., for this purpose.  Dr. Paulson evaluated claimant on April 4, 2024.  Dr. 
Paulson found that claimant’s radial nerve was not symptomatic.  He recommended 
against surgical intervention but provided additional injections into claimant’s right 
lateral epicondyle and medial epicondyle.  (Joint Ex. 12, p. 284) 
On May 14, 2024, Ms. Lee submitted to an FCE recommended by her attorney 
with Short Physical Therapy, P.L.L.C.  The therapist administering that FCE opined that 
claimant demonstrated consistent effort and performance.  (Claimant’s Ex. 1, p. 11)  
The Short FCE recommended claimant limit work to the light to lower medium work 
category.  Specifically, the Short FCE recommended lifting in the 20 to 25 pound range 
on an occasional basis.  It also recommended claimant limit elevated work and/or 
reaching to or above shoulder height. (Claimant’s Ex. 2, p. 13)  That FCE also 
recommended restrictions or limits on claimant’s ability to push and pull.  (Claimant’s 
Ex. 2, p. 14)  
Claimant also continued treating for mental health issues with her personal nurse 
practitioner.  In January 2024, she was diagnosed with depression and anxiety and her 
medications were changed.  (Joint Ex. 10, pp. 257-258)  The medication was helpful to 
claimant over time but she continues to take medication for depression as of the date of 
hearing.  However, in her June 20, 2024 office note, claimant’s nurse practitioner noted 
that medication management was helpful and that the depression and anxiety were 
more manageable for Ms. Lee.  However, the nurse practitioner has also noted, “Full 
resolution of depression and anxiety is unlikely due to ongoing pain and difficulties with 
Workmen’s Comp. withholding pay.”  (Joint Ex. 10, pp. 274, 277) 
Claimant countered the opinions of Dr. Brooke by seeking her own mental health 
evaluation with a psychiatrist, Mark W. Mittauer, M.D., on July 29, 2024.  Dr. Mittauer 
performed his evaluation via teleconference and has not met with claimant in-person.  
Dr. Mittauer diagnosed claimant with major depressive disorder, single episode, mild, 
with anxious distress.  With respect to the cause of claimant’s major depressive 
disorder, Dr. Mittauer opined, “It is more likely than not that Ms. Lee’s physical injury, 
which occurred on 06/07/19, caused her psychiatric diagnosis of major depressive 
disorder.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 4, p. 65) 
Dr. Mittauer opined, “Ms. Lee sustained a permanent mental health injury 
because of the 06/07/19 work injury.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 4, p. 66)  Dr. Mittauer 
acknowledged that claimant does not qualify for permanent impairment for her mental 
injury under the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition.  
However, Dr. Mittauer elected to utilize the Second Edition of the AMA Guides to assign 
permanent impairment.  Having reviewed the Second Edition, Dr. Mittauer opines that 
Ms. Lee sustained 10 percent permanent impairment of the whole person as a result of 
her mental injury.  He also opined that claimant’s prognosis for further improvement is 
fair and her prognosis for complete resolution of her symptoms is poor.  (Claimant’s Ex. 
4, p. 68) 

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 8 
 
 
With respect to work restrictions, Dr. Mittauer recommended: 
Ms. Lee not be assigned work duties that require her to maintain 
sustained concentration, work at a rapid pace, make complex decisions, 
or follow complex directions in completing work tasks.  She should not be 
assigned work tasks that require her to rapidly change from one task to 
another.  She should not operate machinery where if she makes a 
mistake, she may injure herself, others, or damage expensive equipment. 
(Claimants’ Ex. 4, p. 70) 
 
In addition to her FCE and psychiatric evaluation, Ms. Lee also obtained an 
independent medical evaluation performed by Robin L. Sassman, M.D. on August 6, 
2024.  Dr. Sassman diagnosed claimant with: (1) right radial tunnel syndrome status 
post radial nerve decompression and lateral/medial epicondylitis debridement; (2) right 
carpal tunnel syndrome; (3) right lateral epicondylitis status post lateral epicondylar 
release; (4) right medial epicondylitis; and (5) right Guyon canal syndrome.  She opined 
that “the work Ms. Lee did at John Deer [sic] Dubuque Works on or about 6/17/19 was 
more likely than not a substantial factor causing the injuries to her right upper 
extremity.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 3, p. 43) 
Dr. Sassman assigned permanent impairment to claimant’s right upper extremity.  
Specifically, she assigned a two percent permanent functional impairment of the right 
upper extremity for loss of extension (range of motion).  In addition, Dr. Sassman 
identified and assigned four percent permanent functional impairment as a result of a 
right ulnar nerve deficit.  Dr. Sassman also identified a loss of sensation related to 
damage of the radial nerve and assigned four percent permanent functional impairment 
for this radial nerve sensation change.  (Claimant’s Ex. 3, p. 44)   
In addition, Dr. Sassman found a loss of sensation in the right median nerve.  
She assigned a one percent permanent functional impairment of the right upper 
extremity as a result of the injury to the right median nerve.  Dr. Sassman also opined 
that claimant sustained a motor deficit of the median nerve resulting in an additional one 
percent permanent impairment for the right upper extremity.  (Claimant’s Ex. 3, p. 45) 
Combining the permanent impairment for claimant’s loss of range of motion, 
radial nerve injury, ulnar nerve injury, and median nerve injury, Dr. Sassman opined that 
claimant sustained 26 percent permanent functional impairment of the right upper 
extremity, which she converted pursuant to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, to a 16 percent permanent functional impairment 
of the whole person.  (Claimant’s Ex. 3, p. 45) 
Dr. Sassman also evaluated claimant’s left foot and opined that claimant 
sustained a two percent permanent impairment of the left foot as a result of an injury 
she sustained while snowmobiling in 1978 or 1979.  (Claimants’ Ex. 3, p. 47)  Dr. 
Sassman acknowledged that there are no medical records to document this injury and 

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 9 
 
 
claimant conceded she has not sought any ongoing treatment, other than the initial 
evaluation, after this injury.  
Dr. Sassman opined that claimant achieved maximum medical improvement for 
her right arm on April 4, 2024.  She also opined that claimant requires permanent work 
restrictions.  Dr. Sassman recommended claimant not lift, push, pull, or carry more than 
20 pounds occasionally and that she limit lifting away from her body to not more than 10 
pounds occasionally.  Dr. Sassman also recommended limiting reaching and fine 
manipulation to an occasional basis, repetitive or forceful gripping or grasping with the 
right hand to a rare basis.  She recommended against any use of vibratory or power 
tools.  She also recommended against any ladder usage by claimant.  (Claimant’s Ex. 3, 
p. 46)  With respect to claimant’s left foot, Dr. Sassman opined that claimant should limit 
her standing and walking combined to an occasional basis and that she “take care in 
her choice of shoes as narrow shoes aggravate her left foot symptoms.”  (Claimant’s 
Ex. 3, p. 47) 
Defendants obtained a rebuttal report from Dr. Paulson, addressing the opinions 
offered by Dr. Sassman.  Dr. Paulson authored a report dated August 28, 2024, in 
which he expressed the bases for his disagreements with Dr. Sassman.  Specifically, 
Dr. Paulson took exception to the work restrictions offered by Dr. Sassman.  He noted 
he continues to agree with the recommendations of the Athletico FCE performed on 
November 3, 2022.  In disagreeing with Dr. Sassman’s restrictions, he explained, “None 
of these recommendations by Dr. Sassman are based off of objective data in her IME.  
In addition, it makes no sense to make recommendations for restrictions when the 
patient clearly was able to perform beyond this level for the functional capacity 
evaluation.”  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 13) 
Dr. Paulson disagreed with Dr. Sassman’s MMI date, explaining that claimant did 
not obtain significant improvement with treatment after November 11, 2022.  While 
acknowledging additional pain medicine treatment and injections into claimant’s right 
arm, Dr. Paulson noted this treatment “did not significantly appear to change her overall 
status. Therefore, again, I believe the MMI date of November 11, 2022 is more 
appropriate than the date of April 4, 2024.”  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 14) 
Dr. Paulson also disagreed with the permanent impairment rating offered by Dr. 
Sassman.  In noting his disagreement, Dr. Paulson explained: 
I note on page 16 of Dr. Sassman’s IME that Dr. Sassman gave Ms. Lee 
an impairment rating.  It appears that the majority of this impairment rating 
is due to compressive neuropathies.  I find this highly suspect and believe 
this is almost malpractice in the fact that a very large impairment rating 
was given for compressive neuropathies including carpal and cubital 
tunnel syndrome, but the patient has not had any carpal or cubital tunnel 
treatments such as surgical releases of the carpal tunnel and cubital 
tunnel.  It is certainly interesting why you would give a very large 
impairment rating and yet still put a patient at MMI without recommending 

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 10 
 
 
further treatment for decompressive surgeries such as a carpal tunnel 
release and cubital tunnel release. 
(Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 14)   
In addition, Dr. Paulson noted that Dr. Sassman offered permanent impairment 
for a sensory deficit of the right ulnar nerve.  He notes that Dr. Sassman documented 
normal two-point sensation and discrimination testing and that her sensory impairment 
is purely subjective.  He noted his disagreement with awarding that impairment because 
both he and Dr. Buckwalter noted normal sensation during their evaluations.  
(Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 14)  Dr. Paulson noted similar concerns or objections with 
respect to the median and radial nerve injuries and Dr. Sassman’s award of permanent 
impairment.  He specifically noted, “the nerve conduction study performed on 
September 9, 2020 did not find any objective findings for the radial nerve.  Therefore, 
without any objective findings for the radial nerve, I think it is again, inappropriate to give 
an impairment rating other than 0%.”  (Defendants’ Ex. B, p. 15) 
 
 
When considering the competing medical opinions relative to claimant’s right 
arm, I accept the opinions of Dr. Buckwalter and Dr. Paulson as most convincing.  I 
accept Dr. Buckwalter’s permanent impairment rating and find that claimant proved she 
sustained a two percent permanent functional impairment of her right arm as a result of 
her work injury.   
 
Dr. Paulson’s explanation of why Dr. Sassman’s impairment rating is inflated and 
erroneous is convincing.  If Ms. Lee has significant impairment related to sensory 
deficits due to three nerves in her right arm, further surgical intervention is likely 
appropriate.  However, Dr. Sassman does not recommend further surgical care and 
declares claimant at MMI.  I also find Dr. Paulson’s explanation pertaining to MMI and 
work restrictions to be most convincing in this record.  Dr. Buckwalter assigned MMI on 
November 11, 2022, and Dr. Paulson concurs with that assessment of MMI.  Therefore, 
I find claimant achieved MMI on November 11, 2022, in spite of the maintenance and 
symptomatic care provided thereafter.  Her functional status did not significantly change 
after November 11, 2022, and Dr. Paulson’s opinion is accurate that she achieved MMI 
on that date. 
 
With respect to claimant’s mental health claims, I find Dr. Mittauer’s causation 
opinion to be most credible and convincing.  Defendants rely upon the opinion of Dr. 
Brooke and Dr. Freeman.  Both are highly qualified psychologists.  However, Dr. 
Mittauer is a board-certified psychiatrist. 
 
Moreover, Dr. Brooke’s and Dr. Freeman’s causation opinions do not identify 
something other than the work injury and its resulting circumstances as the cause of 
claimant’s mental health condition.  Dr. Brooke opines, “Ms. Lee did not suffer a mental 
injury due to her 2019 right elbow injury.  While she does understandably complain of 
frustration/discouragement and a diagnosis of situational depression seems 
appropriate, this is due to the cessation of her medical treatment, not her injury.”  
(Defendants’ Ex. A, p. 1) Dr. Brooke further explained, “No indications of depression 

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 11 
 
 
were noted at the time of her injury or during her treatment.  She even choose [sic] 
repeatedly to continue to search for a medical solution, although the odds were poor.  It 
was when she was told that there were no more treatment options that she became 
upset and was placed on an antidepressant.”  (Defendants’ Ex. A, p. 5)  While Dr. 
Brooke opines that the injury to claimant’s right elbow was not directly the cause of a 
mental health injury, he clearly ascribes the mental health condition to the fact that 
claimant became frustrated and depressed when there were no further medical options 
left to treat and improve the right elbow injury.  
Dr. Freeman opines in an August 13, 2024 report: 
I concur with Dr. Brooke’s opinion that Ms. Lee’s situational depression 
(diagnosed as Adjustment Disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed 
mood), is due to the ending of her medical treatment and failed recovery 
from her work injury.  In addition, her Adjustment Disorder is due to 
financial stressors, failed recovery of her elbow injury, and ongoing 
frustration with her case. 
(Defendants’ Ex. C, p. 36)   
Dr. Freeman further explained, “while Ms. Lee’s work-related elbow injury on 
June 7, 2019 did not directly or immediately result in a mental health disorder, over 
time, her frustration with her elbow condition not improving, case management, and 
financial stress contributed to her current diagnosis of Adjustment Disorder with mixed 
anxiety and depressed mood.”  (Defendants’ Ex. C, p. 36)  Realistically, Dr. Freeman is 
explaining that claimant’s right elbow injury is at least indirectly a substantial 
contributing factor in causing claimant’s mental health injury.  Dr. Freemen recommends 
ongoing pharmacotherapy for claimant’s psychological symptoms, further suggesting 
that claimant’s mental health injury is continuing and likely permanent in nature.  Given 
that claimant’s physical condition is now at MMI, there does not appear to be a high 
likelihood of improvement of her right arm condition such that her mental health 
condition might improve.   
Ultimately, I accept Dr. Mittauer’s opinion that claimant sustained a permanent 
mental health injury as a result of the June 7, 2019 right elbow work injury.  Dr. Mittauer 
further recommends: 
Ms. Lee not be assigned work duties that require her to maintain 
sustained concentration, work at a rapid pace, make complex decisions, 
or follow complex directions in completing work tasks.  She should not be 
assigned work tasks that require her to rapidly change from one task to 
another.  She should not operate machinery where if she makes a 
mistake, she may injure herself, others, or damage expensive equipment. 
(Claimant’s Ex. 4, p. 70)  These could be considered to be reasonable limitations for 
claimant’s depression.  However, Dr. Mittauer opines, “her depressive symptoms are 

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 12 
 
 
generally mild in severity.”  Mild depressive symptoms tend to suggest claimant does 
not require the significantly limiting restrictions offered by Dr. Mittauer. 
Moreover, Dr. Mittauer’s opinions are internally inconsistent.  In evaluating 
claimant’s permanent impairment pursuant to the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of 
Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, Dr. Mittauer notes, “her symptoms of major 
depressive disorder are consistent with Class 1, or no impairment in her ability to 
concentrate, sustain attention, and complete tasks.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 4, p. 66)  He 
further noted, “her symptoms of major depressive disorder do not interfere with her 
ability to go to work on a consistent basis, make decisions, complete work-related tasks, 
or interact appropriately with coworkers, customers, and supervisors.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 
4, p. 67)    Dr. Mittauer’s analysis of claimant’s mild symptoms not affecting her ability to 
concentrate, sustain attention, go to work, and complete tasks directly contradicts his 
later restrictions against work that requires maintained concentration.   
If claimant’s mental health condition does not affect her ability to concentrate, 
sustain concentration, and complete tasks, it makes little sense to impose a work 
restriction against work that requires sustained concentration.  If claimant’s condition 
does not affect her ability to complete tasks or make decisions, it makes little sense that 
she requires a permanent restriction against making complex decisions or following 
complex directions.  Ultimately, I reject Dr. Mittauer’s opinions pertaining to work 
restrictions.  His internally inconsistent analysis leaves me little confidence in the work 
restrictions he recommends, and I find claimant failed to prove the need for permanent 
restrictions related to her mental health condition.   
I further reject Dr. Mittauer’s opinions pertaining to permanent impairment related 
to claimant’s mental health condition.  Dr. Mittauer initially concedes and explains that 
the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, does not 
provide a permanent impairment rating for claimant’s mental health condition.  I accept 
this as accurate and find that Ms. Lee did not prove permanent impairment related to 
her mental health condition. 
Dr. Mittauer, however, consults a different edition of the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment to develop and identify permanent impairment.  
Specifically, Dr. Mittauer consults the Second Edition of the AMA Guides and opines 
that Ms. Lee sustained a 10 percent permanent impairment of the whole person as a 
result of her mental health condition.  I reject this opinion.   
Dr. Mittauer clearly could not identify permanent impairment under the Fifth 
Edition of the AMA Guides.  He offers no analysis of the Sixth, Fourth, Third, or First 
Editions of the AMA Guides.  Rather, for unspecified reasons, he selects the Second 
Edition and in contravention of current Iowa law to craft a permanent impairment rating.  
Ultimately, the rating offered pursuant to the Second Edition is based solely upon 
claimant’s subjective report of affect and “'slight problems’ because she consistently 
feels depressed.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 4, p. 67)  I do not find Dr. Mittauer’s attempt to craft a 
permanent impairment rating using an unadopted version of the AMA Guides, while 
apparently cherry-picking the version he wanted to utilize, to be credible or convincing.  

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 13 
 
 
The rating offered by Dr. Mittauer is not consistent with current Iowa law and is rejected.  
Therefore, I ultimately find that claimant’s work injury caused her mental health injury 
and that her mental health condition is permanent.  However, I find that claimant failed 
to prove permanent impairment or the need for permanent work restrictions related to 
the mental health condition. 
Ms. Lee also sought a vocational expert opinion regarding her ability to return to 
work.  Barbara Laughlin reviewed claimant’s case and authored a report dated August 
30, 2024.  Ms. Laughlin performed an employability assessment.  She reviewed 
relevant medical records, claimant’s answers to interrogatories, performed a labor 
market survey, and apparently interviewed Ms. Lee. 
Ms. Laughlin noted claimant’s age, 60, as relevant and likely to result in 
difficulties in securing alternate employment. Ms. Laughlin analyzed claimant’s 
employability using five different scenarios given competing restrictions of the various 
experts.  She opines that claimant sustained between a 34.5 percent and 100 percent 
loss of all semi-skilled and skilled occupations.  (Claimant’s Ex. 5, pp. 89-90)  
Ultimately, Ms. Laughlin opines, “Ms. Lee is severely limited due to her multiple 
impairments.  Due to her combination of impairments from Dr. Sassman, as well as Dr. 
Mittauer, and her need for accommodations, Ms. Lee is unlikely to find work in any 
quality, quantity, or dependability in her labor market.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 5, p. 94) 
However, I rejected the opinion of Dr. Sassman and rejected the restrictions 
offered by Dr. Mittauer.  Claimant failed to prove these restrictions are reasonable and 
necessary for her arm and/or mental health injuries.  Therefore, to the extent Ms. 
Laughlin relies upon the opinions of Dr. Sassman and Dr. Mittauer to reach her ultimate 
conclusion, I find her opinion to be unsubstantiated and not convincing. 
Defendants also submitted a vocational expert report from Lana Sellner.  Ms. 
Sellner did not interview Ms. Lee as part of her employability analysis but relied solely 
on written documentation.  As part of her analysis, Ms. Sellner performed a labor market 
survey and identified several potential positions that would be available to claimant and 
opines, “Ms. Lee is employable within her imposed restrictions of each medical 
provider.”  (Defendants’ Ex. D, p. 53) 
I accept Ms. Sellner’s opinion that claimant remains employable in the general 
labor market.  Nevertheless, having found the FCE restrictions, as adopted by Dr. 
Buckwalter and Dr. Paulson, are applicable and reasonable for claimant’s right arm 
injury, I have concerns about some of the positions identified as available by Ms. 
Sellner.  For instance, Ms. Sellner identified an executive housekeeping manager 
position.  One of the requirements of that position is to support staff and perform the 
duties of a housekeeper when required.  It seems unlikely that claimant can perform a 
housekeeping position within the restrictions outlined in the Athletico FCE.   
Similarly, Ms. Sellner identified a quality control line inspector position as a 
possible job match for claimant.  Realistically, claimant would have to perform 
“Complete tear downs for each seamer head on the running seamer.”  It is not apparent 

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 14 
 
 
from the job description she provides whether these job duties, or any product 
manipulation, could be performed within the restrictions outlined in the Athletico FCE. I 
accept Ms. Sellner’s opinion that there remain viable employment opportunities for Ms. 
Lee in the local job market.  I am not as confident that all of the opportunities identified 
by Ms. Sellner would be viable, but I find that there remain viable employment 
opportunities of reasonable quality and quantity for claimant in her local labor market.  
Ultimately, I find the impairment rating of Dr. Buckwalter is the most credible with 
respect to the right upper extremity.  Therefore, I find that claimant has proven a two 
percent permanent functional impairment of the right arm.  I find that she failed to prove 
any permanent impairment or permanent restrictions related to the mental health injury. 
Ms. Lee also pursues a claim against the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  She 
alleges she sustained a first injury to her left foot in 1978 or 1979. I accept claimant’s 
testimony that she sustained an injury to her left foot while driving a snowmobile in the 
1970s.  However, there are no medical records to document what injury, if any, claimant 
sustained.  She testified that the physician told her she broke her leg, which is certainly 
possible and claimant’s testimony in this respect was credible. 
On the other hand, claimant obtained treatment once for the injury.  She received 
no x-rays, no ongoing treatment, and carried no restrictions following that injury.  Ms. 
Lee worked various jobs, between the 1970s and her injury date in this case without 
requiring additional treatment of the left leg or any work restrictions related to that 
condition.  Many of her jobs required significant lifting, constant standing, or walking. 
Ms. Lee’s only evidence to substantiate the first injury (left foot) comes from Dr. 
Sassman.  Dr. Sassman offers a permanent impairment rating for claimant’s left foot.  
Specifically, she opines that Ms. Lee sustained a five percent permanent impairment, or 
two percent of the whole person, as a result of a fracture of the left 5th metatarsal.  
(Claimant’s Ex. 3, p. 47)  Dr. Sassman further opines that claimant “should limit 
standing and walking to an occasional basis.”  (Claimant’s Ex. 3, p. 47) 
Four things concern me about Dr. Sassman’s opinions pertaining to claimant’s 
left foot.  First, there is no objective medical data to actually document a diagnosis of a 
left 5th metatarsal fracture.  Dr. Sassman even notes the diagnosis is “likely” but cannot 
definitively identify objective data to substantiate that diagnosis.  Second, the 
permanent impairment rating offered is pursuant to a diagnosis-based rating under the 
AMA Guides.  Therefore, Dr. Sassman is assuming a diagnosis without confirmation, 
then using a diagnosis-based impairment rating assuming the accuracy of the 
diagnosis.   
Third, the diagnosis-based rating in Table 17-33 of the AMA Guides to the 
Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition, is permitted with a 5th metatarsal 
fracture with loss of weight transfer.  Dr. Sassman’s entire explanation of claimant’s left 
foot symptoms records, “She notes pain with certain types of shoes with no support.  If 
she stands for a long time or walking for a long time, she notes pain over the side of her 
foot.  She will loosen her shoelaces.”  (Claimants’ Ex. 3, p. 41)  Nothing in Dr. 

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 15 
 
 
Sassman’s report indicates that claimant has a loss of weight transfer as a result of the 
left foot injury.  She does not use a crutch, cane, walker, or other support because of 
her foot.  There is no mention of a limp or antalgic gait in Dr. Sassman’s report or 
otherwise.  Dr. Sassman offers no diagnosis of a loss of weight transfer as a result of 
the left foot injury.  Claimant’s work activities throughout the years, performed while 
standing and walking for long periods of time, suggest claimant did not sustain a loss of 
weight transfer as a result of the left foot injury.  Therefore, Dr. Sassman’s diagnosis 
and reported symptoms do not appear to fit within the diagnosis-based estimate of 
impairment she ultimately assigns. 
Finally, Dr. Sassman imposes work restrictions for the left foot, indicating, “Ms. 
Lee should limit standing and walking combined to an occasional basis.”  This is directly 
contradicted by claimant’s actual work history in jobs that required frequent or constant 
standing and walking.  I do not find Dr. Sassman’s restrictions to be convincing or 
necessary and reject her opinions pertaining to the left foot.  I find claimant did not 
prove her first injury, the left foot injury in 1978 or 1979, resulted in permanent disability. 
The parties also submit a dispute regarding claimant’s gross earnings and her 
applicable weekly worker’s compensation rate.  The briefs of the parties make it clear 
that the disputes over gross earnings is whether CIPP payments and/or annual profit-
sharing payments should be included in claimant’s gross average weekly earnings.  I 
find that these factual disputes are the subject of a Declaratory Order Regarding Profit 
Sharing Bonus and Continuous Improvement Pay Plan issued by the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner on July 12, 2017 and subsequent caselaw from this 
agency.  Using the directives of the aforementioned declaratory order and cases as 
discussed in the conclusions of law, I find that the defendants’ calculations of the gross 
earnings are accurate.  Claimant’s average gross weekly earnings at the time of the 
injury were $1,026.53. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
The parties stipulated that claimant sustained a work-related injury on June 7, 
2019.  They also stipulated that the injury caused both temporary and permanent 
disability.  (Hearing Report)  The initial disputed issue to consider is the extent of 
claimant’s entitlement to permanent disability. 
Claimant asserts she is permanently and totally disabled, or alternatively, an odd-
lot doctrine.  Defendants contend that claimant’s recovery is limited to a scheduled 
member injury of the right arm and should be awarded two percent functional 
impairment of the right arm. 
The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the injury is a proximate cause of the disability on which the claim is based.  A cause is 
proximate if it is a substantial factor in bringing about the result; it need not be the only 
cause.  A preponderance of the evidence exists when the causal connection is probable 
rather than merely possible.  George A. Hormel & Co. v. Jordan, 569 N.W.2d 148, 153 

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 16 
 
 
(Iowa 1997); Frye v. Smith-Doyle Contractors, 569 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa Ct. App. 
1997); Sanchez v. Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996). 
A possibility of causation is not sufficient; a probability is necessary. Sanchez v. 
Blue Bird Midwest, 554 N.W.2d 283, 285 (Iowa Ct. App. 1996) (citing Holmes v. Bruce 
Motor Freight, Inc., 215 N.W.2d 296, 297 (Iowa 1974)). 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability.  
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an 
expert opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy 
of the facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The 
expert opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 
621 N.W.2d 410, 420 (Iowa 2001); St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 N.W.2d 646, 652 
(Iowa 2000); Dunlavey v. Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845, 853 (Iowa 
1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted 
expert medical testimony cannot be summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & 
Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910, 911-12 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994). 
Claimant’s assertion is that she sustained a permanent right arm injury as well as 
a permanent mental health injury such that her injury should be compensated with 
industrial disability.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 
N.W.2d 312 (Iowa 1998).  Under the Iowa Workers' Compensation Act, permanent 
partial disability is compensated either for a loss or loss of use of a scheduled member 
under Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(a)-(u) or as an unscheduled injury pursuant to the 
provisions of section 85.34(2)(v).  
An injury to a scheduled member may, because of aftereffects or compensatory 
change, result in permanent impairment of the body as a whole.  Such impairment may 
in turn be the basis for a rating of industrial disability.  It is the anatomical situs of the 
permanent injury or impairment which determines whether the schedules in section 
85.34(2)(a) – (u) are applied.  Lauhoff Grain v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834, 835 (Iowa 
1986) (superseded by statute for shoulder injuries as stated in Chavez v. MS 
Technology, LLC, 972 N.W.2d 662, 668 (Iowa 2022)); Blacksmith v. All-American, Inc., 
290 N.W.2d 348, 354 (Iowa 1980); Dailey v. Pooley Lumber Co., 233 Iowa 758, 764, 10 
N.W.2d 569, 573 (1943).  Soukup v. Shores Co., 222 Iowa 272, 277, 268 N.W. 598, 600 
(1936). 
An injury to the right arm is clearly a scheduled member injury pursuant to Iowa 
Code section 85.34(2)(m).  However, a mental injury causing permanent disability is not 
contained within the listed scheduled member injuries and would be compensated with 
industrial disability pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.34(2)(v). 
Having considered the opinions of the competing mental health experts, I found 
that claimant proved she sustained an ongoing mental health injury that is likely 

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 17 
 
 
permanent in nature.  However, I ultimately found that claimant failed to prove any 
permanent impairment or permanent restrictions related to the mental health injury.  
Without permanent impairment or permanent restrictions for the mental health injury, I 
conclude claimant is not entitled to an award of permanent disability related to the 
mental health injury at this time.  Therefore, I conclude claimant’s claim against the 
employer is limited to a scheduled member injury to the right arm.  Iowa Code section 
85.34(2)(m); Lauhoff Grain v. McIntosh, 395 N.W.2d 834 (Iowa 1986); Blacksmith v. All-
American, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 348 (Iowa 1980); Dailey v. Pooley Lumber Co., 233 Iowa 
758, 10 N.W.2d 569 (1943); Soukup v. Shores Co., 222 Iowa 272, 268 N.W. 598 
(1936). 
The extent of scheduled member disability benefits to which an injured worker is 
entitled is determined by using the functional method. Functional disability is "limited to 
the loss of the physiological capacity of the body or body part.” Mortimer v. Fruehauf 
Corp., 502 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Iowa 1993); Sherman v. Pella Corp., 576 N.W.2d 312, 320 
(Iowa 1998).   
Iowa Code section 85.34(x) states:  
x. In all cases of permanent partial disability described in 
paragraphs “a” through “u”, or paragraph “v” when determining functional 
disability and not loss of earning capacity, the extent of loss or percentage 
of permanent impairment shall be determined solely by utilizing the guides 
to the evaluation of permanent impairment, published by the American 
medical association, as adopted by the workers' compensation 
commissioner by rule pursuant to chapter 17A. Lay testimony or agency 
expertise shall not be utilized in determining loss or percentage of 
permanent impairment pursuant to paragraphs “a” through “u”, or 
paragraph “v” when determining functional disability and not loss of 
earning capacity.  
Iowa Code section 85.34 (x).  
This agency has adopted the Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, 
Fifth Edition, published by the American Medical Association for determining the extent 
of loss or percentage of impairment for permanent partial disabilities.  See 876 IAC 2.4. 
Having considered the expert opinions of Dr. Buckwalter, Dr. Paulson, and Dr. 
Sassman, I ultimately found Dr. Buckwalter’s permanent functional impairment rating to 
be the most convincing.  Therefore, I found claimant proved a two percent permanent 
functional impairment of the right arm. 
Injuries to the arm are compensated on a 250-week schedule.  Iowa Code 
section 85.34(2)(m).  Two percent of 250 weeks is equivalent to five weeks.  I conclude 
claimant is entitled to an award of five weeks of permanent partial disability benefits 
against the employer for her right arm injury. 

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 18 
 
 
Ms. Lee asserted a claim for permanent total disability benefits.  Total disability 
does not mean a state of absolute helplessness.  Permanent total disability occurs 
where the injury wholly disables the employee from performing work that the employee's 
experience, training, education, intelligence, and physical capacities would otherwise 
permit the employee to perform.  See McSpadden v. Big Ben Coal Co., 288 N.W.2d 
181, 192 (Iowa 1980); Diederich v. Tri-City Ry. Co. of Iowa, 219 Iowa 587, 258 N.W. 
899 (1935). 
A finding that claimant could perform some work despite claimant's physical and 
educational limitations does not foreclose a finding of permanent total disability, 
however.  See Chamberlin v. Ralston Purina, File No. 661698 (App. October 1987); 
Eastman v. Westway Trading Corp., II Iowa Industrial Commissioner Report 134 (App. 
May 1982). 
Given my conclusion that her injury is limited to a scheduled member injury, I 
conclude she does not qualify for an award of permanent total disability.  Moreover, I 
ultimately accepted the vocational opinions of Ms. Sellner, who opined that there are 
viable employment opportunities for claimant in her local labor market.  Therefore, I 
conclude claimant failed to prove entitlement to permanent total disability benefits. 
Ms. Lee also asserted a claim as an odd-lot employee.  In Guyton v. Irving 
Jensen Co., 373 N.W.2d 101 (Iowa 1985), the Iowa court formally adopted the “odd-lot 
doctrine.”  Under that doctrine a worker becomes an odd-lot employee when an injury 
makes the worker incapable of obtaining employment in any well-known branch of the 
labor market.  An odd-lot worker is thus totally disabled if the only services the worker 
can perform are “so limited in quality, dependability, or quantity that a reasonably stable 
market for them does not exist.”  Id., at 105. 
Under the odd-lot doctrine, the burden of persuasion on the issue of industrial 
disability always remains with the worker.  Nevertheless, when a worker makes a prima 
facie case of total disability by producing substantial evidence that the worker is not 
employable in the competitive labor market, the burden to produce evidence showing 
availability of suitable employment shifts to the employer.  If the employer fails to 
produce such evidence and the trier of facts finds the worker does fall in the odd-lot 
category, the worker is entitled to a finding of total disability.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 
106.  Factors to be considered in determining whether a worker is an odd-lot employee 
include the worker’s reasonable but unsuccessful effort to find steady employment, 
vocational or other expert evidence demonstrating suitable work is not available for the 
worker, the extent of the worker’s physical impairment, intelligence, education, age, 
training, and potential for retraining.  No factor is necessarily dispositive on the issue.  
Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Nelson, 544 N.W.2d 258, 266 (Iowa 1995).  Even under 
the odd-lot doctrine, the trier of fact is free to determine the weight and credibility of 
evidence in determining whether the worker’s burden of persuasion has been carried, 
and only in an exceptional case would evidence be sufficiently strong as to compel a 
finding of total disability as a matter of law.  Guyton, 373 N.W.2d at 106. 

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 19 
 
 
In this case, claimant produced evidence that she is not working, medical 
opinions that could substantiate a finding of odd-lot status, and a vocational expert 
opinion suggesting that claimant is not employable in the competitive labor market.  I 
conclude claimant produced evidence to establish a prima facie case of odd-lot status.   
Therefore, the burden of production shifted to defendants.  I conclude defendants 
adequately produced evidence to carry its burden of production.  Defendants produced 
evidence that claimant’s physical injury and restrictions are not severe enough to be 
considered permanently and totally disabled.  Defendants produced psychological 
opinions that challenged the severity of claimant’s mental health injuries and condition.  
Defendants also produced a vocational expert report, opining that claimant remains 
employable in her local labor market.  Defendants adequately carried their burden of 
production. 
Therefore, the ultimate burden of persuasion remained with claimant.  For the 
reasons explained above, I rejected the medical and vocational opinions offered by 
claimant.  For the reasons explained above, I ultimately conclude claimant failed to 
establish her claim for odd-lot employee status.  Instead, claimant’s injury should be 
compensated as a scheduled member injury of the right arm as explained above. 
Having decided the permanent disability issue, I must consider claimant’s 
assertion of a claim for additional healing period benefits.  The first basis for additional 
healing period benefits is based upon a weekly rate dispute.  This issue will be 
discussed below.  The second basis for claimant’s request for additional healing period 
benefits is a dispute between the parties regarding the date claimant achieved 
maximum medical improvement.   
Permanent disability benefits commence “when it is medically indicated that 
maximum medical improvement from the injury has been reached and that the extent of 
loss or percentage of permanent impairment can be determined.”  Iowa Code section 
85.34(2).  Healing period benefits are payable “until the employee has returned to work 
or it is medically indicated that significant improvement from the injury is not anticipated 
or until the employee is medically capable of returning to employment substantially 
similar to the employment in which the employee was engaged at the time of injury, 
whichever occurs first.”  Iowa Code section 85.34(1). 
In this case, claimant did not return to work in a full duty status prior to achieving 
MMI.  Claimant was not medically capable of returning to substantially similar 
employment prior to MMI.  Therefore, her healing period benefits continued until she 
achieved MMI.  Having considered the opinions of Dr. Buckwalter, Dr. Paulson, and Dr. 
Sassman on the issue of MMI, I ultimately found that claimant achieved MMI on 
November 11, 2022.  Claimant seeks healing period benefits beyond this MMI date.  I 
conclude claimant fails to establish a claim for healing period benefits beyond 
November 11, 2022.  Iowa Code section 85.34(1).  Permanent disability benefits 
commence on November 12, 2022.  Iowa Code section 85.34(2). 

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 20 
 
 
The next disputed issue is the applicable weekly rate at which benefits should be 
awarded.  Claimant challenges the average gross earnings calculated by defendants.  
Review of the parties’ briefs discloses the fighting issues are whether Continuous 
Improvement Pay Plan (CIPP) pay and annual profit sharing bonuses should be 
included in claimant’s weekly gross earnings at the time of the injury. 
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner entered a Declaratory Order 
Regarding Profit Sharing Bonus and Continuous Improvement Pay Plan on July 12, 
2017.  That Declaratory Order specifically dealt with the Deere compensation plans and 
what wages should be included in a calculation of gross weekly earnings.  Defendants 
contend that Declaratory Order is binding and that both quarterly CIPP and annual profit 
sharing payments should be excluded. 
Claimant contends that the Declaratory Order was overruled or rendered no 
longer binding in Lee v. John Deere Waterloo Works, File No. 21700629.01 (Arbitration 
September 2022).  First, as claimant noted, the Lee decision was rendered by a former 
deputy workers’ compensation commissioner.  Deputy commissioners do not and 
cannot overrule or render a decision of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner 
null or no longer binding agency precedent.  It is the prerogative of the Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Commissioner to establish agency precedent. 
That being said, another case came before the Commissioner in April 2023 
dealing with these issues.  In Reichert v. John Deere Waterloo Works, File No. 
21700341.01 (Appeal 2023), the employer conceded that weekly CIPP payments 
should be included in the calculation of the gross weekly earnings pursuant to Lee.  The 
Commissioner accepted that concession and included weekly CIPP payments.   
In the Declaratory Order, the Commissioner noted that the prior quarterly CIPP 
payment should be included in calculating the gross weekly wages.  That works easily 
and well when the 13 weeks of wages immediately preceding the injury date are used to 
calculate gross weekly earnings.  In this case, however, all parties agree to the weeks 
of wages that should be used, and many weeks were excluded as non-representative 
and substitute weeks were included in the rate calculations of all parties.  The question 
is whether all CIPP payments from all quarters when weekly wages were used to 
calculate the weekly rate should be proportionally included in calculating the gross 
weekly wages.  This specific question was not considered or decided in the Declaratory 
Order, Lee, or Reichert.  However, the deputy commissioner did exclude certain weeks 
as unrepresentative in Lee, but still only included the last quarterly CIPP. 
It is not clear whether the Commissioner would utilize the prior quarterly CIPP 
bonuses or how those bonuses should be prorated.  The deputy in Lee only included 
the last quarterly CIPP bonus in calculating the gross weekly earnings.  Without further 
clarification of this issue by the commissioner, I conclude that only the last quarterly 
CIPP bonus should be included in calculating the weekly rate.   
Ms. Lee also asserts that profit sharing bonuses should be included in calculation 
of her gross weekly earnings.  However, in Reichert, the Commissioner reiterated, “’a 

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 21 
 
 
bonus should not be used to determine an employee’s weekly workers’ compensation 
benefit unless the employee’s right to the benefit has vested at the time of his or her 
injury’ … Under the Declaratory Order and Noel, the profit-sharing bonus for the year 
2019 should not be used in determining claimant’s average weekly earnings.”  Reichert 
v. John Deere Waterloo Works, File No. 21700341.01 (Appeal 2023).  Pursuant to the 
Commissioner’s decision in Reichert less than two years ago, I conclude that the profit-
sharing bonus asserted by claimant should not be included in calculation of the gross 
weekly earnings. 
Having reached these conclusions, I concur with the defendants’ calculation of 
the gross weekly wage as $1,026.53.  It is stipulated that claimant was single and 
entitled to three exemptions. The corresponding weekly workers' compensation rate is 
$654.23.  See https://dial.iowa.gov/media/8642/download?inline.  
Ms. Lee also seeks benefits from the Iowa Second Injury Fund.  Iowa Code 
section 85.64 governs Second Injury Fund liability.  Before liability of the Fund is 
triggered, three requirements must be met.  First, the employee must have lost or lost 
the use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye.  Second, the employee must sustain a loss or 
loss of use of another specified member or organ through a compensable injury.  Third, 
permanent disability must exist as to both the initial injury and the second injury.   
The Second Injury Fund Act exists to encourage the hiring of handicapped 
persons by making a current employer responsible only for the amount of disability 
related to an injury occurring while that employer employed the handicapped individual 
as if the individual had had no preexisting disability.  See Anderson v. Second Injury 
Fund, 262 N.W.2d 789, 792 (Iowa 1978); 15 Iowa Practice, Workers’ Compensation, 
Lawyer, Section 17:1, p. 211 (2014-2015). 
The Fund is responsible for the industrial disability present after the second injury 
that exceeds the disability attributable to the first and second injuries.  Section 85.64.  
Second Injury Fund of Iowa v. Braden, 459 N.W.2d 467, 471 (Iowa 1990); Second Injury 
Fund v. Neelans, 436 N.W.2d 355, 358 (Iowa 1989); Second Injury Fund v. Mich Coal 
Co., 274 N.W.2d 300, 304 (Iowa 1979). 
In this instance, Ms. Lee asserts she sustained a first qualifying injury in 1978 or 
1979.  I found claimant’s testimony about that injury to be credible and find that she did 
sustain an injury to the left foot as a result of a snowmobile accident.  Claimant offered a 
medical expert opinion from Dr. Sassman in support of this first injury.   
After considering Dr. Sassman’s opinion, I did not find it to be credible or 
convincing.  I rejected Dr. Sassman’s opinion as to permanent impairment and 
permanent restrictions related to the left foot injury.  Ultimately, I conclude claimant 
failed to prove the injury in the 1970s caused permanent disability.  Claimant was able 
to function without restrictions for decades after that injury and worked jobs that 
required significant standing and walking.   

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 22 
 
 
As noted above, an award of Second Injury Fund benefits is permitted only if 
claimant establishes that there is permanent disability resulting from each of the two 
alleged injuries.  I conclude claimant failed to prove she sustained a qualifying first injury 
to support an award of benefits from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  Therefore, the 
Second Injury Fund claim is rejected without award of benefits. 
Finally, claimant seeks assessment of costs against defendant employer.  
Assessment of costs is within the discretion of the agency.  Iowa Code section 10A.328.  
Claimant obtained an award of benefits, though clearly not to the extent she urged.  
Nevertheless, she has proven permanent injuries and a hearing was necessary to 
preserve those rights, including future medical rights.  I conclude it is appropriate to 
assess claimant’s costs in some amount. 
Claimant seeks assessment of her filing fee ($128.75).  This is a reasonable 
request and Deere will be ordered to reimburse claimant’s filing fee pursuant to 876 IAC 
4.33(7).  Claimant seeks assessment of her psychiatric independent medical evaluation 
with Dr. Mittauer totaling $4,000.00.  She also seeks assessment of the cost of the 
Short Physical Therapy FCE totaling $1,000.00.  Finally, claimant seeks assessment of 
the Laughlin Enterprises vocational rehabilitation expenses totaling $1,608.00. 
Pursuant to 876 IAC 4.33(6), only two expert reports can be assessed as costs.  
Therefore, claimant cannot obtain assessment of all three of her expert report costs.  In 
this case, I did not find the Short FCE to be helpful or convincing.  I decline to assess 
that cost. 
I accepted portions of Dr. Mittauer’s opinions as part of my analysis.  Claimant 
needed Dr. Mittauer’s opinions to establish her psychiatric claims.  While I did not 
accept the entirety of Dr. Mittauer’s opinions, I conclude it is reasonable to assess the 
cost of his report.  Dr. Mittauer documented 11.67 hours of work in this case.  Of that 
amount approximately 83 percent is identified as work on Dr. Mittauer’s report.   
Pursuant to Des Moines Area Regional Transit Auth. v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 
(Iowa 2015), only the cost of Dr. Mittauer’s report can be assessed as a cost.  The total 
charges submitted by Dr. Mittauer were $4,000.00.  Of that amount, 83 percent of Dr. 
Mittauer’s work is identified as preparation of a report.  While this seems potentially 
inflated since Dr. Mittauer documents no time spent reviewing prior medical records 
even though his report clearly documents prior medical treatment, there is no contrary 
evidence developed in this record.  I conclude it is reasonable to assess $3,320.00 
($4,000.00 x 83 percent) of Dr. Mittauer’s charges as a cost pursuant to 876 IAC 
4.33(6). 
Finally, claimant submits and requests assessment of her vocational report.  
Ultimately, Ms. Laughlin’s opinions did not prove helpful in this case.  I ultimately 
concluded claimant was not entitled to an industrial disability award.  I further relied 
upon the competing vocational report, noting that the restrictions ultimately relied upon 
by Ms. Laughlin were rejected in my analysis.  I conclude it is not appropriate to assess 

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 23 
 
 
the costs of Ms. Laughlin’s report.  Therefore, I ultimately conclude costs in the amount 
of $3,448.75 should be assessed against the employer. 
ORDER 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
Defendant employer shall pay to claimant healing period benefits from June 27, 
2019 through November 11, 2022. 
Defendant employer shall pay to claimant five (5) weeks of permanent partial 
disability benefits commencing on November 12, 2022. 
All weekly benefits shall be paid at the rate of six hundred fifty-four and 23/100 
dollars ($654.23) per week. 
Defendant employer is entitled to a credit for all weekly benefits paid to date. 
Defendant employer shall pay any accrued weekly benefits in a lump sum, along 
with applicable interest pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.30. 
Defendant employer shall pay claimant’s past medical mileage as stipulated to by 
the parties prior to full submission of this case via post-hearing briefs. 
Claimant remains entitled to future causally related medical expenses for her 
work injuries pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27. 
Defendant employer shall reimburse claimant for her litigation costs in the 
amount of three thousand four hundred forty-eight and 75/100 dollars ($3,448.75). 
Defendant employer shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by 
this agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7.   
Claimant takes nothing from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa and that claim is 
dismissed without an award of benefits. 
Signed and filed this __10th ___ day of April, 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      WILLIAM H. GRELL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 

LEE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA 
Page 24 
 
 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
Zeke McCartney (via WCES) 
Stephanie Marett (via WCES) 
Meredith Cooney (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days 
from the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal 
must be filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted 
permission by the Workers’ Compensation Division to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been 
granted, the notice of appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Workers’ 
Compensation Division, 6200 Park Ave., Suite 100, Des Moines, Iowa 50321. The notice of appeal must be  received 
by the Workers’ Compensation Division within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be 
extended to the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
  
