Case Number: 19006740.01
Case Title:  MOELLERS, THEODORE V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/2ND INJ-FUND
Doc Type:    Decision - Deputy
Source:      Moellers Theodore-19006740.01D.PDF
========================================================================

BEFORE THE IOWA WORKERS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
 
 
  : 
THEODORE MOELLERS, 
  : 
 
 
  :                  File No. 19006740.01 
 
Claimant, 
  :  
 
  
 
 
  :                  
 
 
  : 
vs. 
 
  : 
 
 
  :                  
JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS, 
  : 
 
 
  :                           
 
Self-Insured Employer, 
  :              ARBITRATION DECISION 
 
 
  :               
and 
 
  : 
 
 
  : 
SECOND INJURY FUND OF IOWA, 
  : 
 
 
  : 
  Headnotes: 1108; 1402.30; 2206;  
 
Defendants. 
  : 
 
           2601; 2701; 3202 
 
 
  : 
 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
Claimant, Theodore Moellers, filed a petition in arbitration seeking worker’s 
compensation benefits against John Deere Dubuque Works, self-insured employer, and 
the Second Injury Fund of Iowa (“Fund”), for an alleged work injury date of August 7, 
2019. Claimant also alleges a first qualifying loss, for purposes of his Fund claim, occurred 
in 2006. The case came before the undersigned for an arbitration hearing on January 30, 
2023. Pursuant to an order of the Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, this case 
proceeded to a live video hearing via Zoom, with all parties and the court reporter 
appearing remotely. The hearing proceeded without significant difficulties. 
 
The parties filed a hearing report prior to the commencement of the hearing. On 
the hearing report, the parties entered into numerous stipulations. Those stipulations were 
accepted, and no factual or legal issues relative to the parties’ stipulations will be made 
or discussed. The parties are now bound by their stipulations. 
 
The evidentiary record includes Joint Exhibits 1 through 5, Claimant’s Exhibits 1 
through 6, Defendants’ Exhibits A through F, and the Fund’s Exhibits AA-DD.  
 
Claimant testified on his own behalf. The evidentiary record closed at the 
conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on January 30, 2023. The parties submitted post-
hearing briefs on March 24, 2023, and the case was considered fully submitted on that 
date. 
 
 
ELECTRONICALLY FILED     2023-Aug-29  15:59:26     DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

MOELLERS V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/2ND INJ-FUND 
Page 2 
 
 
ISSUES 
 
1. 
Whether claimant sustained a sequela injury to his lumbar spine as a result of 
the August 7, 2019 right leg injury; 
 
2. 
The nature and extent of permanent disability; 
 
3. 
Payment of claimant’s independent medical evaluation under Iowa Code 
section 85.39; 
 
4. 
Whether claimant is entitled to alternate medical care related to the disputed 
lumbar spine injury; 
 
5. 
Whether claimant is entitled to benefits from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa; 
 
6. 
If so, the extent of benefits and the Fund’s credit; and 
 
7. 
Taxation of costs. 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
The undersigned, having considered all of the evidence and testimony in the 
record, finds: 
 
Claimant’s testimony was consistent as compared to the evidentiary record, and 
his demeanor at the time of hearing gave the undersigned no reason to doubt his veracity. 
Claimant is found credible. 
 
At the time of hearing, claimant was a 58-year-old person. (Hearing Transcript, p. 
16) He graduated from high school in 1983, and has no other education or vocational 
training. (Tr., pp. 16-17) After high school, claimant worked as a truck driver for a fish 
farm for two to three years. (Tr., p. 18) He then worked doing general construction and 
painting work until about 1990. (Tr., pp. 18-19) In 1990, he started working at Iroquois 
Foundry pouring iron. (Tr., p. 19) In 1993, claimant left the foundry and went to work at 
Nelson Muffler running presses and welders. (Tr., pp. 19-20) Claimant worked at Nelson 
Muffler until 2006, when he started working at John Deere Dubuque. (Tr., p. 20)  
 
Claimant’s first job at John Deere was in welding. (Tr., p. 21) After about 18 
months, he was laid off for a short time, and then he was transferred to the Quad Cities 
location. At the Quad Cities location, he did several different jobs, including re-packing 
parts and running presses. (Tr., pp. 21-22) In 2010, claimant returned to the Dubuque 
plant, and resumed welding for a short time. (Tr., p. 22) He was then moved to assembly, 
and first worked in roof install on the backhoe line. (Tr., pp. 22-23) After that, he moved 
to mini backhoes, and by 2019, he was working on backhoe cabs. (Tr., p. 23) His job on 
backhoe cabs involved preparing the cabs on the rails of the assembly line, and then 
sending them down the line for additional parts. (Tr., pp. 23-24)  

MOELLERS V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/2ND INJ-FUND 
Page 3 
 
 
Claimant testified that prior to 2019, he was generally in good health. (Tr., p. 24) 
He had never had any injury to his right knee, or any issues with his hip or back. However, 
he did have an injury to his right foot in 2006. (Tr., pp. 24-25) He was loading parts on 
while working, and a piece fell off and landed on his right foot. (Tr., p. 25) Claimant 
testified that he was on crutches and wore a walking boot following that injury, and also 
did physical therapy. (Tr., pp. 45-46) Since completing his treatment, he has not had any 
other treatment for the right foot prior to August 7, 2019. (Tr., p. 46) He was released from 
the 2006 injury to return to work with no restrictions. (Tr., p. 47) 
 
On August 7, 2019, claimant was working between the cabs putting decals on 
windows. (Tr., p. 25) He testified that it was really hot, and that he turned around to throw 
his scraps away and “the next thing I know, I was on the floor.” (Tr., pp. 25-26) He said 
that he went over a guardrail and landed on his hands and knees. (Tr., p. 26) He reported 
the incident to a supervisor, and was taken to John Deere’s in-house occupational health. 
The incident report indicates claimant got dizzy and his legs gave out, and he landed on 
the cement with both knees, landing harder on his right knee. (Joint Exhibit 1, p. 1) He 
reported pain in his right knee and right dorsal foot, with a history of the work related right 
foot fracture in 2006. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 2) 
 
Claimant was sent for an x-ray of the right foot and right knee. The right knee x-
ray was negative for fracture but showed mild medial predominant tricompartmental 
osteoarthritis and a small joint effusion. (Claimant’s Exhibit 3, pp. 29-30) The x-ray of the 
right foot showed a healed, second toe proximal phalanx base fracture. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 30) 
The joint spaces were normal, and there was no acute fracture. He returned to work the 
remainder of his shift, and was to follow up the next day. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 2) On August 8, 
2019, claimant saw Peggy Barton, ARNP, at Finley Occupational Health. (Jt. Ex. 2, pp. 
12-13) On examination, ARNP Barton found some swelling in the lower knee, and it was 
painful to palpation in the joint line medially. (Jt. Ex. 2, p. 12) She noted fluid on top of the 
tibia. She also found the right foot was bigger than the left foot, which claimant reported 
had been the case since his 2006 foot injury. He indicated pain in the arch of his foot, 
coming back across the ankle and across the top of his foot. ARNP Barton recommended 
physical therapy and over the counter pain medication. She also recommended ice and 
heat to the knee and foot 1 to 3 times per day. 
 
Apparently, claimant was initially sent to a chiropractor for treatment rather than a 
physical therapist. However, on September 17, 2019, he started physical therapy for the 
knee at Dubuque Physical Therapy. He continued physical therapy through November 
13, 2019, noting no change in his symptoms. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 30) 
 
Claimant saw Robert Bartelt, M.D. on November 6, 2019. On examination, Dr. 
Bartelt noted bursitis of the knee and limited range of motion. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 31) He was 
diagnosed with infrapatellar bursitis of the right knee and arthritis of the right knee. He 
was prescribed Meloxicam and given options to consider, including excision of the 
infrapatellar bursa or an injection. On November 19, 2019, he started another course of 
physical therapy. 
 

MOELLERS V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/2ND INJ-FUND 
Page 4 
 
 
On November 27, 2019, Dr. Bartelt authored a letter to Amanda Addison, NP with 
John Deere Occupational Health. (Jt. Ex. 3, p. 14) He noted that an MRI of the right knee 
showed chondromalacia or early arthritis of the knee. He also noted swelling in the 
infrapatellar bursa and some inflammation in the fat pad. In response to NP Addison’s 
questions, he stated that the purpose of a knee arthroscopy and chondroplasty would be 
to treat the chondromalacia or arthritis of the knee. He said the arthritis is a preexisting 
condition, not caused by claimant’s fall at work. However, he stated that the swelling in 
the infrapatellar bursal was related to the fall, and that surgery would be related to the 
injury. However, the knee arthroscopy and chondroplasty would be best described as 
being related to a personal underlying medical condition. 
 
On December 9, 2019, claimant saw Dietmar Grentz, M.D., at John Deere 
Occupational Health. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 3) Claimant reported overall his knee pain was about 
the same, and that the physical therapy and medication were not helping. On December 
16, 2019, he saw NP Addison, and reported he was continuing the physical therapy 
stretches at home, and had discontinued the Meloxicam because it was not helping and 
causing an upset stomach. He reported intermittent numbness in his toes. He was to 
continue working with restrictions, and continue home exercises. He also asked about a 
second opinion. 
 
Claimant testified that Dr. Bartelt did not seem to listen to what he had to say. (Tr., 
p. 27) He also recalled some confusion regarding Dr. Bartelt’s causation opinion in 
discussions with John Deere, such that he was eventually sent for a second opinion. (Tr., 
pp. 27-28)  
 
Claimant saw Geoffrey Baer, M.D., Ph.D., at University of Wisconsin Hospitals and 
Clinics on March 3, 2020. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 25) At that time, claimant reported fairly constant 
pain on the medial side of his knee, worse with prolonged use. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 26) 
Conservative treatment had not provided any lasting relief. After his review of the MRI 
and examination, Dr. Baer’s assessment was post-traumatic right knee pain and physical 
finding of a plica band, as well as slightly inflamed prepatellar bursa. He noted that 
claimant’s symptoms seemed to be temporally related to his work injury, as claimant did 
not have significant right knee symptoms before the injury and has had pain since. (Jt. 
Ex. 5, pp. 26-27) He also felt the plica was exacerbated by the work trauma, as well as 
the prepatellar bursal swelling. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 27) Dr. Baer recommended arthroscopic 
surgery, given that claimant had failed conservative management. Dr. Baer issued a brief 
letter after his examination, again stating his opinion that claimant’s knee pain was not 
secondary to degenerative arthritis, but more likely related to the work injury. (Jt. Ex. 5, 
p. 28) 
 
Claimant’s surgery was delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 32) 
However, on September 16, 2020, claimant underwent right knee arthroscopy with 
resection of medial parapatellar plica, shaving chondroplasty patella and trochlea, and 
shaving chondroplasty medial femoral condyle. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 35) At his first post-operative 
follow up on September 24, 2020, he reported attending physical therapy with no 
difficulties, and rated his pan at a 2 or 3 out of 10. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 41) At his next follow up 

MOELLERS V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/2ND INJ-FUND 
Page 5 
 
 
on October 29, 2020, he reported continued posterior knee pain and swelling, especially 
with driving greater than 30 minutes. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 42) He rated his pain at a 4 out of 10. 
The record notes claimant was making slow progress with respect to pain and range of 
motion, and he was to continue with physical therapy. The note further states that Dr. 
Baer wanted physical therapy to work on some lumbar exercises as well, in consideration 
of a possible nerve irritation component to claimant’s posterior leg/knee pain when 
driving.  
 
Claimant testified that this visit was not the first time he had experienced pain in 
his low back area. (Tr., p. 28) He stated that he had reported lumbar pain to Dr. Baer and 
to occupational health at John Deere two or three weeks prior to his surgery as well. (Tr., 
pp. 28-29) He testified that he had been favoring his right leg when walking since the 
injury occurred, and described the pain as coming from his hip. (Tr., p. 29) He indicated 
at hearing that the pain starts in the lower right side of his back, just above his right 
buttock, and goes all the way down his right leg and eventually his toes go numb. (Tr., 
pp. 29-30) 
 
At his physical therapy session on November 11, 2020, it is noted that Dr. Baer 
requested evaluation and treatment of claimant’s back. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 15) Claimant reported 
no low back pain, no buttock pain, and no thigh pain, but noted pain in the popliteal fossa 
and above and below that area. He also noted intermittent numbness in his calf, typically 
occurring when driving or sitting for a long time. He indicated the onset of the popliteal 
fossa pain was about one and a half months, prior to surgery, but it had become worse 
since surgery. The therapist noted on evaluation that no significant symptoms were 
reproduced with claimant’s back testing, but that he had significant right sciatic dural 
tension and hamstring tightness. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 19)  
 
At claimant’s next follow up with Dr. Baer’s office on November 19, 2020, he noted 
he had been working on “nerve glides” related to the sciatic nerve irritation. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
44) Claimant noted significant improvement, but still did not feel like he could safely return 
to work. He was to continue with physical therapy, and call with a status update in two 
weeks to determine whether he could return to sedentary work at that time. Claimant did 
call the clinic two weeks later, and it is noted that he was still having some trouble driving 
due to sciatica, but physical therapy did not think he would get any better. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 
47) The therapist recommended a foam wedge for his seat, which he eventually obtained 
through occupational health. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 47; Jt. Ex. 1, p. 5) He was released to return to 
work on December 9, 2020, no more than 8 hours per day for the first two weeks and 
limited pulling. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 47) 
 
Claimant’s next follow up took place on January 22, 2021. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 52) At that 
time, claimant reported ongoing pain medial to his patellar border that worsened 
significantly when sitting in his truck and climbing in and out of the cab. He had no other 
pain or issues with sedentary work. He reported cramping and pain radiating through his 
quadriceps and down his hamstrings, along with occasional numbness and tingling in his 
toes, loosely following the L4-5 and S1 distributions. On physical exam, he had a positive 
straight leg raise with posterolateral pain and tightness and some numbness and tingling 

MOELLERS V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/2ND INJ-FUND 
Page 6 
 
 
into his foot. The assessment was status post right knee scope, ongoing medial knee 
pain, and possible radicular symptoms. He was told to resume physical therapy to work 
on quad control and low-back exercises for a “possible radicular component.” (Jt. Ex. 5, 
p. 53) It was also noted to consider future corticosteroid injections for his right knee pain, 
and consider a lumbar MRI to evaluate for nerve root compression if not improving. He 
was released with no specific restrictions, although the note indicates he was going to 
start a new position the following week that would involve less climbing and driving.  
 
At the time of hearing, claimant still worked on the backhoe cab line, but his job 
involved steering column subs. (Tr., p. 23) In the steering column position, claimant does 
not have to deal with the heavy cabs on the rails or work in between the rails where it is 
hot. (Tr., pp. 23-24) He said it is physically a little easier of a job. (Tr., p. 24) 
 
Occupational health records indicate claimant continued with physical therapy in 
February of 2021. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 6) He continued to complain of pain when driving, noting 
he could only drive for 30 to 45 minutes before getting severe pain in the posterior knee 
that radiated upward to the back of his leg and down into his calf. Claimant saw Dr. Baer 
on March 2, 2021, and reported that his pre-operative knee pain was resolved, but 
posterior, radiating pain up and down the leg continued. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 55) The record notes 
that claimant was experiencing this pain after his work injury, prior to surgery. He had 
been attending physical therapy with a focus on treating the lumbar spine as a potential 
cause of pain, with some mild improvement. X-rays taken that day showed mild 
degenerative changes in the lumbar spine. Dr. Baer did not believe claimant’s knee was 
the source of his ongoing symptoms, and thought it was likely related to lumbar disc 
pathology versus sciatica. As such, he recommended a lumbar spine MRI. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 
55; 59) 
 
At his physical therapy session on March 11, 2021, it was noted that Dr. Baer 
wanted him to continue formal physical therapy until after his lumbar MRI. (Jt. Ex. 4, p. 
21) However, John Deere denied the lumbar spine MRI. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 8) A note from John 
Deere Occupational Health, authored by ARNP Miranda Brower and dated March 19, 
2021, states that she reviewed Dr. Baer’s note and determined that claimant’s current 
symptoms were not related to the knee. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 11) There is no information in the 
note as to how she reached that conclusion. There is another entry from Edwin Chelli, 
M.D., dated April 20, 2021, that states claimant was told that the lumbar MRI was denied 
because Dr. Baer’s assessment was that the knee was not the source of his pain, but that 
it was likely related to lumbar pathology versus sciatica. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 10) Again, there is 
no further explanation or basis provided for the denial of the lumbar claim. Claimant 
testified that he has not gotten the MRI under his personal insurance because he was 
waiting to see if John Deere “was going to take care of me because I feel like they should 
take care of me.” (Tr., p. 44) John Deere continues to deny the low back claim. 
(Defendant’s Exhibit B, p. 2; C, p. 3)  
 
On May 27, 2021, Dr. Baer provided a 2.5 percent impairment rating for claimant’s 
knee, noting “injury to anterior knee with cartilage damage to patella and trochlea, also 
had aggravation of lumbar back pain.” (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 60) However, he used the Wisconsin 

MOELLERS V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/2ND INJ-FUND 
Page 7 
 
 
“Medical Report on Industrial Injury” form for the rating, which is not consistent with the 
AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment, Fifth Edition. (Jt. Ex. 5, pp. 60-
61) He also noted on the form that he recommended further evaluation of claimant’s 
lumbar spine for the source of his radiculopathy. (Jt. Ex. 5, p.  60)  
 
Dr. Chelli wrote to Dr. Baer on June 11, 2021, seeking a rating using the AMA 
Guides. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 61) On June 18, 2021, Dr. Baer provided an updated rating, using 
the same Wisconsin form, but his rating came out to 7 percent of the knee based on the 
calculations he outlined. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 62) He also stated that claimant “should have lumbar 
spine imaging as this is related to his work related injury.” Dr. Chelli again wrote to Dr. 
Baer on July 21, 2021, as it was unclear from his second rating whether he was using the 
Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides, as required in Iowa. (Jt. Ex. 5, p. 63) Dr. Baer did not 
respond to the second letter, despite follow up communications from John Deere 
Occupational Health in August and September. (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 9) 
 
On September 1, 2022, claimant had a functional capacity evaluation (FCE) at 
Short Physical Therapy. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 8) At that time, claimant reported that he was able 
to sit for about 60 minutes before needing to stand and/or walk due to right hip pain. (Cl. 
Ex. 2, p. 13) He also noted that his pain increased with bending, standing, walking, and 
twisting, and he experiences disrupted sleep due to pain if he has a more active day. He 
described the pain in his right hip and foot as constant, and his right knee as intermittent. 
The FCE results determined that based on decreased functional strength and endurance 
of his right knee, hip, and foot, claimant’s capabilities were in the lower medium category 
of physical demand, up to 30 pounds on an occasional basis. (Cl. Ex. 2, p. 9) The report 
also noted that claimant ambulates with an antalgic limp on his right lower extremity due 
to pain and decreased functional strength in his right hip, knee, and foot. Claimant testified 
that he was sore and tired following the FCE. (Tr., p. 32)  
 
On November 1, 2022, claimant underwent an independent medical evaluation 
(IME) with Robin Sassman, M.D. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 28) Dr. Sassman’s report is dated 
December 19, 2022. Dr. Sassman provided a detailed review of medical records, and 
interviewed claimant. (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 28-34) She noted at the time of her examination, 
claimant was working with no restrictions, and the heaviest item he lifted at work was a 
brake valve at waist height. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 34) He described his low back pain as starting 
in the right gluteus, radiating to the knee and then to the foot. He said that he reported 
the pain before surgery, and it did not improve after surgery. He reported that driving, 
bending, riding his lawn mower, and sitting aggravated his symptoms. He denied any prior 
back or hip injuries. 
 
With respect to his right knee, he reported aching, but said it did not feel unstable. 
He reported discomfort going up stairs, but felt his range of motion was okay. He denied 
any prior right knee injury. Finally, with respect to the right foot, he reported an aching 
and burning pain in the arch of his foot. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 35) He said sometimes his toes felt 
numb, and some days were worse than others. He also reported a sharp pain in his great 
toe at times.  
 

MOELLERS V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/2ND INJ-FUND 
Page 8 
 
 
After physical examination, Dr. Sassman’s diagnoses were right knee pain status 
post right knee arthroscopy, and low back pain with radiculopathy. (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 35-36) 
Dr. Sassman opined that the work injury on August 7, 2019 was a substantial aggravating 
factor of claimant’ underlying degenerative changes in his right knee. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 36) 
Her opinion was based on the mechanism of injury, as well as claimant’s lack of prior 
symptoms in his knee. (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 36-37) She also opined that based on the information 
available at that time, which did not include an MRI of the lumbar spine, the work injury 
was a direct and causal factor in claimant’s lumbar pain with radicular symptoms. (Cl. Ex. 
3, p. 36) This was based on the initial notes from John Deere occupational health, which 
noted some complaints consistent with radicular symptoms, and his worsening of 
symptoms over time due to his gait change related to the right knee symptoms. (Cl. Ex. 
3, p. 37) While no lumbar spine examination was done at that time, Dr. Sassman noted 
that when a thorough back examination was done on January 22, 2021, claimant had a 
positive straight leg raise and loss of sensation in a dermatomal pattern. Those findings 
were consistent with her own examination, and lead her to opine that the low back 
symptoms were directly and causally related to the work injury. 
 
Using the Fifth Edition of the AMA Guides, Dr. Sassman provided a 10 percent 
lower extremity rating for loss of flexion, and a 7 percent lower extremity rating for 
degenerative changes. She noted that impairment for range of motion cannot be 
combined with impairment for degenerative changes under the Guides, so he was 
assigned the 10 percent range of motion impairment. For the lumbar spine, she placed 
claimant into DRE Lumbar Category III, and assigned 13 percent impairment of the whole 
person. (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 37-38) Combined, the lumbar spine and right knee gave claimant 
a total of 16 percent impairment of the whole person. (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 38) 
 
With respect to restrictions, Dr. Sassman recommended claimant avoid kneeling 
and crawling, and limit lifting, pushing, pulling, and carrying to 30 pounds at waist height 
and to 10 pounds above waist and shoulder height on an occasional basis. She also 
recommended he avoid uneven surfaces and ladders, and should not work at heights. 
She noted those restrictions might change with additional treatment. With respect to 
future medical care, Dr. Sassman recommended an MRI of the lumbar spine to assess 
for nerve root irritation. After the MRI, she recommended referral to pain management to 
determine if an epidural steroid injection would be beneficial. (Cl. Ex. 3, pp. 38-39) In light 
of that recommendation, she did not believe claimant had reached maximum medical 
improvement (MMI). (Cl. Ex. 3, p. 38) However, she stated that if the recommendations 
were not completed, she would place him at MMI one year after the date of surgery, on 
September 16, 2021. 
 
With respect to claimant’s 2006 right foot injury, Dr. Sassman provided a 2 percent 
lower extremity impairment rating due to the ongoing pain and swelling of the foot. 
However, it is unclear what portion of the Guides she used in reaching this conclusion. 
(Cl. Ex. 3, p. 39) She cites Table 17-3, but that is the table for converting the 2 percent 
lower extremity rating to a 1 percent whole person impairment. She also recommended 
claimant limit standing and walking to a frequent basis, change positions occasionally, 
and take care in his choice of footwear due to the swelling in his right foot.  

MOELLERS V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/2ND INJ-FUND 
Page 9 
 
 
Claimant testified at hearing that he continues to have pain in his knee off and on 
all the time. (Tr., p. 34) He said he has knee pain every day at some point, depending on 
what he does. Stooping, squatting, and bending aggravate his symptoms. He also noted 
stability issues, and said he does not climb ladders anymore because it hurts and feels 
like he cannot stand for very long. (Tr., pp. 34-35) With respect to his hip/right low back, 
he testified that he has ongoing symptoms every day. (Tr., p. 35) He takes Motrin several 
times per day, which "takes the edge off", but never completely takes the pain away. 
Bending, squatting, and sitting for an extended time aggravates his symptoms. He tries 
to avoid activities that aggravate his symptoms, and no longer gardens or goes fishing or 
hunting since his injury. (Tr., pp. 36-37) He also avoids long car rides, and said that he 
and his wife used to take long trips every summer but have not since his injury. (Tr., p. 
38)  
 
With respect to his right foot, claimant testified that after the injury in 2006, his foot 
and all of his toes were numb for two or three months. (Tr., pp. 46-47) Following the 2019 
injury, his foot hurt and burned, but it was not totally numb. (Tr., p. 47) Currently, he 
experiences numbness into the outside of his foot and his outer three toes when his low 
back/hip start to bother him. He testified that the more the hip flares up, the more his foot 
bother him, as the pain radiates down his leg. (Tr., p. 49) He also experiences a burning 
and aching pain in his foot, which he usually correlates to his low back/hip pain. He 
testified that after his treatment was completed for his 2006 foot injury, he had occasional 
symptoms that would flare up, causing his foot to ache and bother him. (Tr., p. 50) After 
the 2019 injury, he was never diagnosed with any specific foot injury, and he has not had 
any physical therapy or other specific treatment for his right foot as a part of that injury. 
(Tr., pp. 50-51) 
 
Claimant testified that he continues to work at John Deere, but has some difficulties 
with his job. (Tr., p. 39) He has trouble bending down or squatting if he has to pick anything 
up. He also noted that it takes him about an hour to drive to work, and by the time he 
arrives his hip and leg are bothering him. (Tr., p. 38) He does not believe he would be 
able to perform any of the jobs he had before working at John Deere, due to the driving, 
lifting, stooping, and climbing involved. (Tr., pp. 39-40) He also does not believe he would 
be able to perform his prior jobs, welding or repacking at John Deere, due to the lifting, 
squatting, bending, and maneuvering around fixtures that would be required. (Tr., pp. 40-
42) Even the job he had at the time of injury would be too much for him currently, due to 
the lifting and bending involved, as it was a more physically demanding job than his 
current position. (Tr., p. 42) 
 
Based on the medical records and other evidence in the file, I find that claimant’s 
lumbar pain issues are a sequelae of the right knee injury on August 7, 2019. Both Dr. 
Baer and Dr. Sassman have opined that the lumbar spine symptoms are related to 
claimant’s fall at work and subsequent knee injury. Dr. Baer has provided treatment to 
claimant over the course of his recovery, and is familiar with his condition and the 
progress of his symptoms. Dr. Sassman performed a detailed record review and 
personally interviewed and examined claimant. Both doctors had an accurate 

MOELLERS V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/2ND INJ-FUND 
Page 10 
 
 
understanding of claimant’s history, treatment, and symptoms, and both have determined 
that the low back symptoms are causally related to the August 7, 2019 work injury. 
 
 Defendant’s denial is based on the opinions of Miranda Brower, ARNP, and Dr. 
Chelli, both of whom worked for John Deere Occupational Health at the time. Additionally, 
neither provider issued an actual report detailing the basis for the denial. The only records 
in evidence regarding their opinions are brief notes found within the John Deere clinic’s 
records. The note from ARNP Brower simply states that she had looked over Dr. Baer’s 
note and “current symptoms are not related to right knee.” (Jt. Ex. 1, p. 11) Dr. Chelli’s 
note is similar, and simply states that claimant was told the MRI was denied because Dr. 
Baer said his knee was likely not the source of his symptoms, but they were likely related 
to lumbar pathology versus sciatica. There is no opinion or analysis from either ARNP 
Brower or Dr. Chelli as to whether the knee injury and/or claimant’s subsequent altered 
gait could have resulted in the lumbar symptoms. I do not find either opinion convincing 
when looking at the evidence as a whole.  
 
The parties stipulated that claimant has not reached MMI for the low back injury. 
(Tr., pp. 6; 8) Claimant is entitled to medical care related to the low back claim, specifically 
a lumbar MRI as recommended by Dr. Baer, and any follow-up treatment recommended 
thereafter. Because claimant has not reached MMI, the issue of permanent disability with 
respect to the claim against the employer is not ripe for determination at this time. 
 
With respect to claimant’s Second Injury Fund claim, I find that claimant has not 
met his burden to prove a first qualifying injury. There are no medical records in evidence 
related to the 2006 injury. The only evidence regarding that injury is claimant’s testimony, 
and Dr. Sassman’s report. Based on claimant’s testimony, he was able to return to work 
with no restrictions following that injury. His only treatment consisted of crutches and a 
walking boot, along with physical therapy. He has not received any treatment for his right 
foot since his release from care in 2006 or 2007. The only impairment rating related to 
the 2006 injury is Dr. Sassman’s rating, which is unclear. Dr. Sassman did not provide 
the section of the AMA Guides used in calculating the rating related to the foot, and the 
fact that the injury occurred approximately 17 years ago is problematic for determining 
whether any potential disability is related back to the original injury. There is not enough 
evidence that claimant’s 2006 foot injury caused permanent disability. As such, claimant 
is not entitled to benefits from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 
The party who would suffer loss if an issue were not established ordinarily has the 
burden of proving that issue by a preponderance of the evidence. Iowa R. App. P. 
6.904(3)(e). The claimant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence 
that the alleged injury actually occurred and that it both arose out of and in the course of 
the employment. Quaker Oats Co. v. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 143, 150 (Iowa 1996); Miedema 
v. Dial Corp., 551 N.W.2d 309, 311 (Iowa 1996). 
 

MOELLERS V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/2ND INJ-FUND 
Page 11 
 
 
The words “arising out of” refer to the cause or source of the injury. The words “in 
the course of” refer to the time, place, and circumstances of the injury. 2800 Corp. v. 
Fernandez, 528 N.W.2d 124, 128 (Iowa 1995). An injury arises out of the employment 
when a causal relationship exists between the injury and the employment. Miedema, 551 
N.W.2d at 311. The injury must be a rational consequence of a hazard connected with 
the employment and not merely incidental to the employment. Koehler Elec. v. Wills, 608 
N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 2000); Miedema, 551 N.W.2d at 311. An injury occurs “in the course 
of” employment when it happens within a period of employment at a place where the 
employee reasonably may be when performing employment duties and while the 
employee is fulfilling those duties or doing an activity incidental to them. Ciha, 552 N.W.2d 
at 150. An employee does not cease to be in the course of employment merely because 
the employee is not actually engaged in doing some specifically prescribed task, if, in the 
course of employment, the employee does some act which he or she deems necessary 
for the benefit or interest of the employer. United Parcel Serv. v. Miller, No. 99-1596, 2000 
WL 1421800, at *1 (Iowa Ct. App. Sept. 27, 2000) (citing Farmers Elevator Co. v. 
Manning, 286 N.W.2d 174, 177 (Iowa 1979)). 
 
The question of causal connection is essentially within the domain of expert 
testimony. The expert medical evidence must be considered with all other evidence 
introduced bearing on the causal connection between the injury and the disability. 
Supportive lay testimony may be used to buttress the expert testimony and, therefore, is 
also relevant and material to the causation question. The weight to be given to an expert 
opinion is determined by the finder of fact and may be affected by the accuracy of the 
facts the expert relied upon as well as other surrounding circumstances. The expert 
opinion may be accepted or rejected, in whole or in part. St. Luke’s Hosp. v. Gray, 604 
N.W.2d 646 (Iowa 2000); IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410 (Iowa 2001); Dunlavey v. 
Economy Fire and Cas. Co., 526 N.W.2d 845 (Iowa 1995). Miller v. Lauridsen Foods, 
Inc., 525 N.W.2d 417 (Iowa 1994). Unrebutted expert medical testimony cannot be 
summarily rejected. Poula v. Siouxland Wall & Ceiling, Inc., 516 N.W.2d 910 (Iowa App. 
1994). 
 
When an injury occurs in the course of employment, the employer is liable for all 
the consequences that “naturally and proximately flow from the accident.” Iowa Workers’ 
Compensation Law and Practice, Lawyer and Higgs, section 4-4. The Supreme Court has 
stated: “If the employee suffers a compensable injury and thereafter suffers further 
disability which is the proximate result of the original injury, such further disability is 
compensable.” Oldham v. Scofield & Welch, 222 Iowa 764, 767, 266 N.W. 480, 481 
(1936). The Oldham Court opined that a claimant must present sufficient evidence that 
the disability was naturally and proximately related to the original work injury. 
 
An employer may be liable for a sequela of an original work injury if the employee 
sustained a compensable injury and later sustained further disability that is a proximate 
result of the original injury. Mallory v. Mercy Medical Center, File No. 5029834 (Appeal 
February 15, 2012). A sequela can be an after-effect or secondary effect of an injury. 
Lewis v. Dee Zee Manufacturing, File No. 797154, (Arb. September 11, 1989). One form 
of sequela is an adverse effect from medical treatment for the original injury. Where 

MOELLERS V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/2ND INJ-FUND 
Page 12 
 
 
treatment rendered with respect to a compensable injury itself causes further injury, the 
subsequent injury is also compensable. Yount v. United Fire & Casualty Co., 256 Iowa 
813, 129 N.W.2d 75 (1964). For example, the death of a claimant who died on the 
operating table during surgery for a work injury may be compensable, since the injury 
caused the need for surgery. Breeden v. Firestone Tire, File No. 966020, (Arb. February 
27, 1992). As another example, a claimant who fell as a result of dizziness from 
medication he was taking to treat a work injury is to be compensated for both the original 
injury and the resulting fall as a sequela of the first injury. Hamilton v. Combined Ins. of 
America, File Nos. 854465, 877068, (Arb. February 21, 1991).   
 
A sequela can also take the form of a secondary effect on the claimant's body 
stemming from the original injury. For example, where a leg injury causing shortening of 
the leg in turn alters the claimant's gait, causing mechanical back pain, the back condition 
can be found to be a sequela of the leg injury. Fridlington v. 3M, File No. 788 758, (Arb. 
November 15, 1991).  
 
A sequela can also take the form of a later injury that is caused by the original 
injury. For example, where a leg injury leads to the claimant's knee giving out in a grocery 
store, the resulting fall is compensable as a sequela of the leg injury. Taylor v. Oscar 
Mayer & Co., Ill Iowa Ind. Comm. Rep. 257, 258 (1982). 
 
In this case, having reviewed all of the evidence in the record, I found that claimant 
sustained a sequela injury to his low back/lumbar spine as a result of the August 7, 2019 
right knee injury. I found the opinions of Dr. Baer and Dr. Sassman to be the most 
convincing and reliable on this matter, as opposed to the brief conclusory statements 
offered by ARNP Brower and Dr. Chelli. The parties stipulated that claimant has not 
reached MMI for the low back injury. Therefore, the issue of permanent disability with 
respect to the claim against the employer is not ripe for determination at this time. 
 
Because claimant’s low back injury is compensable, he is entitled to ongoing 
reasonable and causally related medical care, pursuant to Iowa Code section 85.27. 
Specifically, defendants shall authorize and pay for a lumbar MRI as recommended by 
Dr. Baer, and any follow-up treatment recommended thereafter.  
 
With respect to claimant’s Second Injury Fund Claim, I found that claimant did not 
meet his burden to prove he sustained a qualifying first injury. Iowa Code section 85.64 
states: 
 
If an employee who has previously lost, or lost the use of, one hand, one 
arm, one foot, one leg, or one eye, becomes permanently disabled by a 
compensable injury which has resulted in the loss of or loss of use of 
another such member or organ, the employer shall be liable only for the 
degree of disability which would have resulted from the latter injury if there 
had been no preexisting disability.  In addition to such compensation, and 
after the expiration of the full period provided by law for the payments 
thereof by the employer, the employee shall be paid out of the “Second 

MOELLERS V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/2ND INJ-FUND 
Page 13 
 
 
Injury 
Fund” created by this subchapter the remainder of such 
compensation as would be payable for the degree of permanent disability 
involved after first deducting from such remainder the compensable value 
of the previously lost member or organ.   
 
Thus, an employee is entitled to Fund benefits if the employee establishes: (1) the 
employee sustained a permanent disability to a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye, a first 
qualifying injury; (2) the employee subsequently sustained a permanent disability to 
another hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye, through a work-related injury, a second qualifying 
injury; and (3) the employee has sustained permanent disability resulting from the first 
and second qualifying injuries exceeding the compensable value of the “previously lost 
member.” Gregory v. Second Injury Fund of Iowa, 777 N.W.2d 395, 398-99 (Iowa 2010). 
 
While claimant sustained an injury to his right foot in 2006, he failed to prove that 
injury resulted in any permanent disability. There are no medical records in evidence 
related to the 2006 injury. The only evidence regarding that injury is claimant’s testimony, 
and Dr. Sassman’s report. Based on claimant’s testimony, he was able to return to work 
with no restrictions following the 2006 injury. His only treatment consisted of crutches and 
a walking boot, along with physical therapy. He has not received any treatment for his 
right foot since his release from care in 2006 or 2007. The only impairment rating related 
to the 2006 injury is Dr. Sassman’s rating, which is unclear. Dr. Sassman did not provide 
the section of the AMA Guides used in calculating the rating related to the foot, and the 
fact that the injury occurred approximately 17 years ago is problematic for determining 
whether any potential current disability is related back to the original injury. Claimant has 
not met his burden to prove that the 2006 foot injury caused permanent disability. As 
such, he has not proved a first qualifying injury, and is not entitled to benefits from the 
Second Injury Fund of Iowa.  
 
The only remaining issues to determine are reimbursement for claimant’s IME, and 
taxation of costs. Defendant employer made no argument in its brief regarding the IME. 
Iowa Code section 85.39(2) states, in relevant part: 
 
If an evaluation of permanent disability has been made by a physician 
retained by the employer and the employee believes this evaluation to be 
too low, the employee shall, upon application to the commissioner and upon 
delivery of a copy of the application to the employer and its insurance 
carrier, be reimbursed by the employer the reasonable fee for a subsequent 
examination by a physician of the employee’s own choice, and reasonably 
necessary transportation expenses incurred for the examination.  
 
The Iowa Workers’ Compensation Commissioner has noted that the Iowa 
Supreme Court adopted a strict and literal interpretation of Iowa Code section 85.39 in 
Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority v. Young, 867 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 2015) 
(hereinafter “DART”). See Cortez v. Tyson Fresh Meats. Inc., File No. 5044716 (Appeal 
December 2015). If an injured worker wants to be reimbursed for the expenses 
associated with a disability evaluation by a physician selected by the worker, the process 

MOELLERS V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/2ND INJ-FUND 
Page 14 
 
 
established by the legislature must be followed. This process permits the employer, who 
must pay the benefits, to make the initial arrangements for the evaluation and only allows 
the employee to obtain an independent evaluation at the employer’s expense if 
dissatisfied with the evaluation arranged by the employer. DART, 867 N.W.2d at 847 
(citing Iowa Code § 85.39). This includes an employer-chosen physician’s opinion that 
there was no causation, as such an opinion is tantamount to a zero percent impairment 
rating. Kern v. Fenchel, Doster & Buck, P.L.C., 966 N.W. 2d. 326 (Iowa Ct. App., 2021). 
 
In this case, defendant employer based its denial of the lumbar sequela injury on 
the causation opinions of ARNP Brower and Dr. Chelli. Under Kern, those opinions are 
tantamount to a zero percent impairment rating. Therefore, claimant is entitled to 
additional reimbursement of his IME under Iowa Code section 85.39. 
 
The parties agree that defendants have previously reimbursed claimant for 
$1,000.00 of his total IME cost. Claimant concedes defendant employer is not liable for 
the portion of Dr. Sassman’s IME related to the Fund claim. However, Dr. Sassman 
itemized her bill, and the portion related to the Fund claim totals $330.00. (Cl. Ex. 4, p. 
45) Dr. Sassman’s total bill came to $4,125.00. Less the $330.00 for the Fund claim and 
the $1,000.00 defendant employer have already paid, claimant is entitled to additional 
reimbursement in the amount of $2,795.00. 
 
The final issue to address is costs. Assessment of costs is a discretionary function 
of this agency. Iowa Code § 86.40. Costs are to be assessed at the discretion of the 
deputy commissioner or workers’ compensation commissioner hearing the case. 876 IAC 
4.33. Claimant seeks reimbursement of the filing fee, in the amount of $100.00, and the 
bill for claimant’s FCE at Short Physical Therapy, in the amount of $950.00. (Cl. Ex. 5, 
pp. 46-49)  
 
As claimant was generally successful in his claim, I find an award of costs is 
appropriate. Rule 876-4.33(6) allows the reasonable cost of no more than two doctors’ or 
practitioners’ reports. Under DART, the only allowable taxable costs are the reports 
themselves, not the underlying examination. DART, 867 N.W.2d at 846-847. The FCE bill 
is itemized, and shows that $350.00 of the total bill is allocated to the FCE report. As 
such, claimant is entitled to reimbursement of $350.00 for the FCE report, as well as the 
$100.00 filing fee. 
 
ORDER 
 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
 
Claimant takes nothing from the Second Injury Fund of Iowa. 
 
Claimant is entitled to alternate medical care from defendant employer related to 
the compensable low back/lumbar spine sequela injury. Specifically, defendants shall 
authorize and pay for a lumbar MRI as recommended by Dr. Baer, and any follow-up 
treatment recommended thereafter. 

MOELLERS V. JOHN DEERE DUBUQUE WORKS/2ND INJ-FUND 
Page 15 
 
 
 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant in the amount of two thousand seven hundred 
ninety-five and 00/100 dollars ($2,795.00) for Dr. Sassman’s IME. 
 
Defendants shall reimburse claimant’s costs in the total amount of four hundred 
fifty and 00/100 dollars ($450.00), as outlined above. 
 
Defendants shall file subsequent reports of injury (SROI) as required by this 
agency pursuant to rules 876 IAC 3.1(2) and 876 IAC 11.7. 
 
Signed and filed this    29th    day of August, 2023. 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         JESSICA L. CLEEREMAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DEPUTY WORKERS’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  COMPENSATION COMMISSIONER 
 
The parties have been served, as follows: 
 
Zeke McCartney (via WCES) 
 
Dirk Hamel (via WCES) 
 
Stephanie Techau (via WCES) 
 
Rebecca Duffy (via WCES) 
 
Meredith Cooney (via WCES) 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Appeal:  This decision shall become final unless you or another interested party appeals within 20 days from 
the date above, pursuant to rule 876-4.27 (17A, 10A) of the Iowa Administrative Code. The notice of appeal must be 
filed via Workers’ Compensation Electronic System (WCES) unless the filing party has been granted permission by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation to file documents in paper form. If such permission has been granted, the notice of 
appeal must be filed at the following address: Workers’ Compensation Commissioner, Iowa Division of Workers’ 
Compensation, 150 Des Moines Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50309-1836. The notice of appeal must be received by the 
Division of Workers’ Compensation within 20 days from the date of the decision. The appeal period will be extended to 
the next business day if the last day to appeal falls on a weekend or legal holiday. 
